<doc id="25614" wikidata="Q3254959" url="?curid=25614" title="Race (human categorization)">
<text>Race is a categorization of humans based on shared physical or social qualities into groups generally viewed as distinct within a given society. The term came into common usage during the 16th century, when it was used to refer to groups of various kinds, including those characterized by close kinship relations. By the 17th century, the term began to refer to physical (phenotypical) traits, and then later to national affiliations. Modern science regards race as a social construct, an identity which is assigned based on rules made by society. While partly based on physical similarities within groups, race does not have an inherent physical or biological meaning. The concept of race is foundational to racism, the belief that humans can be divided based on the superiority of one race over another.

Social conceptions and groupings of races have varied over time, often involving folk taxonomies that define essential types of individuals based on perceived traits. Modern scientists consider such biological essentialism obsolete, and generally discourage racial explanations for collective differentiation in both physical and behavioral traits.

Even though there is a broad scientific agreement that essentialist and typological conceptions of race are untenable, scientists around the world continue to conceptualize race in widely differing ways. While some researchers continue to use the concept of race to make distinctions among fuzzy sets of traits or observable differences in behavior, others in the scientific community suggest that the idea of race is inherently naive or simplistic. Still others argue that, among humans, race has no taxonomic significance because all living humans belong to the same subspecies, &quot;Homo sapiens sapiens&quot;.

Since the second half of the 20th century, race has been associated with discredited theories of scientific racism, and has become increasingly seen as a largely pseudoscientific system of classification. Although still used in general contexts, race has often been replaced by less ambiguous and/or loaded terms: &quot;populations&quot;, &quot;people(s)&quot;, &quot;ethnic groups&quot;, or &quot;communities&quot;, depending on context. Its use in genetics was formally renounced by the U.S. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine in 2023.

== Defining race ==
Modern scholarship views racial categories as socially constructed, that is, race is not intrinsic to human beings but rather an identity created, often by socially dominant groups, to establish meaning in a social context. Different cultures define different racial groups, often focused on the largest groups of social relevance, and these definitions can change over time.

Historical race concepts have included a wide variety of schemes to divide local or worldwide populations into races and sub-races. Across the world, different organizations and societies choose to disambiguate race to different extents:
* In South Africa, the Population Registration Act, 1950 recognized only White, Black, and Coloured, with Indians added later.
* The government of Myanmar recognizes eight &quot;major national ethnic races&quot;.
* The Brazilian census classifies people into brancos (Whites), pardos (multiracial), pretos (Blacks), amarelos (Asians), and indigenous (see Race and ethnicity in Brazil), though many people use different terms to identify themselves.
* Legal definitions of whiteness in the United States used before the civil rights movement were often challenged for specific groups.
** Furthermore, the United States Census Bureau proposed but then withdrew plans to add a new category to classify Middle Eastern and North African peoples in the 2020 U.S. census, due to a dispute over whether this classification should be considered a white ethnicity or a separate race.

The establishment of racial boundaries often involves the subjugation of groups defined as racially inferior, as in the one-drop rule used in the 19th-century United States to exclude those with any amount of African ancestry from the dominant racial grouping, defined as &quot;white&quot;. Such racial identities reflect the cultural attitudes of imperial powers dominant during the age of European colonial expansion. This view rejects the notion that race is biologically defined.

According to geneticist David Reich, &quot;while race may be a social construct, differences in genetic ancestry that happen to correlate to many of today&#x27;s racial constructs are real&quot;. In response to Reich, a group of 67 scientists from a broad range of disciplines wrote that his concept of race was &quot;flawed&quot; as &quot;the &quot;meaning and significance&quot; of the groups is produced through social interventions&quot;.

Although commonalities in physical traits such as facial features, skin color, and hair texture comprise part of the race concept, this linkage is a social distinction rather than an inherently biological one. Other dimensions of racial groupings include shared history, traditions, and language. For instance, African-American English is a language spoken by many African Americans, especially in areas of the United States where racial segregation exists. Furthermore, people often self-identify as members of a race for political reasons.

When people define and talk about a particular conception of race, they create a social reality through which social categorization is achieved. In this sense, races are said to be social constructs. These constructs develop within various legal, economic, and sociopolitical contexts, and may be the effect, rather than the cause, of While race is understood to be a social construct by many, most scholars agree that race has real material effects in the lives of people through institutionalized practices of preference and discrimination.

Socioeconomic factors, in combination with early but enduring views of race, have led to considerable suffering within disadvantaged racial groups. Racial discrimination often coincides with racist mindsets, whereby the individuals and ideologies of one group come to perceive the members of an outgroup as both racially defined and morally inferior. As a result, racial groups possessing relatively little power often find themselves excluded or oppressed, while hegemonic individuals and institutions are charged with holding racist attitudes. Racism has led to many instances of tragedy, including slavery and genocide.

In some countries, law enforcement uses race to profile suspects. This use of racial categories is frequently criticized for perpetuating an outmoded understanding of human biological variation, and promoting stereotypes. Because in some societies racial groupings correspond closely with patterns of social stratification, for social scientists studying social inequality, race can be a significant variable. As sociological factors, racial categories may in part reflect subjective attributions, self-identities, and social institutions.

Scholars continue to debate the degrees to which racial categories are biologically warranted and socially constructed. For example, in 2008, John Hartigan Jr. argued for a view of race that focused primarily on culture, but which does not ignore the potential relevance of biology or genetics. Accordingly, the racial paradigms employed in different disciplines vary in their emphasis on biological reduction as contrasted with societal construction.

In the social sciences, theoretical frameworks such as racial formation theory and critical race theory investigate implications of race as social construction by exploring how the images, ideas and assumptions of race are expressed in everyday life. A large body of scholarship has traced the relationships between the historical, social production of race in legal and criminal language, and their effects on the policing and disproportionate incarceration of certain groups.

== Historical origins of racial classification ==


Groups of humans have always identified themselves as distinct from neighboring groups, but such differences have not always been understood to be natural, immutable and global. These features are the distinguishing features of how the concept of race is used today. In this way the idea of race as we understand it today came about during the historical process of exploration and conquest which brought Europeans into contact with groups from different continents, and of the ideology of classification and typology found in the natural sciences. The term &quot;race&quot; was often used in a general biological taxonomic sense, starting from the 19th century, to denote genetically differentiated human populations defined by phenotype.

The modern concept of race emerged as a product of the colonial enterprises of European powers from the 16th to 18th centuries which identified race in terms of skin color and physical differences. Author Rebecca F. Kennedy argues that the Greeks and Romans would have found such concepts confusing in relation to their own systems of classification. According to Bancel et al., the epistemological moment where the modern concept of race was invented and rationalized lies somewhere between 1730 and 1790.

=== Colonialism ===
According to Smedley and Marks the European concept of &quot;race&quot;, along with many of the ideas now associated with the term, arose at the time of the scientific revolution, which introduced and privileged the study of natural kinds, and the age of European imperialism and colonization which established political relations between Europeans and peoples with distinct cultural and political traditions. As Europeans encountered people from different parts of the world, they speculated about the physical, social, and cultural differences among various human groups. The rise of the Atlantic slave trade, which gradually displaced an earlier trade in slaves from throughout the world, created a further incentive to categorize human groups in order to justify the subordination of African slaves.

Drawing on sources from classical antiquity and upon their own internal interactions – for example, the hostility between the English and Irish powerfully influenced early European thinking about the differences between people – Europeans began to sort themselves and others into groups based on physical appearance, and to attribute to individuals belonging to these groups behaviors and capacities which were claimed to be deeply ingrained. A set of folk beliefs took hold that linked inherited physical differences between groups to inherited intellectual, behavioral, and moral qualities. Similar ideas can be found in other cultures, for example in China, where a concept often translated as &quot;race&quot; was associated with supposed common descent from the Yellow Emperor, and used to stress the unity of ethnic groups in China. Brutal conflicts between ethnic groups have existed throughout history and across the world.

=== Early taxonomic models ===
The first post-Graeco-Roman published classification of humans into distinct races seems to be François Bernier&#x27;s &quot;Nouvelle division de la terre par les différents espèces ou races qui l&#x27;habitent&quot; (&quot;New division of Earth by the different species or races which inhabit it&quot;), published in 1684. In the 18th century the differences among human groups became a focus of scientific investigation. But the scientific classification of phenotypic variation was frequently coupled with racist ideas about innate predispositions of different groups, always attributing the most desirable features to the White, European race and arranging the other races along a continuum of progressively undesirable attributes. The 1735 classification of Carl Linnaeus, inventor of zoological taxonomy, divided the human species &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; into continental varieties of &quot;europaeus&quot;, &quot;asiaticus&quot;, &quot;americanus&quot;, and &quot;afer&quot;, each associated with a different humour: sanguine, melancholic, choleric, and phlegmatic, respectively. &quot;Homo sapiens europaeus&quot; was described as active, acute, and adventurous, whereas &quot;Homo sapiens afer&quot; was said to be crafty, lazy, and careless.

The 1775 treatise &quot;The Natural Varieties of Mankind&quot;, by Johann Friedrich Blumenbach proposed five major divisions: the Caucasoid race, the Mongoloid race, the Ethiopian race (later termed &quot;Negroid&quot;), the American Indian race, and the Malayan race, but he did not propose any hierarchy among the races. Blumenbach also noted the graded transition in appearances from one group to adjacent groups and suggested that &quot;one variety of mankind does so sensibly pass into the other, that you cannot mark out the limits between them&quot;.

From the 17th through 19th centuries, the merging of folk beliefs about group differences with scientific explanations of those differences produced what Smedley has called an &quot;ideology of race&quot;. According to this ideology, races are primordial, natural, enduring and distinct. It was further argued that some groups may be the result of mixture between formerly distinct populations, but that careful study could distinguish the ancestral races that had combined to produce admixed groups. Subsequent influential classifications by Georges Buffon, Petrus Camper and Christoph Meiners all classified &quot;Negros&quot; as inferior to Europeans. In the United States the racial theories of Thomas Jefferson were influential. He saw Africans as inferior to Whites especially in regards to their intellect, and imbued with unnatural sexual appetites, but described Native Americans as equals to whites.

=== Polygenism vs monogenism ===
In the last two decades of the 18th century, the theory of polygenism, the belief that different races had evolved separately in each continent and shared no common ancestor, was advocated in England by historian Edward Long and anatomist Charles White, in Germany by ethnographers Christoph Meiners and Georg Forster, and in France by Julien-Joseph Virey. In the US, Samuel George Morton, Josiah Nott and Louis Agassiz promoted this theory in the mid-19th century. Polygenism was popular and most widespread in the 19th century, culminating in the founding of the Anthropological Society of London (1863), which, during the period of the American Civil War, broke away from the Ethnological Society of London and its monogenic stance, their underlined difference lying, relevantly, in the so-called &quot;Negro question&quot;: a substantial racist view by the former, and a more liberal view on race by the latter.

== Modern scholarship ==
=== Models of human evolution ===
Today, all humans are classified as belonging to the species &quot;Homo sapiens&quot;. However, this is not the first species of homininae: the first species of genus &quot;Homo&quot;, &quot;Homo habilis&quot;, evolved in East Africa at least 2 million years ago, and members of this species populated different parts of Africa in a relatively short time. &quot;Homo erectus&quot; evolved more than 1.8 million years ago, and by 1.5 million years ago had spread throughout Europe and Asia. Virtually all physical anthropologists agree that &quot;Archaic Homo sapiens&quot; (A group including the possible species &quot;H. heidelbergensis&quot;, &quot;H. rhodesiensis&quot;, and &quot;H. neanderthalensis&quot;) evolved out of African &quot;H. erectus&quot; () or &quot;H. ergaster&quot;. Anthropologists support the idea that anatomically modern humans (&quot;Homo sapiens&quot;) evolved in North or East Africa from an archaic human species such as &quot;H. heidelbergensis&quot; and then migrated out of Africa, mixing with and replacing &quot;H. heidelbergensis&quot; and &quot;H. neanderthalensis&quot; populations throughout Europe and Asia, and &quot;H. rhodesiensis&quot; populations in Sub-Saharan Africa (a combination of the Out of Africa and Multiregional models).

=== Biological classification ===

In the early 20th century, many anthropologists taught that race was an entirely biological phenomenon and that this was core to a person&#x27;s behavior and identity, a position commonly called racial essentialism. This, coupled with a belief that linguistic, cultural, and social groups fundamentally existed along racial lines, formed the basis of what is now called scientific racism. After the Nazi eugenics program, along with the rise of anti-colonial movements, racial essentialism lost widespread popularity. New studies of culture and the fledgling field of population genetics undermined the scientific standing of racial essentialism, leading race anthropologists to revise their conclusions about the sources of phenotypic variation. A significant number of modern anthropologists and biologists in the West came to view race as an invalid genetic or biological designation.

The first to challenge the concept of race on empirical grounds were the anthropologists Franz Boas, who provided evidence of phenotypic plasticity due to environmental factors, and Ashley Montagu, who relied on evidence from genetics. E. O. Wilson then challenged the concept from the perspective of general animal systematics, and further rejected the claim that &quot;races&quot; were equivalent to &quot;subspecies&quot;.

Human genetic variation is predominantly within races, continuous, and complex in structure, which is inconsistent with the concept of genetic human races. According to the biological anthropologist Jonathan Marks,

==== Subspecies ====
The term &quot;race&quot; in biology is used with caution because it can be ambiguous. Generally, when it is used it is effectively a synonym of &quot;subspecies&quot;. (For animals, the only taxonomic unit below the species level is usually the subspecies; there are narrower infraspecific ranks in botany, and &quot;race&quot; does not correspond directly with any of them.) Traditionally, subspecies are seen as geographically isolated and genetically differentiated populations. Studies of human genetic variation show that human populations are not geographically isolated. and their genetic differences are far smaller than those among comparable subspecies.

In 1978, Sewall Wright suggested that human populations that have long inhabited separated parts of the world should, in general, be considered different subspecies by the criterion that most individuals of such populations can be allocated correctly by inspection. Wright argued: &quot;It does not require a trained anthropologist to classify an array of Englishmen, West Africans, and Chinese with 100% accuracy by features, skin color, and type of hair despite so much variability within each of these groups that every individual can easily be distinguished from every other.&quot; While in practice subspecies are often defined by easily observable physical appearance, there is not necessarily any evolutionary significance to these observed differences, so this form of classification has become less acceptable to evolutionary biologists. Likewise this typological approach to race is generally regarded as discredited by biologists and anthropologists.

==== Ancestrally differentiated populations (clades) ====
In 2000, philosopher Robin Andreasen proposed that cladistics might be used to categorize human races biologically, and that races can be both biologically real and socially constructed. Andreasen cited tree diagrams of relative genetic distances among populations published by Luigi Cavalli-Sforza as the basis for a phylogenetic tree of human races (p. 661). Biological anthropologist Jonathan Marks (2008) responded by arguing that Andreasen had misinterpreted the genetic literature: &quot;These trees are phenetic (based on similarity), rather than cladistic (based on monophyletic descent, that is from a series of unique ancestors).&quot; Evolutionary biologist Alan Templeton (2013) argued that multiple lines of evidence falsify the idea of a phylogenetic tree structure to human genetic diversity, and confirm the presence of gene flow among populations. Marks, Templeton, and Cavalli-Sforza all conclude that genetics does not provide evidence of human races.

Previously, anthropologists Lieberman and Jackson (1995) had also critiqued the use of cladistics to support concepts of race. They argued that &quot;the molecular and biochemical proponents of this model explicitly use racial categories &quot;in their initial grouping of samples&quot;&quot;. For example, the large and highly diverse macroethnic groups of East Indians, North Africans, and Europeans are presumptively grouped as Caucasians prior to the analysis of their DNA variation. They argued that this &quot;a priori&quot; grouping limits and skews interpretations, obscures other lineage relationships, deemphasizes the impact of more immediate clinal environmental factors on genomic diversity, and can cloud our understanding of the true patterns of affinity.

In 2015, Keith Hunley, Graciela Cabana, and Jeffrey Long analyzed the Human Genome Diversity Project sample of 1,037 individuals in 52 populations, finding that diversity among non-African populations is the result of a serial founder effect process, with non-African populations as a whole nested among African populations, that &quot;some African populations are equally related to other African populations and to non-African populations&quot;, and that &quot;outside of Africa, regional groupings of populations are nested inside one another, and many of them are not monophyletic&quot;. Earlier research had also suggested that there has always been considerable gene flow between human populations, meaning that human population groups are not monophyletic. Rachel Caspari has argued that, since no groups currently regarded as races are monophyletic, by definition none of these groups can be clades.

==== Clines ====
One crucial innovation in reconceptualizing genotypic and phenotypic variation was the anthropologist C. Loring Brace&#x27;s observation that such variations, insofar as they are affected by natural selection, slow migration, or genetic drift, are distributed along geographic gradations or clines. For example, with respect to skin color in Europe and Africa, Brace writes:

In part, this is due to isolation by distance. This point called attention to a problem common to phenotype-based descriptions of races (for example, those based on hair texture and skin color): they ignore a host of other similarities and differences (for example, blood type) that do not correlate highly with the markers for race. Thus, anthropologist Frank Livingstone&#x27;s conclusion was that, since clines cross racial boundaries, &quot;there are no races, only clines&quot;.

In a response to Livingstone, Theodore Dobzhansky argued that when talking about race one must be attentive to how the term is being used: &quot;I agree with Dr. Livingstone that if races have to be &#x27;discrete units&#x27;, then there are no races, and if &#x27;race&#x27; is used as an &#x27;explanation&#x27; of the human variability, rather than vice versa, then the explanation is invalid.&quot; He further argued that one could use the term race if one distinguished between &quot;race differences&quot; and &quot;the race concept&quot;. The former refers to any distinction in gene frequencies between populations; the latter is &quot;a matter of judgment&quot;. He further observed that even when there is clinal variation: &quot;Race differences are objectively ascertainable biological phenomena ... but it does not follow that racially distinct populations must be given racial (or subspecific) labels.&quot; In short, Livingstone and Dobzhansky agree that there are genetic differences among human beings; they also agree that the use of the race concept to classify people, and how the race concept is used, is a matter of social convention. They differ on whether the race concept remains a meaningful and useful social convention.

In 1964, the biologists Paul Ehrlich and Holm pointed out cases where two or more clines are distributed discordantly – for example, melanin is distributed in a decreasing pattern from the equator north and south; frequencies for the haplotype for beta-S hemoglobin, on the other hand, radiate out of specific geographical points in Africa. As the anthropologists Leonard Lieberman and Fatimah Linda Jackson observed, &quot;Discordant patterns of heterogeneity falsify any description of a population as if it were genotypically or even phenotypically homogeneous&quot;.

Patterns such as those seen in human physical and genetic variation as described above, have led to the consequence that the number and geographic location of any described races is highly dependent on the importance attributed to, and quantity of, the traits considered. A skin-lightening mutation, estimated to have occurred 20,000 to 50,000 years ago, partially accounts for the appearance of light skin in people who migrated out of Africa northward into what is now Europe. East Asians owe their relatively light skin to different mutations. On the other hand, the greater the number of traits (or alleles) considered, the more subdivisions of humanity are detected, since traits and gene frequencies do not always correspond to the same geographical location. Or as put it:

==== Genetically differentiated populations ====

Another way to look at differences between populations is to measure genetic differences rather than physical differences between groups. The mid-20th-century anthropologist William C. Boyd defined race as: &quot;A population which differs significantly from other populations in regard to the frequency of one or more of the genes it possesses. It is an arbitrary matter which, and how many, gene loci we choose to consider as a significant &#x27;constellation&#x27;&quot;. Leonard Lieberman and Rodney Kirk have pointed out that &quot;the paramount weakness of this statement is that if one gene can distinguish races then the number of races is as numerous as the number of human couples reproducing&quot;. Moreover, the anthropologist Stephen Molnar has suggested that the discordance of clines inevitably results in a multiplication of races that renders the concept itself useless. The Human Genome Project states &quot;People who have lived in the same geographic region for many generations may have some alleles in common, but no allele will be found in all members of one population and in no members of any other.&quot; Massimo Pigliucci and Jonathan Kaplan argue that human races do exist, and that they correspond to the genetic classification of ecotypes, but that real human races do not correspond very much, if at all, to folk racial categories. In contrast, Walsh &amp; Yun reviewed the literature in 2011 and reported: &quot;Genetic studies using very few chromosomal loci find that genetic polymorphisms divide human populations into clusters with almost 100 percent accuracy and that they correspond to the traditional anthropological categories.&quot;

Some biologists argue that racial categories correlate with biological traits (e.g. phenotype), and that certain genetic markers have varying frequencies among human populations, some of which correspond more or less to traditional racial groupings.

===== Distribution of genetic variation =====
The distribution of genetic variants within and among human populations are impossible to describe succinctly because of the difficulty of defining a population, the clinal nature of variation, and heterogeneity across the genome (Long and Kittles 2003). In general, however, an average of 85% of statistical genetic variation exists within local populations, ≈7% is between local populations within the same continent, and ≈8% of variation occurs between large groups living on different continents. The recent African origin theory for humans would predict that in Africa there exists a great deal more diversity than elsewhere and that diversity should decrease the further from Africa a population is sampled. Hence, the 85% average figure is misleading: Long and Kittles find that rather than 85% of human genetic diversity existing in all human populations, about 100% of human diversity exists in a single African population, whereas only about 60% of human genetic diversity exists in the least diverse population they analyzed (the Surui, a population derived from New Guinea). Statistical analysis that takes this difference into account confirms previous findings that &quot;Western-based racial classifications have no taxonomic significance&quot;.

===== Cluster analysis =====
A 2002 study of random biallelic genetic loci found little to no evidence that humans were divided into distinct biological groups.

In his 2003 paper, &quot;Human Genetic Diversity: Lewontin&#x27;s Fallacy&quot;, A. W. F. Edwards argued that rather than using a locus-by-locus analysis of variation to derive taxonomy, it is possible to construct a human classification system based on characteristic genetic patterns, or &quot;clusters&quot; inferred from multilocus genetic data. Geographically based human studies since have shown that such genetic clusters can be derived from analyzing of a large number of loci which can assort individuals sampled into groups analogous to traditional continental racial groups. Joanna Mountain and Neil Risch cautioned that while genetic clusters may one day be shown to correspond to phenotypic variations between groups, such assumptions were premature as the relationship between genes and complex traits remains poorly understood. However, Risch denied such limitations render the analysis useless: &quot;Perhaps just using someone&#x27;s actual birth year is not a very good way of measuring age. Does that mean we should throw it out? ... Any category you come up with is going to be imperfect, but that doesn&#x27;t preclude you from using it or the fact that it has utility.&quot;

Early human genetic cluster analysis studies were conducted with samples taken from ancestral population groups living at extreme geographic distances from each other. It was thought that such large geographic distances would maximize the genetic variation between the groups sampled in the analysis, and thus maximize the probability of finding cluster patterns unique to each group. In light of the historically recent acceleration of human migration (and correspondingly, human gene flow) on a global scale, further studies were conducted to judge the degree to which genetic cluster analysis can pattern ancestrally identified groups as well as geographically separated groups. One such study looked at a large multiethnic population in the United States, and &quot;detected only modest genetic differentiation between different current geographic locales within each race/ethnicity group. Thus, ancient geographic ancestry, which is highly correlated with self-identified race/ethnicity – as opposed to current residence – is the major determinant of genetic structure in the U.S. population.&quot;

 have argued that even when individuals can be reliably assigned to specific population groups, it may still be possible for two randomly chosen individuals from different populations/clusters to be more similar to each other than to a randomly chosen member of their own cluster. They found that many thousands of genetic markers had to be used in order for the answer to the question &quot;How often is a pair of individuals from one population genetically more dissimilar than two individuals chosen from two different populations?&quot; to be &quot;never&quot;. This assumed three population groups separated by large geographic ranges (European, African and East Asian). The entire world population is much more complex and studying an increasing number of groups would require an increasing number of markers for the same answer. The authors conclude that &quot;caution should be used when using geographic or genetic ancestry to make inferences about individual phenotypes&quot;. Witherspoon, et al. concluded: &quot;The fact that, given enough genetic data, individuals can be correctly assigned to their populations of origin is compatible with the observation that most human genetic variation is found within populations, not between them. It is also compatible with our finding that, even when the most distinct populations are considered and hundreds of loci are used, individuals are frequently more similar to members of other populations than to members of their own population.&quot;

Anthropologists such as C. Loring Brace, the philosophers Jonathan Kaplan and Rasmus Winther, and the geneticist Joseph Graves, have argued that the cluster structure of genetic data is dependent on the initial hypotheses of the researcher and the influence of these hypotheses on the choice of populations to sample. When one samples continental groups, the clusters become continental, but if one had chosen other sampling patterns, the clustering would be different. Weiss and Fullerton have noted that if one sampled only Icelanders, Mayans and Maoris, three distinct clusters would form and all other populations could be described as being clinally composed of admixtures of Maori, Icelandic and Mayan genetic materials. Kaplan and Winther therefore argue that, seen in this way, both Lewontin and Edwards are right in their arguments. They conclude that while racial groups are characterized by different allele frequencies, this does not mean that racial classification is a natural taxonomy of the human species, because multiple other genetic patterns can be found in human populations that crosscut racial distinctions. Moreover, the genomic data underdetermines whether one wishes to see subdivisions (i.e., splitters) or a continuum (i.e., lumpers). Under Kaplan and Winther&#x27;s view, racial groupings are objective social constructions (see Mills 1998) that have conventional biological reality only insofar as the categories are chosen and constructed for pragmatic scientific reasons. In earlier work, Winther had identified &quot;diversity partitioning&quot; and &quot;clustering analysis&quot; as two separate methodologies, with distinct questions, assumptions, and protocols. Each is also associated with opposing ontological consequences vis-a-vis the metaphysics of race. Philosopher Lisa Gannett has argued that biogeographical ancestry, a concept devised by Mark Shriver and Tony Frudakis, is not an objective measure of the biological aspects of race as Shriver and Frudakis claim it is. She argues that it is actually just a &quot;local category shaped by the U.S. context of its production, especially the forensic aim of being able to predict the race or ethnicity of an unknown suspect based on DNA found at the crime scene&quot;.

===== Clines and clusters in genetic variation =====
Recent studies of human genetic clustering have included a debate over how genetic variation is organized, with clusters and clines as the main possible orderings. argued for smooth, clinal genetic variation in ancestral populations even in regions previously considered racially homogeneous, with the apparent gaps turning out to be artifacts of sampling techniques. disputed this and offered an analysis of the Human Genetic Diversity Panel showing that there were small discontinuities in the smooth genetic variation for ancestral populations at the location of geographic barriers such as the Sahara, the Oceans, and the Himalayas. Nonetheless, stated that their findings &quot;should not be taken as evidence of our support of any particular concept of biological race ... Genetic differences among human populations derive mainly from gradations in allele frequencies rather than from distinctive &#x27;diagnostic&#x27; genotypes.&quot; Using a sample of 40 populations distributed roughly evenly across the Earth&#x27;s land surface, found that &quot;genetic diversity is distributed in a more clinal pattern when more geographically intermediate populations are sampled&quot;.

Guido Barbujani has written that human genetic variation is generally distributed continuously in gradients across much of Earth, and that there is no evidence that genetic boundaries between human populations exist as would be necessary for human races to exist.

Over time, human genetic variation has formed a nested structure that is inconsistent with the concept of races that have evolved independently of one another.

=== Social constructions ===
As anthropologists and other evolutionary scientists have shifted away from the language of race to the term &quot;population&quot; to talk about genetic differences, historians, cultural anthropologists and other social scientists re-conceptualized the term &quot;race&quot; as a cultural category or identity, i.e., a way among many possible ways in which a society chooses to divide its members into categories.

Many social scientists have replaced the word race with the word &quot;ethnicity&quot; to refer to self-identifying groups based on beliefs concerning shared culture, ancestry and history. Alongside empirical and conceptual problems with &quot;race&quot;, following the Second World War, evolutionary and social scientists were acutely aware of how beliefs about race had been used to justify discrimination, apartheid, slavery, and genocide. This questioning gained momentum in the 1960s during the civil rights movement in the United States and the emergence of numerous anti-colonial movements worldwide. They thus came to believe that race itself is a social construct, a concept that was believed to correspond to an objective reality but which was believed in because of its social functions.

Craig Venter and Francis Collins of the National Institute of Health jointly made the announcement of the mapping of the human genome in 2000. Upon examining the data from the genome mapping, Venter realized that although the genetic variation within the human species is on the order of 1–3% (instead of the previously assumed 1%), the types of variations do not support the notion of genetically defined races. Venter said, &quot;Race is a social concept. It&#x27;s not a scientific one. There are no bright lines (that would stand out), if we could compare all the sequenced genomes of everyone on the planet. ... When we try to apply science to try to sort out these social differences, it all falls apart.&quot;

Anthropologist Stephan Palmié has argued that race &quot;is not a thing but a social relation&quot;; or, in the words of Katya Gibel Mevorach, &quot;a metonym&quot;, &quot;a human invention whose criteria for differentiation are neither universal nor fixed but have always been used to manage difference&quot;. As such, the use of the term &quot;race&quot; itself must be analyzed. Moreover, they argue that biology will not explain why or how people use the idea of race; only history and social relationships will.

Imani Perry has argued that race &quot;is produced by social arrangements and political decision making&quot;, and that &quot;race is something that happens, rather than something that is. It is dynamic, but it holds no objective truth.&quot; Similarly, in &quot;Racial Culture: A Critique&quot; (2005), Richard T. Ford argued that while &quot;there is no necessary correspondence between the ascribed identity of race and one&#x27;s culture or personal sense of self&quot; and &quot;group difference is not intrinsic to members of social groups but rather contingent o[n] the social practices of group identification&quot;, the social practices of identity politics may coerce individuals into the &quot;compulsory&quot; enactment of &quot;prewritten racial scripts&quot;.

==== Brazil ====
Compared to 19th-century United States, 20th-century Brazil was characterized by a perceived relative absence of sharply defined racial groups. According to anthropologist Marvin Harris, this pattern reflects a different history and different social relations.

Race in Brazil was &quot;biologized&quot;, but in a way that recognized the difference between ancestry (which determines genotype) and phenotypic differences. There, racial identity was not governed by rigid descent rule, such as the one-drop rule, as it was in the United States. A Brazilian child was never automatically identified with the racial type of one or both parents, nor were there only a very limited number of categories to choose from, to the extent that full siblings can pertain to different racial groups.

Over a dozen racial categories would be recognized in conformity with all the possible combinations of hair color, hair texture, eye color, and skin color. These types grade into each other like the colors of the spectrum, and not one category stands significantly isolated from the rest. That is, race referred preferentially to appearance, not heredity, and appearance is a poor indication of ancestry, because only a few genes are responsible for someone&#x27;s skin color and traits: a person who is considered white may have more African ancestry than a person who is considered black, and the reverse can be also true about European ancestry. The complexity of racial classifications in Brazil reflects the extent of genetic mixing in Brazilian society, a society that remains highly, but not strictly, stratified along color lines. These socioeconomic factors are also significant to the limits of racial lines, because a minority of &quot;pardos&quot;, or brown people, are likely to start declaring themselves white or black if socially upward, and being seen as relatively &quot;whiter&quot; as their perceived social status increases (much as in other regions of Latin America).

Fluidity of racial categories aside, the &quot;biologification&quot; of race in Brazil referred above would match contemporary concepts of race in the United States quite closely, though, if Brazilians are supposed to choose their race as one among, Asian and Indigenous apart, three IBGE&#x27;s census categories. While assimilated Amerindians and people with very high quantities of Amerindian ancestry are usually grouped as &quot;caboclos&quot;, a subgroup of &quot;pardos&quot; which roughly translates as both mestizo and hillbilly, for those of lower quantity of Amerindian descent a higher European genetic contribution is expected to be grouped as a &quot;pardo&quot;. In several genetic tests, people with less than 60-65% of European descent and 5–10% of Amerindian descent usually cluster with Afro-Brazilians (as reported by the individuals), or 6.9% of the population, and those with about 45% or more of Subsaharan contribution most times do so (in average, Afro-Brazilian DNA was reported to be about 50% Subsaharan African, 37% European and 13% Amerindian).

If a more consistent report with the genetic groups in the gradation of genetic mixing is to be considered (e.g. that would not cluster people with a balanced degree of African and non-African ancestry in the black group instead of the multiracial one, unlike elsewhere in Latin America where people of high quantity of African descent tend to classify themselves as mixed), more people would report themselves as white and &quot;pardo&quot; in Brazil (47.7% and 42.4% of the population as of 2010, respectively), because by research its population is believed to have between 65 and 80% of autosomal European ancestry, in average (also &gt;35% of European mt-DNA and &gt;95% of European Y-DNA).

From the last decades of the Empire until the 1950s, the proportion of the white population increased significantly while Brazil welcomed 5.5 million immigrants between 1821 and 1932, not much behind its neighbor Argentina with 6.4 million, and it received more European immigrants in its colonial history than the United States. Between 1500 and 1760, 700.000 Europeans settled in Brazil, while 530.000 Europeans settled in the United States for the same given time. Thus, the historical construction of race in Brazilian society dealt primarily with gradations between persons of majority European ancestry and little minority groups with otherwise lower quantity therefrom in recent times.

==== European Union ====

According to the Council of the European Union:

The European Union uses the terms racial origin and ethnic origin synonymously in its documents and according to it &quot;the use of the term &#x27;racial origin&#x27; in this directive does not imply an acceptance of such [racial] theories&quot;. Haney López warns that using &quot;race&quot; as a category within the law tends to legitimize its existence in the popular imagination. In the diverse geographic context of Europe, ethnicity and ethnic origin are arguably more resonant and are less encumbered by the ideological baggage associated with &quot;race&quot;. In European context, historical resonance of &quot;race&quot; underscores its problematic nature. In some states, it is strongly associated with laws promulgated by the Nazi and Fascist governments in Europe during the 1930s and 1940s. Indeed, in 1996, the European Parliament adopted a resolution stating that &quot;the term should therefore be avoided in all official texts&quot;.

The concept of racial origin relies on the notion that human beings can be separated into biologically distinct &quot;races&quot;, an idea generally rejected by the scientific community. Since all human beings belong to the same species, the ECRI (European Commission against Racism and Intolerance) rejects theories based on the existence of different &quot;races&quot;. However, in its Recommendation ECRI uses this term in order to ensure that those persons who are generally and erroneously perceived as belonging to &quot;another race&quot; are not excluded from the protection provided for by the legislation. The law claims to reject the existence of &quot;race&quot;, yet penalize situations where someone is treated less favourably on this ground.

==== United States ====

The immigrants to the United States came from every region of Europe, Africa, and Asia. They mixed among themselves and with the indigenous inhabitants of the continent. In the United States most people who self-identify as African American have some European ancestors, while many people who identify as European American have some African or Amerindian ancestors.

Since the early history of the United States, Amerindians, African Americans, and European Americans have been classified as belonging to different races. Efforts to track mixing between groups led to a proliferation of categories, such as mulatto and octoroon. The criteria for membership in these races diverged in the late 19th century. During the Reconstruction era, increasing numbers of Americans began to consider anyone with &quot;one drop&quot; of known &quot;Black blood&quot; to be Black, regardless of appearance. By the early 20th century, this notion was made statutory in many states. Amerindians continue to be defined by a certain percentage of &quot;Indian blood&quot; (called &quot;blood quantum&quot;). To be White one had to have perceived &quot;pure&quot; White ancestry. The one-drop rule or hypodescent rule refers to the convention of defining a person as racially black if he or she has any known African ancestry. This rule meant that those that were mixed race but with some discernible African ancestry were defined as black. The one-drop rule is specific to not only those with African ancestry but to the United States, making it a particularly African-American experience.

The decennial censuses conducted since 1790 in the United States created an incentive to establish racial categories and fit people into these categories.

The term &quot;Hispanic&quot; as an ethnonym emerged in the 20th century with the rise of migration of laborers from the Spanish-speaking countries of Latin America to the United States. Today, the word &quot;Latino&quot; is often used as a synonym for &quot;Hispanic&quot;. The definitions of both terms are non-race specific, and include people who consider themselves to be of distinct races (Black, White, Amerindian, Asian, and mixed groups). However, there is a common misconception in the US that Hispanic/Latino is a race or sometimes even that national origins such as Mexican, Cuban, Colombian, Salvadoran, etc. are races. In contrast to &quot;Latino&quot; or &quot;Hispanic&quot;, &quot;Anglo&quot; refers to non-Hispanic White Americans or non-Hispanic European Americans, most of whom speak the English language but are not necessarily of English descent.

== Views across disciplines over time ==
=== Anthropology ===
The concept of race classification in physical anthropology lost credibility around the 1960s and is now considered untenable. A 2019 statement by the American Association of Physical Anthropologists declares:Race does not provide an accurate representation of human biological variation. It was never accurate in the past, and it remains inaccurate when referencing contemporary human populations. Humans are not divided biologically into distinct continental types or racial genetic clusters. Instead, the Western concept of race must be understood as a classification system that emerged from, and in support of, European colonialism, oppression, and discrimination.Wagner et al. (2017) surveyed 3,286 American anthropologists&#x27; views on race and genetics, including both cultural and biological anthropologists. They found a consensus among them that biological races do not exist in humans, but that race does exist insofar as the social experiences of members of different races can have significant effects on health.

Wang, Štrkalj et al. (2003) examined the use of race as a biological concept in research papers published in China&#x27;s only biological anthropology journal, &quot;Acta Anthropologica Sinica&quot;. The study showed that the race concept was widely used among Chinese anthropologists. In a 2007 review paper, Štrkalj suggested that the stark contrast of the racial approach between the United States and China was due to the fact that race is a factor for social cohesion among the ethnically diverse people of China, whereas &quot;race&quot; is a very sensitive issue in America and the racial approach is considered to undermine social cohesion – with the result that in the socio-political context of US academics scientists are encouraged not to use racial categories, whereas in China they are encouraged to use them.

Lieberman et al. in a 2004 study researched the acceptance of race as a concept among anthropologists in the United States, Canada, the Spanish speaking areas, Europe, Russia and China. Rejection of race ranged from high to low, with the highest rejection rate in the United States and Canada, a moderate rejection rate in Europe, and the lowest rejection rate in Russia and China. Methods used in the studies reported included questionnaires and content analysis.

Kaszycka et al. (2009) in 2002–2003 surveyed European anthropologists&#x27; opinions toward the biological race concept. Three factors – country of academic education, discipline, and age – were found to be significant in differentiating the replies. Those educated in Western Europe, physical anthropologists, and middle-aged persons rejected race more frequently than those educated in Eastern Europe, people in other branches of science, and those from both younger and older generations. &quot;The survey shows that the views on race are sociopolitically (ideologically) influenced and highly dependent on education.&quot;

==== United States ====
Since the second half of the 20th century, physical anthropology in the United States has moved away from a typological understanding of human biological diversity towards a genomic and population-based perspective. Anthropologists have tended to understand race as a social classification of humans based on phenotype and ancestry as well as cultural factors, as the concept is understood in the social sciences. Since 1932, an increasing number of college textbooks introducing physical anthropology have rejected race as a valid concept: from 1932 to 1976, only seven out of thirty-two rejected race; from 1975 to 1984, thirteen out of thirty-three rejected race; from 1985 to 1993, thirteen out of nineteen rejected race. According to one academic journal entry, where 78 percent of the articles in the 1931 &quot;Journal of Physical Anthropology&quot; employed these or nearly synonymous terms reflecting a bio-race paradigm, only 36 percent did so in 1965, and just 28 percent did in 1996.

A 1998 &quot;Statement on &#x27;Race&#x27;&quot; composed by a select committee of anthropologists and issued by the executive board of the American Anthropological Association, which they argue &quot;represents generally the contemporary thinking and scholarly positions of a majority of anthropologists&quot;, declares:

An earlier survey, conducted in 1985 , asked 1,200 American scientists how many &quot;disagree&quot; with the following proposition: &quot;There are biological races in the species &quot;Homo sapiens&quot;.&quot; Among anthropologists, the responses were:
* physical anthropologists: 41%
* cultural anthropologists: 53%
Lieberman&#x27;s study also showed that more women reject the concept of race than men.

The same survey, conducted again in 1999, showed that the number of anthropologists disagreeing with the idea of biological race had risen substantially. The results were as follows:
* physical anthropologists: 69%
* cultural anthropologists: 80%

A line of research conducted by Cartmill (1998), however, seemed to limit the scope of Lieberman&#x27;s finding that there was &quot;a significant degree of change in the status of the race concept&quot;. Goran Štrkalj has argued that this may be because Lieberman and collaborators had looked at all the members of the American Anthropological Association irrespective of their field of research interest, while Cartmill had looked specifically at biological anthropologists interested in human variation.

In 2007, Ann Morning interviewed over 40 American biologists and anthropologists and found significant disagreements over the nature of race, with no one viewpoint holding a majority among either group. Morning also argues that a third position, &quot;antiessentialism&quot;, which holds that race is not a useful concept for biologists, should be introduced into this debate in addition to &quot;constructionism&quot; and &quot;essentialism&quot;.

According to the 2000 University of Wyoming edition of a popular physical anthropology textbook, forensic anthropologists are overwhelmingly in support of the idea of the basic biological reality of human races. Forensic physical anthropologist and professor George W. Gill has said that the idea that race is only skin deep &quot;is simply not true, as any experienced forensic anthropologist will affirm&quot; and &quot;Many morphological features tend to follow geographic boundaries coinciding often with climatic zones. This is not surprising since the selective forces of climate are probably the primary forces of nature that have shaped human races with regard not only to skin color and hair form but also the underlying bony structures of the nose, cheekbones, etc. (For example, more prominent noses humidify air better.)&quot; While he can see good arguments for both sides, the complete denial of the opposing evidence &quot;seems to stem largely from socio-political motivation and not science at all&quot;. He also states that many biological anthropologists see races as real yet &quot;not one introductory textbook of physical anthropology even presents that perspective as a possibility. In a case as flagrant as this, we are not dealing with science but rather with blatant, politically motivated censorship&quot;.

In partial response to Gill&#x27;s statement, Professor of Biological Anthropology C. Loring Brace argues that the reason laymen and biological anthropologists can determine the geographic ancestry of an individual can be explained by the fact that biological characteristics are clinally distributed across the planet, and that does not translate into the concept of race. He states: The concept of &quot;race&quot; is still sometimes used within forensic anthropology (when analyzing skeletal remains), biomedical research, and race-based medicine. Brace has criticized forensic anthropologists for this, arguing that they in fact should be talking about regional ancestry. He argues that while forensic anthropologists can determine that a skeletal remain comes from a person with ancestors in a specific region of Africa, categorizing that skeletal as being &quot;black&quot; is a socially constructed category that is only meaningful in the particular social context of the United States, and which is not itself scientifically valid.

=== Biology, anatomy, and medicine ===
In the same 1985 survey , 16% of the surveyed biologists and 36% of the surveyed developmental psychologists disagreed with the proposition: &quot;There are biological races in the species &quot;Homo sapiens&quot;.&quot;

The authors of the study also examined 77 college textbooks in biology and 69 in physical anthropology published between 1932 and 1989. Physical anthropology texts argued that biological races exist until the 1970s, when they began to argue that races do not exist. In contrast, biology textbooks did not undergo such a reversal but many instead dropped their discussion of race altogether. The authors attributed this to biologists trying to avoid discussing the political implications of racial classifications, and to the ongoing discussions in biology about the validity of the idea of &quot;subspecies&quot;. The authors concluded, &quot;The concept of race, masking the overwhelming genetic similarity of all peoples and the mosaic patterns of variation that do not correspond to racial divisions, is not only socially dysfunctional but is biologically indefensible as well (pp. 5 18–5 19).&quot;

A 1994 examination of 32 English sport/exercise science textbooks found that 7 (21.9%) claimed that there are biophysical differences due to race that might explain differences in sports performance, 24 (75%) did not mention nor refute the concept, and 1 (3.1%) expressed caution with the idea.

In February 2001, the editors of &quot;Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine&quot; asked &quot;authors to not use race and ethnicity when there is no biological, scientific, or sociological reason for doing so&quot;. The editors also stated that &quot;analysis by race and ethnicity has become an analytical knee-jerk reflex&quot;. &quot;Nature Genetics&quot; now ask authors to &quot;explain why they make use of particular ethnic groups or populations, and how classification was achieved&quot;.

Morning (2008) looked at high school biology textbooks during the 1952–2002 period and initially found a similar pattern with only 35% directly discussing race in the 1983–92 period from initially 92% doing so. However, this has increased somewhat after this to 43%. More indirect and brief discussions of race in the context of medical disorders have increased from none to 93% of textbooks. In general, the material on race has moved from surface traits to genetics and evolutionary history. The study argues that the textbooks&#x27; fundamental message about the existence of races has changed little.

Surveying views on race in the scientific community in 2008, Morning concluded that biologists had failed to come to a clear consensus, and they often split along cultural and demographic lines. She notes: &quot;At best, one can conclude that biologists and anthropologists now appear equally divided in their beliefs about the nature of race.&quot;

Gissis (2008) examined several important American and British journals in genetics, epidemiology and medicine for their content during the 1946–2003 period. He wrote that &quot;Based upon my findings I argue that the category of race only &quot;seemingly&quot; disappeared from scientific discourse after World War II and has had a &quot;fluctuating yet continuous use&quot; during the time span from 1946 to 2003, and has even &quot;become more pronounced from the early 1970s on&quot;&quot;.

33 health services researchers from differing geographic regions were interviewed in a 2008 study. The researchers recognized the problems with racial and ethnic variables but the majority still believed these variables were necessary and useful.

A 2010 examination of 18 widely used English anatomy textbooks found that they all represented human biological variation in superficial and outdated ways, many of them making use of the race concept in ways that were current in 1950s anthropology. The authors recommended that anatomical education should describe human anatomical variation in more detail and rely on newer research that demonstrates the inadequacies of simple racial typologies.

A 2021 study that examined over 11,000 papers from 1949 to 2018 in the &quot;American Journal of Human Genetics&quot;, found that &quot;race&quot; was used in only 5% of papers published in the last decade, down from 22% in the first. Together with an increase in use of the terms &quot;ethnicity&quot;, &quot;ancestry&quot;, and location-based terms, it suggests that human geneticists have mostly abandoned the term &quot;race&quot;.

The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM), supported by the US the National Institutes of Health, formally declared that &quot;researchers should not use race as a proxy for describing human genetic variation&quot;. The report of its Committee on the Use of Race, Ethnicity, and Ancestry as Population Descriptors in Genomics Research titled &quot;Using Population Descriptors in Genetics and Genomics Research&quot; was released on 14 March 2023. The report stated: &quot;In humans, race is a socially constructed designation, a misleading and harmful surrogate for population genetic differences, and has a long history of being incorrectly identified as the major genetic reason for phenotypic differences between groups.&quot; The committee co-chair Charmaine D. Royal and Robert O. Keohane of Duke University agreed in the meeting: &quot;Classifying people by race is a practice entangled with and rooted in racism.&quot;

=== Sociology ===

Lester Frank Ward (1841–1913), considered to be one of the founders of American sociology, rejected notions that there were fundamental differences that distinguished one race from another, although he acknowledged that social conditions differed dramatically by race. At the turn of the 20th century, sociologists viewed the concept of race in ways that were shaped by the scientific racism of the 19th and early 20th centuries. Many sociologists focused on African Americans, called Negroes at that time, and claimed that they were inferior to whites. White sociologist Charlotte Perkins Gilman (1860–1935), for example, used biological arguments to claim the inferiority of African Americans. American sociologist Charles H. Cooley (1864–1929) theorized that differences among races were &quot;natural&quot;, and that biological differences result in differences in intellectual abilities. Edward Alsworth Ross (1866–1951), also an important figure in the founding of American sociology, and a eugenicist, believed that whites were the superior race, and that there were essential differences in &quot;temperament&quot; among races. In 1910, the &quot;Journal&quot; published an article by Ulysses G. Weatherly (1865–1940) that called for white supremacy and segregation of the races to protect racial purity.

W. E. B. Du Bois (1868–1963), one of the first African-American sociologists, was the first sociologist to use sociological concepts and empirical research methods to analyze race as a social construct instead of a biological reality. Beginning in 1899 with his book &quot;The Philadelphia Negro&quot;, Du Bois studied and wrote about race and racism throughout his career. In his work, he contended that social class, colonialism, and capitalism shaped ideas about race and racial categories. Social scientists largely abandoned scientific racism and biological reasons for racial categorization schemes by the 1930s. Other early sociologists, especially those associated with the Chicago School, joined Du Bois in theorizing race as a socially constructed fact. By 1978, William Julius Wilson argued that race and racial classification systems were declining in significance, and that instead, social class more accurately described what sociologists had earlier understood as race. By 1986, sociologists Michael Omi and Howard Winant successfully introduced the concept of racial formation to describe the process by which racial categories are created. Omi and Winant assert that &quot;there is no biological basis for distinguishing among human groups along the lines of race&quot;.

Eduardo Bonilla-Silva, Sociology professor at Duke University, remarks: &quot;I contend that racism is, more than anything else, a matter of group power; it is about a dominant racial group (whites) striving to maintain its systemic advantages and minorities fighting to subvert the racial status quo.&quot; The types of practices that take place under this new color-blind racism is subtle, institutionalized, and supposedly not racial. Color-blind racism thrives on the idea that race is no longer an issue in the United States. There are contradictions between the alleged color-blindness of most whites and the persistence of a color-coded system of inequality.

Today, sociologists generally understand race and racial categories as socially constructed, and reject racial categorization schemes that depend on biological differences.

== Political and practical uses ==
=== Biomedicine ===
In the United States, federal government policy promotes the use of racially categorized data to identify and address health disparities between racial or ethnic groups. In clinical settings, race has sometimes been considered in the diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. Doctors have noted that some medical conditions are more prevalent in certain racial or ethnic groups than in others, without being sure of the cause of those differences. Recent interest in race-based medicine, or race-targeted pharmacogenomics, has been fueled by the proliferation of human genetic data which followed the decoding of the human genome in the first decade of the twenty-first century. There is an active debate among biomedical researchers about the meaning and importance of race in their research. Proponents of the use of racial categories in biomedicine argue that continued use of racial categorizations in biomedical research and clinical practice makes possible the application of new genetic findings, and provides a clue to diagnosis. Biomedical researchers&#x27; positions on race fall into two main camps: those who consider the concept of race to have no biological basis and those who consider it to have the potential to be biologically meaningful. Members of the latter camp often base their arguments around the potential to create genome-based personalized medicine.

Other researchers point out that finding a difference in disease prevalence between two socially defined groups does not necessarily imply genetic causation of the difference. They suggest that medical practices should maintain their focus on the individual rather than an individual&#x27;s membership to any group. They argue that overemphasizing genetic contributions to health disparities carries various risks such as reinforcing stereotypes, promoting racism or ignoring the contribution of non-genetic factors to health disparities. International epidemiological data show that living conditions rather than race make the biggest difference in health outcomes even for diseases that have &quot;race-specific&quot; treatments. Some studies have found that patients are reluctant to accept racial categorization in medical practice.

=== Law enforcement ===
In an attempt to provide general descriptions that may facilitate the job of law enforcement officers seeking to apprehend suspects, the United States FBI employs the term &quot;race&quot; to summarize the general appearance (skin color, hair texture, eye shape, and other such easily noticed characteristics) of individuals whom they are attempting to apprehend. From the perspective of law enforcement officers, it is generally more important to arrive at a description that will readily suggest the general appearance of an individual than to make a scientifically valid categorization by DNA or other such means. Thus, in addition to assigning a wanted individual to a racial category, such a description will include: height, weight, eye color, scars and other distinguishing characteristics.

Criminal justice agencies in England and Wales use at least two separate racial/ethnic classification systems when reporting crime, as of 2010. One is the system used in the 2001 Census when individuals identify themselves as belonging to a particular ethnic group: W1 (White-British), W2 (White-Irish), W9 (Any other white background); M1 (White and black Caribbean), M2 (White and black African), M3 (White and Asian), M9 (Any other mixed background); A1 (Asian-Indian), A2 (Asian-Pakistani), A3 (Asian-Bangladeshi), A9 (Any other Asian background); B1 (Black Caribbean), B2 (Black African), B3 (Any other black background); O1 (Chinese), O9 (Any other). The other is categories used by the police when they visually identify someone as belonging to an ethnic group, e.g. at the time of a stop and search or an arrest: White – North European (IC1), White – South European (IC2), Black (IC3), Asian (IC4), Chinese, Japanese, or South East Asian (IC5), Middle Eastern (IC6), and Unknown (IC0). &quot;IC&quot; stands for &quot;Identification Code;&quot; these items are also referred to as Phoenix classifications. Officers are instructed to &quot;record the response that has been given&quot; even if the person gives an answer which may be incorrect; their own perception of the person&#x27;s ethnic background is recorded separately. Comparability of the information being recorded by officers was brought into question by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) in September 2007, as part of its Equality Data Review; one problem cited was the number of reports that contained an ethnicity of &quot;Not Stated&quot;.

In many countries, such as France, the state is legally banned from maintaining data based on race.

In the United States, the practice of racial profiling has been ruled to be both unconstitutional and a violation of civil rights. There is active debate regarding the cause of a marked correlation between the recorded crimes, punishments meted out, and the country&#x27;s populations. Many consider &quot;de facto&quot; racial profiling an example of institutional racism in law enforcement.

Mass incarceration in the United States disproportionately impacts African American and Latino communities. Michelle Alexander, author of &quot;The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness&quot; (2010), argues that mass incarceration is best understood as not only a system of overcrowded prisons. Mass incarceration is also, &quot;the larger web of laws, rules, policies, and customs that control those labeled criminals both in and out of prison&quot;. She defines it further as &quot;a system that locks people not only behind actual bars in actual prisons, but also behind virtual bars and virtual walls&quot;, illustrating the second-class citizenship that is imposed on a disproportionate number of people of color, specifically African-Americans. She compares mass incarceration to Jim Crow laws, stating that both work as racial caste systems.

Many research findings appear to agree that the impact of victim race in the interpersonal violence (IPV) arrest decision might include a racial bias in favor of white victims. A 2011 study in a national sample of IPV arrests found that female arrest was more likely if the male victim was white and the female offender was black, while male arrest was more likely if the female victim was white. For both female and male arrest in IPV cases, situations involving married couples were more likely to lead to arrest compared to dating or divorced couples. More research is needed to understand agency and community factors that influence police behavior and how discrepancies in IPV interventions/ tools of justice can be addressed.

Recent work using DNA cluster analysis to determine race background has been used by some criminal investigators to narrow their search for the identity of both suspects and victims. Proponents of DNA profiling in criminal investigations cite cases where leads based on DNA analysis proved useful, but the practice remains controversial among medical ethicists, defense lawyers and some in law enforcement.

The Constitution of Australia contains a line about &#x27;people of any race for whom it is deemed necessary to make special laws&#x27;, despite there being no agreed definition of race described in the document.

==== Forensic anthropology ====

Similarly, forensic anthropologists draw on highly heritable morphological features of human remains (e.g. cranial measurements) to aid in the identification of the body, including in terms of race. In a 1992 article, anthropologist Norman Sauer noted that anthropologists had generally abandoned the concept of race as a valid representation of human biological diversity, except for forensic anthropologists. He asked, &quot;If races don&#x27;t exist, why are forensic anthropologists so good at identifying them?&quot; He concluded:

Identification of the ancestry of an individual is dependent upon knowledge of the frequency and distribution of phenotypic traits in a population. This does not necessitate the use of a racial classification scheme based on unrelated traits, although the race concept is widely used in medical and legal contexts in the United States. Some studies have reported that races can be identified with a high degree of accuracy using certain methods, such as that developed by Giles and Elliot. However, this method sometimes fails to be replicated in other times and places; for instance, when the method was re-tested to identify Native Americans, the average rate of accuracy dropped from 85% to 33%. Prior information about the individual (e.g. Census data) is also important in allowing the accurate identification of the individual&#x27;s &quot;race&quot;.

In a different approach, anthropologist C. Loring Brace said:

In association with a NOVA program in 2000 about race, he wrote an essay opposing use of the term.

A 2002 study found that about 13% of human craniometric variation existed between regions, while 6% existed between local populations within regions and 81% within local populations. In contrast, the opposite pattern of genetic variation was observed for skin color (which is often used to define race), with 88% of variation between regions. The study concluded: &quot;The apportionment of genetic diversity in skin color is atypical, and cannot be used for purposes of classification.&quot;
Similarly, a 2009 study found that craniometrics could be used accurately to determine what part of the world someone was from based on their cranium; however, this study also found that there were no abrupt boundaries that separated craniometric variation into distinct racial groups. Another 2009 study showed that American blacks and whites had different skeletal morphologies, and that significant patterning in variation in these traits exists within continents. This suggests that classifying humans into races based on skeletal characteristics would necessitate many different &quot;races&quot; being defined.

In 2010, philosopher Neven Sesardić argued that when several traits are analyzed at the same time, forensic anthropologists can classify a person&#x27;s race with an accuracy of close to 100% based on only skeletal remains. Sesardić&#x27;s claim has been disputed by philosopher Massimo Pigliucci, who accused Sesardić of &quot;cherry pick[ing] the scientific evidence and reach[ing] conclusions that are contradicted by it&quot;. Specifically, Pigliucci argued that Sesardić misrepresented a paper by Ousley et al. (2009), and neglected to mention that they identified differentiation not just between individuals from different races, but also between individuals from different tribes, local environments, and time periods.

== See also ==

* Casta
* Clan
* Cultural identity
* Ethnic nationalism
* Ethnic stereotype
* Genetic distance
* Human skin color
* Interracial marriage
* List of contemporary ethnic groups
* Melanism
* Minzu (anthropology)
* Multiracial
* Race and ethnicity in censuses (US)
* Race and ethnicity in Latin America
* Racialization
* Raciolinguistics
* UNESCO statements on race
* Race (French Constitution)
== References ==
== Bibliography ==

























* Lay summary (1 December 2013)


































* 










* Originally appeared in: 
















 
























== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Lay summary (28 April 2013) This review of current research includes chapters by Ian Whitmarsh, David S. Jones, Jonathan Kahn, Pamela Sankar, Steven Epstein, Simon M. Outram, George T. H. Ellison, Richard Tutton, Andrew Smart, Richard Ashcroft, Paul Martin, George T. H. Ellison, Amy Hinterberger, Joan H. Fujimura, Ramya Rajagopalan, Pilar N. Ossorio, Kjell A. Doksum, Jay S. Kaufman, Richard S. Cooper, Angela C. Jenks, Nancy Krieger, and Dorothy Roberts.


=== Popular press ===

* Extract from 
* 
* 
== External links ==
* 
* 
* Companion website to California Newsreel feature.
* A collection of essays by professors and research scientists.

=== Official statements ===
* 
* Originally published in &quot;Federal Register&quot;, 30 October 1997.
* A public education program, including history, human variation, and lived experience.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3254959" start="0" end="4" title="Race (human categorization)" label="Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="28" end="33" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425" start="136" end="143" title="society" label="society"/>
<link wikidata="Q171318" start="295" end="302" title="kinship" label="kinship"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="372" end="384" title="phenotypical" label="phenotypical"/>
<link wikidata="Q231002" start="412" end="420" title="Nationality" label="national"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="442" end="449" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q116732893" start="468" end="484" title="social construct" label="social construct"/>
<link wikidata="Q844569" start="489" end="497" title="Identity (social science)" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="709" end="715" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10751930" start="888" end="903" title="Folk taxonomy" label="folk taxonomies"/>
<link wikidata="Q391156" start="1017" end="1029" title="essentialism" label="essentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q240305" start="1521" end="1541" title="scientific community" label="scientific community"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146890" start="1726" end="1736" title="Human subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146890" start="1744" end="1764" title="Homo sapiens sapiens" label="Homo sapiens sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="1870" end="1887" title="scientific racism" label="scientific racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="1935" end="1951" title="Pseudoscience" label="pseudoscientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757993" start="2073" end="2079" title="Loaded language" label="loaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="2093" end="2104" title="populations" label="populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472587" start="2118" end="2124" title="people" label="people"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="2141" end="2154" title="ethnic groups" label="ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q177634" start="2171" end="2182" title="communities" label="communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233780" start="2267" end="2324" title="National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine" label="National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q844569" start="2484" end="2492" title="Identity (social science)" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042898" start="2732" end="2756" title="Historical race concepts" label="Historical race concepts"/>
<link wikidata="Q772197" start="2993" end="3026" title="Population Registration Act, 1950" label="Population Registration Act, 1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130204" start="3061" end="3069" title="Coloured" label="Coloured"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055416" start="3148" end="3175" title="List of ethnic groups in Myanmar" label="major national ethnic races"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278947" start="3325" end="3353" title="Race and ethnicity in Brazil" label="Race and ethnicity in Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251622" start="3427" end="3472" title="definitions of whiteness in the United States" label="definitions of whiteness in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="3489" end="3510" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="3574" end="3601" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q984212" start="3669" end="3701" title="MENA" label="Middle Eastern and North African"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3717" end="3733" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 U.S. census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154577" start="3965" end="3978" title="one-drop rule" label="one-drop rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="4123" end="4128" title="White people" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245246" start="4236" end="4263" title="History of colonialism" label="European colonial expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="4307" end="4319" title="biologically" label="biologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238967" start="4354" end="4365" title="David Reich (geneticist)" label="David Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767245" start="5085" end="5109" title="African-American English" label="African-American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="5139" end="5156" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430254" start="5398" end="5412" title="social reality" label="social reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q745692" start="5578" end="5592" title="sociopolitical" label="sociopolitical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070165" start="5798" end="5815" title="Institutionalization" label="institutionalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="5844" end="5858" title="discrimination" label="discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q12332701" start="6009" end="6030" title="Racial discrimination" label="Racial discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q375181" start="6156" end="6164" title="Ingroups and outgroups" label="outgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q182034" start="6325" end="6334" title="Hegemony" label="hegemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178706" start="6351" end="6362" title="institution" label="institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="6462" end="6469" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="6474" end="6482" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q732717" start="6504" end="6519" title="Law enforcement agency" label="law enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191309" start="6533" end="6540" title="Offender profiling" label="profile"/>
<link wikidata="Q841628" start="6786" end="6807" title="social stratification" label="social stratification"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="6813" end="6830" title="social scientists" label="social scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q320723" start="6885" end="6893" title="Dependent and independent variables" label="variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="6898" end="6910" title="Sociology" label="sociological"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396191" start="6958" end="6968" title="Subjectivity" label="subjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860557" start="6983" end="6998" title="Self-identity" label="self-identities"/>
<link wikidata="Q28643" start="7345" end="7353" title="paradigm" label="paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q206829" start="7415" end="7435" title="Biological reductionism" label="biological reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279582" start="7534" end="7557" title="racial formation theory" label="racial formation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186753" start="7562" end="7582" title="critical race theory" label="critical race theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q918036" start="8613" end="8639" title="Race (biology)" label="biological taxonomic sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230536" start="8683" end="8709" title="Genetic divergence" label="genetically differentiated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="8716" end="8726" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q214078" start="9436" end="9457" title="scientific revolution" label="scientific revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356722" start="9504" end="9516" title="natural kind" label="natural kind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="9534" end="9554" title="European imperialism" label="European imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q815962" start="9559" end="9571" title="colonization" label="colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q82821" start="9677" end="9687" title="traditions" label="traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q16502" start="9749" end="9754" title="world" label="world"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="9869" end="9889" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q12981973" start="9928" end="9943" title="History of slavery" label="trade in slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414816" start="9989" end="9998" title="incentive" label="incentive"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="10075" end="10080" title="slave" label="slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="10108" end="10127" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401154" start="10536" end="10547" title="folk belief" label="folk belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041074" start="10620" end="10642" title="Race and intelligence" label="inherited intellectual"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="10644" end="10654" title="behavioral" label="behavioral"/>
<link wikidata="Q235282" start="10660" end="10665" title="moral" label="moral"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="10738" end="10743" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q29201" start="10851" end="10865" title="Yellow Emperor" label="Yellow Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q937284" start="11063" end="11075" title="Graeco-Roman" label="Graeco-Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q375438" start="11143" end="11159" title="François Bernier" label="François Bernier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="11811" end="11824" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="11891" end="11903" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5782572" start="12065" end="12071" title="humorism" label="humour"/>
<link wikidata="Q901944" start="12073" end="12081" title="sanguine" label="sanguine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192077" start="12083" end="12094" title="Melancholia" label="melancholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q638210" start="12096" end="12104" title="choleric" label="choleric"/>
<link wikidata="Q638210" start="12110" end="12120" title="phlegmatic" label="phlegmatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q58588" start="12369" end="12396" title="Johann Friedrich Blumenbach" label="Johann Friedrich Blumenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129609" start="12432" end="12446" title="Caucasoid race" label="Caucasoid race"/>
<link wikidata="Q207912" start="12452" end="12466" title="Mongoloid race" label="Mongoloid race"/>
<link wikidata="Q338460" start="12507" end="12514" title="Negroid" label="Negroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="12527" end="12547" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="American Indian race"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405057" start="12557" end="12569" title="Malayan race" label="Malayan race"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="13043" end="13051" title="ideology" label="ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q229264" start="13404" end="13418" title="Georges Buffon" label="Georges Buffon"/>
<link wikidata="Q382682" start="13420" end="13433" title="Petrus Camper" label="Petrus Camper"/>
<link wikidata="Q71587" start="13438" end="13455" title="Christoph Meiners" label="Christoph Meiners"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="13523" end="13536" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="13560" end="13576" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="13733" end="13749" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q323800" start="13864" end="13874" title="polygenism" label="polygenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344206" start="14018" end="14029" title="Edward Long (colonial administrator)" label="Edward Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083433" start="14044" end="14057" title="Charles White (physician)" label="Charles White"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="14062" end="14069" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q71587" start="14087" end="14104" title="Christoph Meiners" label="Christoph Meiners"/>
<link wikidata="Q58062" start="14109" end="14122" title="Georg Forster" label="Georg Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="14131" end="14137" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189320" start="14141" end="14160" title="Julien-Joseph Virey" label="Julien-Joseph Virey"/>
<link wikidata="Q920542" start="14173" end="14193" title="Samuel George Morton" label="Samuel George Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708623" start="14195" end="14206" title="Josiah Nott" label="Josiah Nott"/>
<link wikidata="Q122972" start="14211" end="14224" title="Louis Agassiz" label="Louis Agassiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q574390" start="14370" end="14403" title="Anthropological Society of London" label="Anthropological Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404386" start="14484" end="14514" title="Ethnological Society of London" label="Ethnological Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901593" start="14523" end="14539" title="monogenism" label="monogenic stance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="14792" end="14798" title="humans" label="humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q242047" start="14910" end="14919" title="homininae" label="homininae"/>
<link wikidata="Q101373" start="14972" end="14984" title="Homo habilis" label="Homo habilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="15143" end="15155" title="Homo erectus" label="Homo erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27172" start="15285" end="15308" title="physical anthropologist" label="physical anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q115690473" start="15327" end="15347" title="Anatomically modern human" label="Archaic Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q105784" start="15400" end="15418" title="Homo heidelbergensis" label="H. heidelbergensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q105777" start="15550" end="15561" title="Homo ergaster" label="H. ergaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q115690473" start="15607" end="15633" title="anatomically modern humans" label="anatomically modern humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="15701" end="15714" title="archaic human" label="archaic human"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478419" start="16016" end="16029" title="Recent African origin of modern humans" label="Out of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509795" start="16034" end="16047" title="Multiregional origin of modern humans" label="Multiregional"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="16125" end="16140" title="Anthropology" label="anthropologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254959" start="16288" end="16307" title="racial essentialism" label="racial essentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="16342" end="16352" title="linguistics" label="linguistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="16463" end="16480" title="scientific racism" label="scientific racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q701673" start="16492" end="16505" title="Nazi eugenics" label="Nazi eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="16626" end="16633" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q31151" start="16661" end="16680" title="population genetics" label="population genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q864503" start="16891" end="16900" title="biologist" label="biologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="17055" end="17070" title="anthropology" label="anthropologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q76857" start="17071" end="17081" title="Franz Boas" label="Franz Boas"/>
<link wikidata="Q725974" start="17164" end="17178" title="Ashley Montagu" label="Ashley Montagu"/>
<link wikidata="Q211029" start="17218" end="17230" title="E. O. Wilson" label="E. O. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502105" start="17409" end="17432" title="Human genetic variation" label="Human genetic variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119217" start="17608" end="17622" title="Jonathan M. Marks" label="Jonathan Marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q918036" start="17646" end="17682" title="Race (biology)" label="The term &amp;quot;race&amp;quot; in biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="17797" end="17807" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="17863" end="17870" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q631147" start="17923" end="17952" title="Infraspecific name" label="infraspecific ranks in botany"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="18038" end="18048" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q221061" start="18321" end="18334" title="Sewall Wright" label="Sewall Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q25416184" start="19173" end="19184" title="Typology (anthropology)" label="typological"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="19384" end="19394" title="cladistics" label="cladistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q748695" start="19562" end="19578" title="genetic distance" label="genetic distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q315454" start="19611" end="19631" title="Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza" label="Luigi Cavalli-Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119217" start="19720" end="19734" title="Jonathan M. Marks" label="Jonathan Marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="19907" end="19919" title="Monophyly" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355559" start="20002" end="20016" title="Alan Templeton" label="Alan Templeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937178" start="21147" end="21177" title="Human Genome Diversity Project" label="Human Genome Diversity Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006671" start="22105" end="22120" title="C. Loring Brace" label="C. Loring Brace"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="22194" end="22211" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q486420" start="22232" end="22245" title="genetic drift" label="genetic drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q966735" start="22294" end="22300" title="Cline (biology)" label="clines"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947412" start="22403" end="22424" title="isolation by distance" label="isolation by distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q246731" start="22894" end="22913" title="Theodore Dobzhansky" label="Theodore Dobzhansky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24361" end="24378" title="HBB#Sickle cell disease" label="beta-S hemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80726" start="25288" end="25294" title="allele" label="allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006262" start="25690" end="25705" title="William C. Boyd" label="William C. Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q192446" start="26408" end="26428" title="Human Genome Project" label="Human Genome Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361585" start="26647" end="26664" title="Massimo Pigliucci" label="Massimo Pigliucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q296519" start="26776" end="26783" title="ecotype" label="ecotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="27275" end="27284" title="phenotype" label="phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478419" start="27993" end="28014" title="recent African origin" label="recent African origin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28937" end="28985" title="Human Genetic Diversity: Lewontin&amp;#x27;s Fallacy" label="Human Genetic Diversity: Lewontin&amp;#x27;s Fallacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618551" start="28993" end="29009" title="A. W. F. Edwards" label="A. W. F. Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29223" end="29260" title="Race and genetics#Structure" label="inferred from multilocus genetic data"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989212" start="29518" end="29528" title="Neil Risch" label="Neil Risch"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608248" start="29713" end="29727" title="complex traits" label="complex traits"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006671" start="32741" end="32756" title="C. Loring Brace" label="C. Loring Brace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6284727" start="32830" end="32843" title="Joseph L. Graves" label="Joseph Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662868" start="33903" end="33978" title="Lumpers and splitters" label="wishes to see subdivisions (i.e., splitters) or a continuum (i.e., lumpers)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767250" start="34602" end="34614" title="Mark D. Shriver" label="Mark Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205713" start="34619" end="34632" title="Tony Frudakis" label="Tony Frudakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="35632" end="35638" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="35660" end="35669" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779177" start="36221" end="36236" title="Guido Barbujani" label="Guido Barbujani"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="36843" end="36853" title="History" label="historians"/>
<link wikidata="Q28598" start="36855" end="36879" title="cultural anthropology" label="cultural anthropologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="36890" end="36907" title="social sciences" label="social scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q844569" start="36978" end="36986" title="Identity (social science)" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37163" end="37172" title="Ethnic group#Ethnicity and race" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="37362" end="37378" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="37501" end="37510" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="37592" end="37613" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378542" start="38731" end="38751" title="Katya Gibel Mevorach" label="Katya Gibel Mevorach"/>
<link wikidata="Q27663694" start="39128" end="39139" title="Imani Perry" label="Imani Perry"/>
<link wikidata="" start="39391" end="39417" title="Racial Culture: A Critique" label="Racial Culture: A Critique"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914650" start="39777" end="39794" title="identity politics" label="identity politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774121" start="39973" end="39979" title="Demographics of Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q334842" start="40092" end="40105" title="Marvin Harris" label="Marvin Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q853725" start="40163" end="40179" title="social relations" label="social relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q106016" start="40304" end="40312" title="genotype" label="genotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="40318" end="40328" title="phenotypic" label="phenotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154577" start="40417" end="40430" title="one-drop rule" label="one-drop rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q31184" start="40658" end="40665" title="sibling" label="sibling"/>
<link wikidata="Q221284" start="40762" end="40772" title="conformity" label="conformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774121" start="41449" end="41466" title="Brazilian society" label="Brazilian society"/>
<link wikidata="Q841628" start="41517" end="41527" title="social stratification" label="stratified"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515895" start="41553" end="41566" title="Socioeconomic status" label="socioeconomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130244" start="41655" end="41660" title="pardo" label="pardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q97357217" start="41899" end="41928" title="Racial fluidity" label="Fluidity of racial categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="42232" end="42243" title="Amerindians" label="Amerindians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024920" start="42333" end="42340" title="caboclo" label="caboclo"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="42415" end="42422" title="mestizo" label="mestizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448" start="42427" end="42436" title="hillbilly" label="hillbilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q388315" start="42705" end="42719" title="Afro-Brazilian" label="Afro-Brazilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q217230" start="43701" end="43707" title="Empire of Brazil" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8896" start="44409" end="44438" title="Council of the European Union" label="Council of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="44445" end="44459" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q16973024" start="44689" end="44700" title="Ian Haney López" label="Haney López"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="44863" end="44869" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="45180" end="45184" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="45189" end="45196" title="Fascist" label="Fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="45268" end="45287" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q645966" start="45637" end="45641" title="European Commission against Racism and Intolerance" label="ECRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="46200" end="46213" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090033" start="46271" end="46276" title="miscegenation" label="mixed"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="46307" end="46346" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="indigenous inhabitants of the continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="46402" end="46418" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="46429" end="46447" title="European ethnic groups" label="European ancestors"/>
<link wikidata="Q43103" start="46483" end="46500" title="European American" label="European American"/>
<link wikidata="Q191923" start="46785" end="46792" title="mulatto" label="mulatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q56575424" start="46797" end="46805" title="octoroon" label="octoroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="46896" end="46910" title="Reconstruction era of the United States" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154577" start="46984" end="46992" title="one-drop theory" label="one drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="47145" end="47156" title="Amerindians" label="Amerindians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927888" start="47246" end="47259" title="Blood quantum laws" label="blood quantum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5959535" start="47360" end="47371" title="hypodescent" label="hypodescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="47755" end="47773" title="United States Census" label="decennial censuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="47922" end="47930" title="Hispanic" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137656" start="47943" end="47951" title="ethnonym" label="ethnonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q514022" start="48028" end="48054" title="Hispanophone" label="Spanish-speaking countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="48058" end="48071" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065184" start="48605" end="48610" title="Anglo" label="Anglo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="48640" end="48654" title="White American" label="White American"/>
<link wikidata="Q43103" start="48672" end="48689" title="European American" label="European American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743082" start="48990" end="49038" title="American Association of Physical Anthropologists" label="American Association of Physical Anthropologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q27172" start="51855" end="51876" title="physical anthropology" label="physical anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588602" start="52949" end="52985" title="American Anthropological Association" label="American Anthropological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q814232" start="53143" end="53149" title="Statistical survey" label="survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q27172" start="53390" end="53413" title="physical anthropologist" label="physical anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q28598" start="53422" end="53445" title="cultural anthropologist" label="cultural anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q27172" start="53726" end="53749" title="physical anthropologist" label="physical anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q28598" start="53758" end="53781" title="cultural anthropologist" label="cultural anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53994" end="54007" title="Goran Štrkalj" label="Goran Štrkalj"/>
<link wikidata="Q26709223" start="54306" end="54317" title="Ann Morning" label="Ann Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326975" start="54769" end="54790" title="University of Wyoming" label="University of Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q28065" start="54844" end="54868" title="forensic anthropology" label="forensic anthropologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545622" start="55006" end="55020" title="George W. Gill" label="George W. Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006671" start="56165" end="56180" title="C. Loring Brace" label="C. Loring Brace"/>
<link wikidata="Q966735" start="56362" end="56370" title="cline (biology)" label="clinally"/>
<link wikidata="Q28065" start="56530" end="56551" title="forensic anthropology" label="forensic anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2752427" start="56587" end="56606" title="biomedical research" label="biomedical research"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000306" start="56612" end="56631" title="race-based medicine" label="race-based medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q864503" start="57208" end="57217" title="biologist" label="biologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q175002" start="57243" end="57270" title="Developmental psychology" label="developmental psychologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787306" start="58623" end="58669" title="Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine" label="Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="60837" end="60844" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744249" start="61318" end="61352" title="American Journal of Human Genetics" label="American Journal of Human Genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233780" start="61682" end="61739" title="National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine" label="National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="61773" end="61802" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q98518469" start="62460" end="62478" title="Charmaine Royal" label="Charmaine D. Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q544500" start="62483" end="62500" title="Robert O. Keohane" label="Robert O. Keohane"/>
<link wikidata="Q679184" start="62653" end="62670" title="Lester Frank Ward" label="Lester Frank Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="63027" end="63044" title="scientific racism" label="scientific racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130557" start="63138" end="63143" title="Negro" label="Negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q287752" start="63225" end="63249" title="Charlotte Perkins Gilman" label="Charlotte Perkins Gilman"/>
<link wikidata="Q468172" start="63370" end="63387" title="Charles Cooley" label="Charles H. Cooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q444906" start="63546" end="63566" title="Edward Alsworth Ross" label="Edward Alsworth Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="63650" end="63660" title="Eugenics" label="eugenicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1597181" start="63846" end="63866" title="Ulysses G. Weatherly" label="Ulysses G. Weatherly"/>
<link wikidata="Q158060" start="63967" end="63983" title="W. E. B. Du Bois" label="W. E. B. Du Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="64372" end="64384" title="social class" label="social class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="64386" end="64397" title="colonialism" label="colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="64403" end="64413" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072063" start="64649" end="64663" title="Chicago school (sociology)" label="Chicago School"/>
<link wikidata="Q111536" start="64740" end="64761" title="William Julius Wilson" label="William Julius Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="64863" end="64875" title="social class" label="social class"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833247" start="64974" end="64985" title="Michael Omi" label="Michael Omi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921272" start="64990" end="65003" title="Howard Winant" label="Howard Winant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279582" start="65043" end="65059" title="Racial formation theory" label="racial formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q26251562" start="65256" end="65277" title="Eduardo Bonilla-Silva" label="Eduardo Bonilla-Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000306" start="66624" end="66643" title="race-based medicine" label="race-based medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152227" start="66662" end="66678" title="pharmacogenomics" label="pharmacogenomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q192446" start="66758" end="66766" title="Human Genome Project" label="decoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q720988" start="66774" end="66786" title="human genome" label="human genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072214" start="67512" end="67533" title="personalized medicine" label="personalized medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503343" start="68475" end="68498" title="law enforcement officer" label="law enforcement officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="68549" end="68552" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q732717" start="68786" end="68801" title="Law enforcement agency" label="law enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="69226" end="69233" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="69238" end="69243" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69371" end="69382" title="United Kingdom Census 2001#Ethnicity" label="2001 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334971" start="70626" end="70656" title="Office for National Statistics" label="Office for National Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="70846" end="70852" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850662" start="70958" end="70974" title="racial profiling" label="racial profiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515622" start="71001" end="71017" title="unconstitutional" label="unconstitutional"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="71037" end="71049" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850662" start="71241" end="71257" title="racial profiling" label="racial profiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q848745" start="71272" end="71292" title="institutional racism" label="institutional racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753648" start="71458" end="71474" title="The New Jim Crow" label="The New Jim Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="72124" end="72137" title="Jim Crow laws" label="Jim Crow laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q124490" start="72265" end="72287" title="interpersonal violence" label="interpersonal violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q622825" start="72943" end="72959" title="cluster analysis" label="cluster analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144614" start="73333" end="73358" title="Constitution of Australia" label="Constitution of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28065" start="73587" end="73611" title="forensic anthropology" label="forensic anthropologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q25999512" start="73809" end="73821" title="Norman Sauer" label="Norman Sauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006671" start="75012" end="75027" title="C. Loring Brace" label="C. Loring Brace"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638275" start="76267" end="76281" title="Neven Sesardić" label="Neven Sesardić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361585" start="76525" end="76542" title="Massimo Pigliucci" label="Massimo Pigliucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379243" start="76992" end="76997" title="Casta" label="Casta"/>
<link wikidata="Q211503" start="77000" end="77004" title="Clan" label="Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368367" start="77007" end="77024" title="Cultural identity" label="Cultural identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q637251" start="77027" end="77045" title="Ethnic nationalism" label="Ethnic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698964" start="77048" end="77065" title="Ethnic stereotype" label="Ethnic stereotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q748695" start="77068" end="77084" title="Genetic distance" label="Genetic distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q853516" start="77087" end="77103" title="Human skin color" label="Human skin color"/>
<link wikidata="Q14324792" start="77106" end="77126" title="Interracial marriage" label="Interracial marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q780000" start="77129" end="77163" title="List of contemporary ethnic groups" label="List of contemporary ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q725450" start="77166" end="77174" title="Melanism" label="Melanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q110977906" start="77177" end="77197" title="Minzu (anthropology)" label="Minzu (anthropology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="77200" end="77211" title="Multiracial" label="Multiracial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278939" start="77214" end="77244" title="Race and ethnicity in censuses" label="Race and ethnicity in censuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="77246" end="77248" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278938" start="77252" end="77287" title="Race and ethnicity in Latin America" label="Race and ethnicity in Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q10649809" start="77290" end="77303" title="Racialization" label="Racialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136934" start="77306" end="77322" title="Raciolinguistics" label="Raciolinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279096" start="77325" end="77350" title="UNESCO statements on race" label="UNESCO statements on race"/>
<link wikidata="Q120434347" start="77353" end="77379" title="Race (French Constitution)" label="Race (French Constitution)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25618" wikidata="Q9852" url="?curid=25618" title="R">
<text>R, or r, is the eighteenth letter of the Latin alphabet, used in the modern English alphabet, the alphabets of other western European languages and others worldwide. Its name in English is &quot;ar&quot; (pronounced ), plural &quot;ars&quot;, or in Ireland &quot;or&quot; ().

The letter is the eighth most common letter in English and the fourth-most common consonant, after , , and .

== Name ==
The name of the letter in Latin was (), following the pattern of other letters representing continuants, such as , , , , and . This name is preserved in French and many other languages. In Middle English, the name of the letter changed from to , following a pattern exhibited in many other words such as &quot;farm&quot; (compare French ) and &quot;star&quot; (compare German ).

In Hiberno-English, the letter is called or , somewhat similar to &quot;oar&quot;, &quot;ore&quot;, &quot;orr&quot;.
The letter R is sometimes referred to as the &#x27;canine letter&#x27;, often rendered in English as the dog&#x27;s letter. This Latin term referred to the Latin that was trilled to sound like a growling dog, a spoken style referred to as &#x27;dog voice&#x27; (e.g. in Spanish &#x27;dog&#x27;).

In &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot;, such a reference is made by Juliet&#x27;s nurse in Act 2, scene 4, when she calls the letter R &quot;the dog&#x27;s name&quot;. The reference is also found in Ben Jonson&#x27;s &quot;English Grammar&quot;.

==History==
===Antiquity===

The letter is believed to derive ultimately from an image of a head, used in Semitic alphabets for the sound because the word for &#x27;head&#x27; was &quot;rêš&quot; or similar in most Semitic languages. The word became the name of the letter, as an example of acrophony.

It developed into Greek () and Latin . The descending diagonal stroke develops as a graphic variant in some Western Greek alphabets (writing &quot;rho&quot; as ), but it was not adopted in most Old Italic alphabets; most Old Italic alphabets show variants of their &quot;rho&quot; between a and a shape, but without the Western Greek descending stroke.
Indeed, the oldest known forms of the Latin alphabet itself of the 7th to 6th centuries BC, in the Duenos and the Forum inscription, still write using the shape of the letter.
The Lapis Satricanus inscription shows the form of the Latin alphabet around 500 BC. Here, the rounded, closing Π shape of the and the shape of the have become difficult to distinguish.
The descending stroke of the Latin letter has fully developed by the 3rd century BC, as seen in the Tomb of the Scipios sarcophagus inscriptions of that era. From , the letter would be written with its loop fully closed, assuming the shape formerly taken by .

===Cursive===

The minuscule form developed through several variations on the capital form.
Along with Latin minuscule writing in general, it developed ultimately from Roman cursive via the uncial script of Late Antiquity into the Carolingian minuscule of the 9th century.

In handwriting, it was common not to close the bottom of the loop but continue into the leg, saving an extra pen stroke. The loop-leg stroke shortened into the simple arc used in the Carolingian minuscule and until today.

A calligraphic minuscule , known as &quot;r rotunda&quot; , was used in the sequence , bending the shape of the to accommodate the bulge of the as in , as opposed to . Later, the same variant was also used where followed other lower case letters with a rounded loop towards the right, such as with , , , as well as to write the geminate as . Use of &quot;r rotunda&quot; was mostly tied to blackletter typefaces, and the glyph fell out of use along with blackletter fonts in English language contexts mostly by the 18th century.

Insular script used a minuscule which retained two downward strokes, but which did not close the loop, known as the &quot;Insular r&quot; ; this variant survives in the Gaelic type popular in Ireland until the mid-20th century, but has become largely limited to a decorative function.

==Use in writing systems==

===English===

 represents a rhotic consonant in English, such as the alveolar approximant (most varieties), alveolar trill (some British varieties), or the retroflex approximant (some varieties in the United States, South West England and Dublin).

In non-rhotic accents, it is not pronounced in certain positions, but can affect the pronunciation of the vowel that precedes it.

===Other languages===
 represents a rhotic consonant in many languages, as shown in the table below.

Other languages may use the letter in their alphabets (or Latin transliteration schemes) to represent rhotic consonants different from the alveolar trill. In Haitian Creole, it represents a sound so weak that it is often written interchangeably with , e.g. &#x27;Kweyol&#x27; for &#x27;Kreyol&#x27;.

The doubled represents a trilled in Albanian, Aragonese, Asturian, Basque, Catalan and Spanish.

Brazilian Portuguese has a great number of allophones of , such as , , , , , and . The latter three ones can be used only in certain contexts ( and as ; in the syllable coda, as an allophone of according to the European Portuguese norm and according to the Brazilian Portuguese norm). Usually at least two of them are present in a single dialect, such as Rio de Janeiro&#x27;s , , and, for a few speakers, .

===Other systems===
The International Phonetic Alphabet uses several variations of the letter to represent the different rhotic consonants; represents the alveolar trill.

==Other uses==

* An R rating of the Motion Picture Association film rating system denotes media, such as movies, that are intended for a restricted audience.

==Related characters==
===Descendants and related characters in the Latin alphabet===
* R with diacritics: Ŕ ŕ Ɍ ɍ Ř ř Ŗ ŗ Ṙ ṙ Ȑ ȑ Ȓ ȓ Ṛ ṛ Ṝ ṝ Ṟ ṟ Ꞧ ꞧ Ɽ ɽ R̃ r̃ ᵲ ꭨ ᵳ ᶉ
* International Phonetic Alphabet-specific symbols related to R: ʶ ˞ ʴ
* IPA superscript letters: 𐞦 𐞧 𐞨 𐞩 𐞪
* Obsolete and nonstandard symbols in the International Phonetic Alphabet: ɼ ɿ
* Uralic Phonetic Alphabet-specific symbols related to R:
** 
** 
* Teuthonista phonetic transcription-specific symbols related to R:
** 
* &quot;Anthropos&quot; phonetic transcription:
** 
* Otto Bremer&#x27;s phonetic transcription:
** 
* 𝼨 – with mid-height left hook was used by the British and Foreign Bible Society in the early 20th century for romanization of the Malayalam language.
* ⱹ – A turned with a tail is used in the Swedish Dialect Alphabet
* Other variations of R used for phonetic transcription: 𝼕 𝼖 

===Calligraphic variants in the Latin alphabet===
* Ꝛ ꝛ – &quot;R rotunda&quot;
* Ꞃ ꞃ – &quot;Insular r&quot; (Gaelic type)
* ᫍ – Combining &quot;Insular r&quot;, as used in the &quot;Ormulum&quot;

===Ancestors and siblings in other alphabets===
* 𐤓 – Semitic letter Resh, from which the following letters derive:
** Ρ ρ – Greek letter Rho, from which the following letters derive:
*** 𐌓 – Old Italic letter R, the ancestor of modern Latin 
**** ᚱ – Runic letter Raido
*** Р р – Cyrillic letter Er
*** 𐍂 – Gothic letter Reda

=== Abbreviations, signs and symbols ===
* ℟ – symbol for response in liturgy
* – Medical prescription
* ® – Registered trademark symbol
* ₹ – Indian rupee sign

==Other representations==
===Computing ===
===Other===

==See also==
* Guttural R

== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9852" start="0" end="1" title="R" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q9852" start="6" end="7" title="R" label="r"/>
<link wikidata="Q9788" start="27" end="33" title="Letter (alphabet)" label="letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="41" end="55" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q754673" start="69" end="92" title="English alphabet" label="modern English alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="189" end="203" title="English alphabet#Letter names" label="&amp;quot;ar&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472788" start="490" end="500" title="continuant" label="continuant"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="551" end="557" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="587" end="601" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q665624" start="781" end="796" title="Hiberno-English" label="Hiberno-English"/>
<link wikidata="Q51611" start="1066" end="1073" title="Trill consonant" label="trilled"/>
<link wikidata="Q83186" start="1201" end="1217" title="Romeo and Juliet" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q193857" start="1384" end="1394" title="Ben Jonson" label="Ben Jonson"/>
<link wikidata="Q911270" start="1538" end="1555" title="Semitic alphabets" label="Semitic alphabets"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862728" start="1618" end="1621" title="rêš" label="rêš"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="1647" end="1664" title="Semitic languages" label="Semitic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q420938" start="1723" end="1732" title="acrophony" label="acrophony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839562" start="1843" end="1866" title="Western Greek alphabets" label="Western Greek alphabets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891256" start="1929" end="1948" title="Old Italic alphabet" label="Old Italic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q657989" start="2187" end="2193" title="Duenos Inscription" label="Duenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q841388" start="2202" end="2219" title="Forum inscription" label="Forum inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q541675" start="2268" end="2284" title="Lapis Satricanus" label="Lapis Satricanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540716" start="2550" end="2569" title="Tomb of the Scipios" label="Tomb of the Scipios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285080" start="2879" end="2892" title="Roman cursive" label="Roman cursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q784235" start="2901" end="2907" title="uncial" label="uncial"/>
<link wikidata="Q785729" start="2942" end="2963" title="Carolingian minuscule" label="Carolingian minuscule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002829" start="3250" end="3259" title="r rotunda" label="r rotunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q213686" start="3598" end="3609" title="blackletter" label="blackletter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518866" start="3738" end="3752" title="Insular script" label="Insular script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432616" start="3907" end="3918" title="Gaelic type" label="Gaelic type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076155" start="4081" end="4097" title="rhotic consonant" label="rhotic consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q121811927" start="4122" end="4142" title="alveolar approximant" label="alveolar approximant"/>
<link wikidata="Q113159186" start="4161" end="4175" title="alveolar trill" label="alveolar trill"/>
<link wikidata="Q534118" start="4209" end="4230" title="retroflex approximant" label="retroflex approximant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="4254" end="4267" title="American English" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q15839081" start="4269" end="4287" title="West Country dialects" label="South West England"/>
<link wikidata="Q665624" start="4292" end="4298" title="Hiberno-English" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26677" start="4305" end="4315" title="Rhoticity in English" label="non-rhotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076155" start="4469" end="4485" title="rhotic consonant" label="rhotic consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q33491" start="4693" end="4707" title="Haitian Creole" label="Haitian Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="4872" end="4880" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8765" start="4882" end="4891" title="Aragonese language" label="Aragonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q29507" start="4893" end="4901" title="Asturian language" label="Asturian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="4903" end="4909" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="4911" end="4918" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="4923" end="4930" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="4943" end="4953" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="5288" end="5302" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q21204" start="5366" end="5397" title="International Phonetic Alphabet" label="International Phonetic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q113159186" start="5497" end="5511" title="alveolar trill" label="alveolar trill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987792" start="5535" end="5543" title="Motion Picture Association film rating system" label="R rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987792" start="5551" end="5596" title="Motion Picture Association film rating system" label="Motion Picture Association film rating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="5769" end="5778" title="diacritic" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q386760" start="5781" end="5784" title="Ŕ" label="Ŕ ŕ"/>
<link wikidata="Q423483" start="5785" end="5788" title="R with stroke" label="Ɍ ɍ"/>
<link wikidata="Q386781" start="5789" end="5792" title="Ř" label="Ř ř"/>
<link wikidata="Q245421" start="5793" end="5796" title="Cedilla" label="Ŗ ŗ"/>
<link wikidata="Q669057" start="5797" end="5800" title="Dot (diacritic)" label="Ṙ ṙ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631907" start="5801" end="5804" title="Double grave accent" label="Ȑ ȑ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3594587" start="5805" end="5808" title="Ȓ" label="Ȓ ȓ"/>
<link wikidata="Q425466" start="5809" end="5812" title="Ṛ" label="Ṛ ṛ"/>
<link wikidata="Q425469" start="5813" end="5816" title="Ṝ" label="Ṝ ṝ"/>
<link wikidata="Q460147" start="5817" end="5820" title="Ṟ" label="Ṟ ṟ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595047" start="5821" end="5824" title="Ꞧ" label="Ꞧ ꞧ"/>
<link wikidata="Q117321" start="5825" end="5828" title="R with tail" label="Ɽ ɽ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458967" start="5829" end="5834" title="R̃" label="R̃ r̃"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5835" end="5836" title="ᵲ" label="ᵲ"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5837" end="5838" title="ꭨ" label="ꭨ"/>
<link wikidata="Q874996" start="5839" end="5840" title="ᵳ" label="ᵳ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047429" start="5841" end="5842" title="ᶉ" label="ᶉ"/>
<link wikidata="Q21204" start="5845" end="5876" title="International Phonetic Alphabet" label="International Phonetic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312951" start="5908" end="5909" title="ʶ" label="ʶ"/>
<link wikidata="Q843029" start="5910" end="5913" title="R-colored vowel" label="˞ ʴ"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5916" end="5939" title="International Phonetic Alphabet#Superscript IPA" label="IPA superscript letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862127" start="5953" end="6024" title="Obsolete and nonstandard symbols in the International Phonetic Alphabet" label="Obsolete and nonstandard symbols in the International Phonetic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287368" start="6032" end="6056" title="Uralic Phonetic Alphabet" label="Uralic Phonetic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q915378" start="6098" end="6109" title="Teuthonista" label="Teuthonista"/>
<link wikidata="Q30749970" start="6176" end="6185" title="Anthropos phonetic alphabet" label="Anthropos"/>
<link wikidata="Q920404" start="6317" end="6350" title="British and Foreign Bible Society" label="British and Foreign Bible Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q976327" start="6381" end="6393" title="romanization" label="romanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="6401" end="6410" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839550" start="6463" end="6487" title="Swedish Dialect Alphabet" label="Swedish Dialect Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002829" start="6615" end="6624" title="R rotunda" label="R rotunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432616" start="6662" end="6673" title="Gaelic type" label="Gaelic type"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534421" start="6735" end="6742" title="Ormulum" label="Ormulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q26752" start="6804" end="6811" title="Phoenician alphabet" label="Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862728" start="6819" end="6823" title="Resh" label="Resh"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="6875" end="6880" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q14412" start="6888" end="6891" title="Rho (letter)" label="Rho"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891256" start="6942" end="6952" title="Old Italic script" label="Old Italic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82996" start="7002" end="7007" title="Runes" label="Runic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399093" start="7015" end="7020" title="Raido" label="Raido"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="7031" end="7039" title="Cyrillic" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181460" start="7047" end="7049" title="Er (Cyrillic)" label="Er"/>
<link wikidata="Q467784" start="7058" end="7064" title="Gothic alphabet" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7072" end="7076" title="Reda (letter)" label="Reda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077527" start="7136" end="7144" title="Response (liturgy)" label="response"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355478" start="7160" end="7180" title="Medical prescription" label="Medical prescription"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853446" start="7187" end="7214" title="Registered trademark symbol" label="Registered trademark symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270398" start="7221" end="7238" title="Indian rupee sign" label="Indian rupee sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q56639924" start="7311" end="7321" title="Guttural R" label="Guttural R"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25622" wikidata="Q3495759" url="?curid=25622" title="Richard Bachman">
<text>Richard Bachman is a pen name (as well as a fictional character) of American horror fiction author Stephen King, adopted in 1977 for the novel &quot;Rage&quot;. King hid the link between himself and Bachman, until allowing for his identification in 1985. He collected the first four Bachman novels into &quot;The Bachman Books&quot;. &quot;Rage&quot; became controversial for being about a school shooting and was allowed to go out of print after the 1997 Heath High School shooting. Three more novels were published under the Bachman name.

King portrays an unrelated character named Richard Bachman in the third season of the FX television series &quot;Sons of Anarchy&quot; (2010).

==Origin==
At the beginning of King&#x27;s career, the general view among publishers was that an author was limited to one book per year, since publishing more would be unacceptable to the public. King therefore wanted to write under another name in order to increase his publication without saturating the market for the King &quot;brand&quot;. He convinced his publisher, Signet Books, to print these novels under a pseudonym.

In his introduction to &quot;The Bachman Books,&quot; King states that adopting the pen name Bachman was also an attempt to make sense of his career and try to answer the question of whether his success was due to talent or luck. He says he deliberately released the Bachman novels with as little marketing presence as possible and did his best to &quot;load the dice against&quot; Bachman. King concludes that he has yet to find an answer to the &quot;talent versus luck&quot; question, as he felt he was outed as Bachman too early to know. The Bachman book &quot;Thinner&quot; (1984) sold 28,000 copies during its initial run—and then ten times as many when it was revealed that Bachman was, in fact, King.

The pseudonym King originally selected, Gus Pillsbury, is King&#x27;s maternal grandfather&#x27;s name, but at the last moment (due to the pseudonym being outed) King changed it to Richard Bachman. Richard is a tribute to crime author Donald E. Westlake&#x27;s long-running pseudonym Richard Stark. (The surname Stark &quot;was&quot; later used in King&#x27;s novel &quot;The Dark Half,&quot; in which an author&#x27;s malevolent pseudonym, &quot;George Stark&quot;, comes to life.) Bachman was inspired by Bachman–Turner Overdrive, a rock and roll band which King was listening to at the time his publisher asked him to choose a pseudonym on the spot.

==Biography==
King provided biographical details for Bachman, initially in the &quot;about the author&quot; blurbs in the early novels. Known &quot;facts&quot; about Bachman were that he was born in New York and served a four-year stint in the Coast Guard, which he then followed with ten years in the Merchant Marine. Bachman finally settled down in rural central New Hampshire, where he ran a medium-sized dairy farm, writing at night. His fifth novel was dedicated to his wife, Claudia Inez Bachman, who also received credit for the faked author photo on the book jacket. Other &quot;facts&quot; about the author were revealed in publicity dispatches from Bachman&#x27;s publishers: the Bachmans had one child, a boy, who died in an unfortunate, Stephen King-esque accident at the age of six, when he fell into a well and drowned. In 1982, a brain tumour was discovered near the base of Bachman&#x27;s brain; tricky surgery removed it. After Bachman&#x27;s true identity was revealed, later publicity dispatches (and &quot;about the author&quot; blurbs) revealed that Bachman died suddenly in late 1985 of &quot;cancer of the pseudonym, a rare form of schizonomia&quot;.

==Identification==

King dedicated Bachman&#x27;s early books—&quot;Rage&quot; (1977), &quot;The Long Walk&quot; (1979), &quot;Roadwork&quot; (1981), and &quot;The Running Man&quot; (1982)—to people close to him. The link between King and his shadow writer was exposed in early 1985 after Steve Brown, a bookstore clerk in Washington, D.C., noted similarities between the writing styles of King and Bachman. Brown located publisher&#x27;s records at the Library of Congress which included a document naming King as the author of one of Bachman&#x27;s novels. Brown wrote to King&#x27;s publishers with a copy of the documents he had uncovered, and asked them what to do. Two weeks later, King telephoned Brown personally and suggested he write an article about how he discovered the truth, allowing himself to be interviewed. At the time of the announcement in 1985, King was working on &quot;Misery&quot;, which he had planned to release as a Bachman book, but changed his mind after the outing. The next Bachman book was not until 1996, with &quot;The Regulators&quot;. And the last Bachman book is the 2007 &quot;Blaze&quot;. These latter books were said to have been &quot;found&quot; or &quot;discovered&quot;.

==Post-outing==
In 1987, the Bachman novel &quot;The Running Man&quot; inspired the Paul Michael Glaser film of the same name. King insisted that his name not be on the credits, and the screen credit for the film went to Richard Bachman.

King used the &quot;relationship&quot; between himself and Bachman as a concept in his 1989 book &quot;The Dark Half.&quot; In the novel, a writer&#x27;s darker pseudonym takes on a life of its own. King dedicated &quot;The Dark Half&quot; to &quot;the late Richard Bachman.&quot; Originally there were plans to make the book a collaboration between the two, although this was later scrapped.

In 1996, Bachman&#x27;s &quot;The Regulators&quot; came out, with the publishers claiming the book&#x27;s manuscript was found among Bachman&#x27;s leftover papers by his widow. It was released as a companion novel to King&#x27;s &quot;Desperation&quot;; the two novels took place in different universes but featured many of the same characters. The two book covers were designed to be placed together to form a single picture. In the foreword by King included with &quot;Desperation&quot; he said that there may be another Bachman novel left to be &quot;found&quot;.

The next Bachman book to be &quot;discovered&quot; was &quot;Blaze&quot;. &quot;Blaze&quot; was, in fact, an unpublished novel by King, written before &quot;Carrie&quot; or the creation of Richard Bachman. For its publication, King rewrote, edited, and updated the entire text. It was published in 2007 under the Bachman pseudonym, with a foreword by King under his own name.

King has taken full ownership of the Bachman name on numerous occasions, as with the republication of the first four Bachman titles &quot;The Bachman Books: Four Early Novels by Stephen King&quot; in 1985. The introduction, titled &quot;Why I Was Bachman&quot;, details the whole Bachman/King story. (In 1996, the collection was reissued with a new King essay, &quot;The Importance of Being Bachman&quot;.)

Bachman was also referred to in King&#x27;s &quot;The Dark Tower&quot; series of books. In the fifth book, &quot;Wolves of the Calla&quot;, the sinister children&#x27;s book &quot;Charlie the Choo Choo&quot; is revealed to be written by &quot;Claudia y Inez Bachman&quot;. The spelling discrepancy of the added &#x27;y&#x27; was later explained as a deus ex machina on the part of &quot;The White&quot; (a force of good throughout King&#x27;s &quot;Tower&quot; series) to bring the total number of letters in her name to nineteen, a number prominent in King&#x27;s series. In the next novel of the series, &quot;Song of Susannah&quot;, King briefly discusses his Richard Bachman pseudonym.

After the 1997 Heath High School shooting, King announced that he would allow &quot;Rage&quot; to go out of print, fearing that it might inspire similar tragedies. &quot;Rage&quot; for a time continued to be available in the United Kingdom in &quot;The Bachman Books&quot; collection, although the collection now no longer contains &quot;Rage&quot;. In a footnote to the preface of &quot;Blaze&quot;, dated 30 January 2007, King wrote of &quot;Rage&quot;: &quot;Now out of print, and a good thing.&quot; King&#x27;s other Bachman novels are available in the US in separate volumes.

In 2010, King appeared as Bachman in the third season of the FX television series &quot;Sons of Anarchy&quot; in a cameo role, the character performing contract work quietly disposing of deceased bodies.

In issue 29 of the comic adaptation of &quot;The Stand&quot;, Richard &quot;Rich&quot; Bachman appears as one of the top lieutenants of Randall Flagg, replacing the character of Whitney Horgan from the original novel. He is drawn to resemble King.

In the 2013 &quot;Grimm&quot; episode &quot;Nameless&quot;, Bachman being a pseudonym of King was a plot point. King&#x27;s novel, &quot;Rage&quot;, had its title page used as a prop for the killer to write a note to the police.

==Bibliography==
* &quot;Rage&quot; (1977)
* &quot;The Long Walk&quot; (1979)
* &quot;Roadwork&quot; (1981)
* &quot;The Running Man&quot; (1982)
* &quot;Thinner&quot; (1984)
* &quot;The Bachman Books&quot; (1985, collection)
* &quot;The Regulators&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Blaze&quot; (2007)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3495759" start="0" end="15" title="Richard Bachman" label="Richard Bachman"/>
<link wikidata="Q127843" start="21" end="29" title="pen name" label="pen name"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="77" end="91" title="horror fiction" label="horror fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="99" end="111" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q277260" start="149" end="153" title="Rage (King novel)" label="Rage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219370" start="309" end="326" title="The Bachman Books" label="The Bachman Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q14690569" start="451" end="482" title="1997 Heath High School shooting" label="1997 Heath High School shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3729944" start="608" end="620" title="Sons of Anarchy (season 3)" label="third season"/>
<link wikidata="Q651228" start="628" end="630" title="FX (TV channel)" label="FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q171254" start="655" end="670" title="Sons of Anarchy" label="Sons of Anarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q358798" start="978" end="999" title="market saturation" label="saturating the market"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005314" start="1060" end="1072" title="Signet Books" label="Signet Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="1104" end="1113" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219370" start="1145" end="1162" title="The Bachman Books" label="The Bachman Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q127843" start="1200" end="1208" title="pen name" label="pen name"/>
<link wikidata="Q253925" start="1681" end="1688" title="Thinner (novel)" label="Thinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q538508" start="2061" end="2079" title="Donald E. Westlake" label="Donald E. Westlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q538508" start="2110" end="2123" title="Richard Stark" label="Richard Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q845944" start="2198" end="2211" title="The Dark Half" label="The Dark Half"/>
<link wikidata="Q798232" start="2333" end="2357" title="Bachman–Turner Overdrive" label="Bachman–Turner Overdrive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="2724" end="2735" title="United States Coast Guard" label="Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772052" start="2782" end="2797" title="United States Merchant Marine" label="Merchant Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q233309" start="3325" end="3337" title="brain tumor" label="brain tumour"/>
<link wikidata="Q277260" start="3723" end="3727" title="Rage (King novel)" label="Rage"/>
<link wikidata="Q384160" start="3748" end="3761" title="The Long Walk (novel)" label="The Long Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072334" start="3782" end="3790" title="Roadwork (novel)" label="Roadwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q25551" start="3815" end="3830" title="The Running Man (King novel)" label="The Running Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="4109" end="4128" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q596874" start="4548" end="4554" title="Misery (novel)" label="Misery"/>
<link wikidata="Q471029" start="4705" end="4719" title="The Regulators (novel)" label="The Regulators"/>
<link wikidata="Q804414" start="4771" end="4776" title="Blaze (novel)" label="Blaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q25551" start="4921" end="4936" title="The Running Man (King novel)" label="The Running Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q527306" start="4956" end="4975" title="Paul Michael Glaser" label="Paul Michael Glaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058512" start="4976" end="4997" title="The Running Man (1987 film)" label="film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q845944" start="5214" end="5227" title="The Dark Half" label="The Dark Half"/>
<link wikidata="Q471029" start="5535" end="5549" title="The Regulators (novel)" label="The Regulators"/>
<link wikidata="Q913576" start="5741" end="5752" title="Desperation (novel)" label="Desperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q804414" start="6135" end="6140" title="Blaze (novel)" label="Blaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q623394" start="6231" end="6237" title="Carrie (novel)" label="Carrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219370" start="6589" end="6606" title="The Bachman Books" label="The Bachman Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q280898" start="6909" end="6923" title="The Dark Tower (series)" label="The Dark Tower"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6972" end="6991" title="The Dark Tower V: Wolves of the Calla" label="Wolves of the Calla"/>
<link wikidata="Q203698" start="7209" end="7224" title="deus ex machina" label="deus ex machina"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7471" end="7487" title="The Dark Tower VI: Song of Susannah" label="Song of Susannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q14690569" start="7560" end="7591" title="1997 Heath High School shooting" label="1997 Heath High School shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219370" start="7799" end="7816" title="The Bachman Books" label="The Bachman Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q171254" start="8221" end="8236" title="Sons of Anarchy" label="Sons of Anarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766209" start="8357" end="8398" title="The Stand (comics)" label="comic adaptation of &amp;quot;The Stand&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161603" start="8474" end="8487" title="Randall Flagg" label="Randall Flagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748" start="8605" end="8610" title="Grimm (TV series)" label="Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q16610692" start="8631" end="8639" title="Nameless (Grimm)" label="Nameless"/>
<link wikidata="Q277260" start="8842" end="8846" title="Rage (King novel)" label="Rage"/>
<link wikidata="Q384160" start="8868" end="8881" title="The Long Walk (novel)" label="The Long Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072334" start="8903" end="8911" title="Roadwork (novel)" label="Roadwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q25551" start="8933" end="8948" title="The Running Man (King novel)" label="The Running Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q253925" start="8970" end="8977" title="Thinner (novel)" label="Thinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219370" start="8999" end="9016" title="The Bachman Books" label="The Bachman Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q471029" start="9050" end="9064" title="The Regulators (novel)" label="The Regulators"/>
<link wikidata="Q804414" start="9086" end="9091" title="Blaze (novel)" label="Blaze"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25624" wikidata="Q67964" url="?curid=25624" title="Roberto Baggio">
<text>Roberto Baggio (; born 18 February 1967) is an Italian former professional footballer who mainly played as a second striker, or as an attacking midfielder, although he was capable of playing in several offensive positions. He is the former president of the technical sector of the Italian Football Federation. A technically gifted creative playmaker and set piece specialist, renowned for his curling free-kicks, dribbling skills, and goalscoring, Baggio is widely regarded as one of the greatest players of all time.

In 1999, he came fourth in the FIFA Player of the Century internet poll, and was chosen on the FIFA World Cup Dream Team in 2002. In 1993, he was named FIFA World Player of the Year and won the Ballon d&#x27;Or. In 2004, he was named by Pelé in the FIFA 100, a list of the world&#x27;s greatest living players.

Baggio played for Italy in 56 matches and is the joint fourth-highest goalscorer for his national team. He starred in the Italian team that finished third in the 1990 FIFA World Cup. At the 1994 World Cup, he led Italy to the final, received the World Cup Silver Ball and was named in the World Cup All-Star Team. Although he was the star performer for Italy at the tournament, he missed the decisive penalty in the shootout of the final against Brazil. Baggio is the only Italian to score in three World Cups, and with nine goals holds the record for most goals scored in World Cup tournaments for Italy, along with Paolo Rossi and Christian Vieri.

In 2002, Baggio became the first Italian player in over 50 years to score more than 300 career goals; he is the fifth-highest scoring Italian in all competitions with 318 goals. In 2004, during the final season of his career, Baggio became the first player in over 30 years to score 200 goals in Serie A, and is the seventh-highest goalscorer of all time in Serie A, with 205 goals. In 1990, he moved from Fiorentina to Juventus for a world record transfer fee. Baggio won two Serie A titles, a Coppa Italia, and a UEFA Cup, playing for seven different Italian clubs during his career (Vicenza, Fiorentina, Juventus, AC Milan, Bologna, Inter Milan, and Brescia).

Baggio is known as &quot;&quot; (&quot;The Divine Ponytail&quot;), for the hairstyle he wore for most of his career, for his talent, and for his Buddhist beliefs. In 2002, Baggio was nominated Goodwill Ambassador of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. In 2003, he was the inaugural winner of the Golden Foot award. In recognition of his human rights activism, he received the Man of Peace award from the Nobel Peace Prize Laureates in 2010. In 2011, he was the first footballer to be inducted into the Italian Football Hall of Fame.

== Early life ==
Roberto Baggio was born in Caldogno, Veneto, the son of Matilde and Florindo Baggio, the sixth of eight siblings. His younger brother, Eddy Baggio, was also a footballer.

== Club career ==

=== 1976–1985: Early career and Vicenza ===
Baggio began his youth career after being noticed by his hometown youth team, Caldogno, at age nine. By the time he turned 11, he had scored 45 goals and provided 20 assists in 26 matches, also scoring six goals in one match. His talent was recognised by scout Antonio Mora, and he was acquired by the Vicenza youth team at age 13 for £300 (500,000 Lit). After scoring 110 goals in 120 matches, Baggio began his professional career with the Vicenza senior side in 1983, at age 15.

At the age of 16, Baggio made his Serie C1 debut with Vicenza on 5 June 1983, a 1–0 home loss against Piacenza, in the final league match of the season, coming on as a second-half substitute. He scored his first goal in Serie C1 during the following season, on 3 June 1984, from a penalty in a 3–0 win against Brescia, the club with which he retired in 2004. Baggio scored the first professional goal of his career in the Coppa Italia Serie C in a 4–1 away win over Legnano on 30 November 1983. He also made his Coppa Italia debut with the club on 31 August 1983, against Palermo, and he scored his first Coppa Italia goal in a 4–2 away loss to Empoli, on 26 August 1984. During the 1984–85 Serie C1 season under manager Bruno Giorgi, he scored 12 goals in 29 appearances, helping the club to gain promotion to Serie B. Baggio began to draw the attention of larger Italian clubs, in particular Serie A side Fiorentina, and his playing style was compared to that of his idol Zico. Baggio was also awarded the Guerin d&#x27;Oro in 1985 as the Best Player in Serie C1.

During the end of his final season at Vicenza, Baggio shattered both the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) and the meniscus of his right knee while playing against Rimini on 5 May 1985, while attempting a slide tackle. The injury occurred two days before his official transfer deal to Fiorentina had been finalised, and it seriously threatened his career, at age 18. Although several team doctors feared he would not play again, Fiorentina retained their faith in him, agreeing to commit to the transfer as well as fund the required surgery, one of many reasons for Baggio&#x27;s attachment to the club.

=== 1985–1990: Fiorentina ===
Fiorentina purchased Baggio in 1985 for £1.5 million. During his time at the club, despite initial injuries, he became extremely popular, and is regarded as one of the club&#x27;s best ever players. In his first season with the club, Baggio did not appear in Serie A as he was sidelined by injury; Fiorentina finished in fifth place in the league and reached the semi-finals of the Coppa Italia, with Baggio making his club debut in the latter competition. He finally made his Serie A debut the following season on 21 September 1986, in a 2–0 home win against Sampdoria, and he also made his European debut that season on 17 September 1986, in an UEFA Cup match against Boavista. Baggio suffered another knee injury on 28 September, and he was operated again, requiring 220 stitches to have it rebuilt, losing 12 kg as a result and missing most of the season. Baggio returned, and scored his first league goal from a free-kick on 10 May 1987 in a 1–1 draw against Diego Maradona&#x27;s Napoli, the eventual Serie A champions; Baggio&#x27;s equaliser saved Fiorentina from relegation.
Baggio led Fiorentina to a Coppa Italia quarter-final during the 1988–89 season under manager Sven-Göran Eriksson, scoring nine goals, as Fiorentina were eliminated by eventual champions Sampdoria. This season would be Baggio&#x27;s breakthrough, as he scored 15 goals in Serie A, finishing third in the &quot;capocannoniere&quot; (top goalscorer) title. He also helped Fiorentina finish in seventh place in Serie A and win an UEFA Cup spot, assisting the only goal by Roberto Pruzzo in the tiebreak qualifier against Roma. He formed a notable attacking partnership with Stefano Borgonovo, and the pair scored 29 of Fiorentina&#x27;s 44 Serie A goals, earning the nickname &quot;B2&quot;. Baggio&#x27;s performances elevated him to hero status among the fans, and he drew praise from several pundits. His characteristics led former Fiorentina playmaker Miguel Montuori to say Baggio was &quot;more productive than Maradona; he is without doubt the best number 10 in the league&quot;, also stating that Baggio had &quot;ice in his veins&quot; due to his composure in front of goal.

Although Fiorentina were struggling against relegation during the 1989–90 season, Baggio led the club to the 1990 UEFA Cup Final, only to be defeated by his future club, Juventus. Baggio scored 1 goal in 12 appearances in the competition, in a round of 16 1–0 home win against Dynamo Kyiv, from a penalty, on 22 November 1989; this was his first goal in European competitions. He also scored the decisive penalty in the first round shootout against Atlético Madrid. With 17 goals, Baggio was the second-highest goalscorer in the 1989–90 Serie A season after Marco van Basten, and was awarded the Bravo Award as the best under-23 player in European competitions. He also placed eighth in the 1990 Ballon d&#x27;Or. With Fiorentina, Baggio scored 55 goals in 136 appearances, 39 of which were in Serie A, from 94 appearances.

=== 1990–1995: Juventus ===

In 1990, Baggio was sold to one of Fiorentina&#x27;s rivals, Juventus, for £8 million, the world record transfer for a footballer at the time. He inherited the number 10 shirt, formerly worn by Michel Platini. Following the transfer, there were riots on the streets of Florence, where 50 people were injured. Baggio replied to his fans, saying: &quot;I was compelled to accept the transfer.&quot;

When Juventus played Fiorentina on 7 April 1991, Baggio refused to take a penalty, stating Fiorentina goalkeeper Gianmatteo Mareggini knew him too well. However, Luigi De Agostini, Baggio&#x27;s replacement, missed the penalty and Juventus eventually lost the match. When Baggio was substituted, he picked up a Fiorentina scarf thrown onto the field, a gesture which, although appreciated by his former club&#x27;s fans, caused outrage among the Juventus supporters, who were initially reluctant to accept Baggio. He claimed to be &quot;always purple&quot; in his heart, with purple being the colour of Fiorentina.

In this first season at Juventus, Baggio scored 14 goals and provided 12 assists in Serie A, often playing behind the forwards under Luigi Maifredi, although Juventus finished in seventh place in Serie A, outside the European qualification spots. However, Juventus did reach the semi-finals of the European Cup Winners&#x27; Cup that year, a tournament in which Baggio was top scorer with nine goals, bringing his seasonal total to 27 goals. Juventus would ultimately be eliminated by Johan Cruyff&#x27;s Barcelona &quot;Dream Team&quot;. Juventus were also eliminated in the quarter-finals of the Coppa Italia to eventual winners Roma, with Baggio scoring three goals. Juventus also lost the Supercoppa Italiana against Napoli at the beginning of the season; Baggio scored Juventus&#x27;s only goal from a free-kick. Baggio made his 100th Serie A appearance in a 0–0 draw against Lazio on 21 October 1990.

In his second season, under new manager Giovanni Trapattoni, Baggio finished runner-up to Marco van Basten for the Serie A top scorer title, scoring 18 goals and providing 8 assists, as Juventus finished runners-up to Fabio Capello&#x27;s AC Milan in Serie A, and to Parma in the Coppa Italia final, in which Baggio scored in his club&#x27;s 1–0 victory in the first leg from a penalty. It was during his second season with the club that Baggio came to be accepted by the Juventus fans, as he was seen as a leader around whom the club&#x27;s play revolved. However, Trapattoni often deployed Baggio in a more advanced role, which led to minor disagreements between the player, his coach and Juventus management.

Baggio was appointed team captain for the 1992–93 season. He had a dominant season, winning the only European club trophy of his career after helping Juventus to the UEFA Cup final, in which he scored twice and assisted another goal over both legs, defeating Borussia Dortmund 6–1 on aggregate. &quot;En route&quot; to the final, Baggio scored two goals in the 2–1 home victory against Paris Saint-Germain, in the first leg of the semi-final, and he went on to score the only goal in the return leg. Juventus also reached the semi-finals of the Coppa Italia, losing on away goals to local rivals and winners Torino. Juventus finished fourth in Serie A that season, although they managed a 3–1 away win against the Serie A champions Milan, with Baggio scoring a memorable individual goal while also setting-up Andreas Möller&#x27;s first goal of the match. One of the highlights of the season involved Baggio scoring four goals in open play against Udinese in a 5–0 Juventus home win. Baggio was once again runner-up for the Serie A &quot;capocannoniere&quot; title with 21 goals and 6 assists. He scored a personal best of 30 goals in all club competitions that season, in addition to five goals with the Italy national team. During the 1993 calendar year, Baggio managed a personal record 39 goals across all competitions, scoring 23 goals in Serie A, 3 in the Coppa Italia, 8 goals in European competitions and 5 goals for Italy, helping his national side qualify for the World Cup. Baggio&#x27;s performances throughout the year earned him both the European Footballer of the Year, with 142 points from a possible 150, and the FIFA World Player of the Year awards. He was also awarded the Onze d&#x27;Or, and the World Soccer Player of the Year Award.

In the 1993–94 season, Baggio often played as a second striker alongside Gianluca Vialli or Fabrizio Ravanelli, and occasionally the young Alessandro Del Piero; Juventus once again finished runners up to Milan in Serie A, and Baggio finished third in the &quot;capocannoniere&quot; title with 17 goals and 8 assists, while the club suffered a quarter-final elimination in the UEFA Cup against Cagliari. On 31 October 1993, Baggio scored a hat-trick in a 4–0 win over Genoa, which included his 100th Serie A goal; he also set up a goal for Möller during the match. Baggio made his 200th Serie A appearance on 5 December 1993 in a 1–0 win over Napoli. After sustaining an injury earlier that season, Baggio was operated on his meniscus in March 1994. Baggio placed second in the 1994 Ballon d&#x27;Or, third in the 1994 FIFA World Player of the Year, and was awarded the 1994 Onze de Bronze.

In the 1994–95 season, Trapattoni&#x27;s replacement, Marcello Lippi, wanted to create a more cohesive team, less dependent on Baggio, who was deployed as an outside forward in a 4–3–3 formation. Baggio was injured for most of the season, being ruled out for over three months after sustaining a knee injury against Padova on 27 November 1994. After scoring from a free-kick, he was substituted by Alessandro Del Piero, who temporarily took his place in the team. Baggio returned to the starting line-up in the first leg of the Coppa Italia semi-final against Lazio in Rome on 8 March 1995, setting up Fabrizio Ravanelli&#x27;s winner. On his first Serie A match back from injury, on 12 March 1995, Baggio scored Juventus&#x27; second goal in a 2–0 win over Foggia, and set up Ravanelli&#x27;s goal. Due to his injury, Baggio only managed 17 Serie A appearances, but still contributed to his first &quot;scudetto&quot; with Juventus by contributing eight goals and eight assists. He provided assists for three of the goals in the title-deciding match against Parma, which Juventus won 4–0 in Turin on 21 May 1995. He helped Juventus win the Coppa Italia that year, notching two goals and two assists, scoring the winning goal in the second leg of the semi-final. He helped lead Juventus to another UEFA Cup final by scoring four goals, including two goals and an assist over both legs of the semi-finals against Borussia Dortmund. Despite Baggio&#x27;s strong performance, Juventus were defeated in the UEFA Cup final by Parma.

Baggio scored 115 goals in 200 appearances during his five seasons at Juventus; 78 were scored in Serie A in 141 appearances. In 1995, Baggio was nominated for the Ballon d&#x27;Or and placed fifth in the 1995 FIFA World Player of the Year Award. He was also awarded the 1995 Onze d&#x27;Argent Award, behind George Weah. Baggio is currently Juventus&#x27; ninth-highest goalscorer in all competitions, and is the joint tenth-highest goalscorer for Juventus in Serie A, alongside Pietro Anastasi. He is the sixth-highest Juventus goalscorer in the Coppa Italia with 14 goals, and is also the joint fourth all-time Juventus goalscorer in European competitions, as well as the joint fifth all-time Juventus goalscorer in international competitions, with 22 goals, alongside Anastasi once again. In 2010, he was named one of the club&#x27;s 50 greatest legends.

=== 1995–1997: AC Milan ===

In 1995, Marcello Lippi, Roberto Bettega and Umberto Agnelli announced that Baggio no longer featured in their plans at Juventus and decided to focus on the emerging star Alessandro Del Piero, who would inherit Baggio&#x27;s number 10 shirt. Baggio faced difficulties with Agnelli, Luciano Moggi, and Juventus management during his final season, as they stated they would only renew his contract if he reduced his salary by 50%. After strong pressure from AC Milan chairman Silvio Berlusconi and manager Fabio Capello, Baggio was sold to the Milanese club for £6.8 million, amidst several protests from Juventus fans. At the time, Baggio had been linked with Inter Milan, Real Madrid, and English Premier League clubs Manchester United and Blackburn Rovers.

Although Baggio initially struggled with injuries at the beginning of his first season with Milan, he came back into the starting line-up and was appointed the main penalty taker. He helped Milan win the Serie A title, notably scoring a goal against his former team Fiorentina from a penalty in the title-deciding match. Baggio finished the season with 10 goals in all competitions, in 34 appearances; seven of his goals were scored in Serie A, in 28 appearances, and he also provided 12 assists in Serie A, making him the top assist provider of the season. He became one of only six players to win the &quot;scudetto&quot; in consecutive years with different teams, and was voted the club&#x27;s best player of the season by the fans, despite playing a more creative role. Towards the end of the season, Baggio had disagreements with Capello due to limited playing time, as Capello believed he was no longer fit enough to play for 90 minutes; although Baggio frequently started matches, he was often substituted during the second half; during the course of the season, he only played nine matches in their entirety, being substituted on 17 occasions, and coming off the bench twice.

During the opening of the 1996–97 Serie A under new Milan manager Óscar Tabárez, Baggio was initially left out of the first team, with the former commenting &quot;[t]here is no place for poets in modern football.&quot; Baggio was later able to convince the Uruguayan manager of his abilities and earn himself a spot in the starting line-up; he became the focal point of the team&#x27;s offensive play, and was initially started in his preferred role behind George Weah, and on occasion as a left-winger or as a central-midfielder playmaker. After a series of disappointing results, Baggio was relegated to the bench, and Milan&#x27;s former coach Arrigo Sacchi, also the former Italy manager with whom Baggio had argued following the 1994 World Cup, was called in as a replacement. Although their relationship initially improved, Sacchi gave Baggio limited playing time, and he soon fell out of form, along with the rest of the squad, which caused their relationship to deteriorate again. Milan failed to retain their league title, finishing the season in a disappointing 11th place, and they were knocked out once again in the quarter-finals of the Coppa Italia. Baggio made his UEFA Champions League debut in the 1996–97 season, scoring his first goal in the competition, although Milan were eliminated in the group stage. Milan also lost the 1996 Supercoppa Italiana to Fiorentina, as Baggio was left on the bench. During his time at Milan, Baggio scored 19 goals in 67 appearances in all competitions; 12 of his goals were scored in Serie A, in 51 appearances, 3 were scored in the Coppa Italia in 6 appearances, and 4 were scored in European competitions, in 10 appearances.

=== 1997–1998: Bologna ===

In 1997, Capello returned to Milan, subsequently stating Baggio was not a part of his plans with the club. Baggio chose to move to Parma, but the manager at the time, Carlo Ancelotti, impeded the transfer, as he also did not feel Baggio would fit into his tactical plans. Ancelotti would later state he regretted this decision, stating that in his naïveté, he believed that the 4–4–2 formation was the ideal formation for success, and he felt that at the time, creative players such as Gianfranco Zola and Baggio were not compatible with this system.

Baggio subsequently transferred to Bologna, aiming to save the squad from relegation, and earn a place at the 1998 FIFA World Cup. Baggio refound his form with the club and had a dominant season, scoring a personal best of 22 goals in Serie A, as well as providing 9 assists, leading Bologna to an eighth-place finish, allowing them to qualify for the UEFA Intertoto Cup. Baggio was the highest scoring Italian in Serie A that season, and the third-highest goalscorer in Serie A. His performances earned him a place in Italy&#x27;s 1998 World Cup squad. Baggio also led Bologna to the round of 16 in the Coppa Italia, where he scored one goal in three appearances. Although he rose to hero status amongst the fans, he had difficulties with his manager Renzo Ulivieri, in particular when he was left out of the starting 11 against Juventus. Ulivieri later denied ever having any difficulties with Baggio. At the beginning of the season, Baggio cut off his iconic ponytail, signifying his rebirth. Baggio was named as Bologna&#x27;s captain for part of the season, before handing the armband to Giancarlo Marocchi. Baggio made his 300th Serie A appearance while at Bologna, in a 0–0 draw against Empoli on 11 January 1998. Baggio received nominations for both the Ballon d&#x27;Or and the FIFA World Player of the Year due to his performances for Bologna and Italy that season. He was also nominated for the 1998 Serie A Italian Footballer of the Year and Serie A Footballer of the Year awards, losing out to Alessandro Del Piero and Ronaldo, respectively.

=== 1998–2000: Inter Milan ===

After the 1998 World Cup, Baggio signed with his favourite childhood club Inter Milan in order to compete in the UEFA Champions League. He made his club debut on 12 August 1998, in the first leg of the second round of the qualifying stages of the latter competition, scoring a goal and providing three assists in a 4–0 win over Skonto FC in Pisa. After injuries, disappointing results, and several managerial changes throughout the season, including Luigi Simoni, Mircea Lucescu, and Roy Hodgson, Baggio struggled to gain playing time, and was used out of position as a winger, often as a substitute. Baggio scored five league goals and provided 10 assists in 23 appearances during the 1998–99 season, as Inter finished in eighth place, missing out on a European spot. He helped Inter to a Coppa Italia semi-final, losing out to eventual winners Parma. Baggio scored a goal against his former club Bologna in a European play-off match, but Inter lost both matches, failing to qualify for the UEFA Cup. Baggio also scored four goals in the Champions League, helping lead Inter through the qualifying rounds to the quarter-finals, where they were eliminated by eventual winners Manchester United, also scoring a memorable brace against defending champions Real Madrid in the group stage.

In the 1999–2000 season, Marcello Lippi, Baggio&#x27;s former manager at Juventus, was appointed as Inter&#x27;s new coach. Lippi did not favour Baggio and left him out of the squad for most of the season, stating Baggio was out of shape. In his autobiography, Baggio stated Lippi had dumped him after Baggio refused to point out which of Inter&#x27;s players had expressed negative opinions about the coach, also highlighting an incident during a training session where he called out Christian Vieri and Christian Panucci for applauding Baggio for a notable assist.

Baggio was used scarcely and often as a substitute, scoring 4 goals in 18 appearances during the regular Serie A season. He made five appearances in the Coppa Italia, with his only goal coming against local rivals A.C. Milan in the second leg of the quarter-finals, as he helped Inter reach the final, only to be defeated by Lazio. Despite his limited playing time, Baggio still managed several important goals to help Inter to a fourth-place finish, alongside Parma, such as his match winning goal against Hellas Verona, which he scored after coming off the bench, after being excluded from the team since 18 December 1999. Baggio had also previously helped to set up Inter&#x27;s equaliser during the match. This was the first time Baggio had scored for Inter since his goal on 27 May of the previous season, and in the post-match the interview, he denied accusations made by Lippi in regard to his personal form.

Baggio&#x27;s last important contribution to Inter was scoring two memorable goals against Parma in the play-off match for the last remaining Champions League place, which Inter won 3–1; Lippi had been forced to field Baggio due to several injuries. Baggio was given a perfect 10 rating from the Italian sports newspaper &quot;La Gazzetta dello Sport&quot;, which described his performance as &quot;absolutely perfect all game&quot;. This match is considered an example of professionalism shown by Baggio, as Inter president Massimo Moratti had stated Lippi would only stay on if the team qualified for the Champions League.

=== 2000–2004: Brescia ===

After two years with Inter, Baggio decided not to renew his expiring contract due to his conflicts with Marcello Lippi, making him a free agent at age 33. He was linked with several Serie A clubs, such as Napoli and Reggina, and also various Premier League and La Liga clubs, including Barcelona. Baggio ultimately transferred to Serie A newcomers Brescia under head coach Carlo Mazzone, aiming to save them from relegation; he remained in Italy in order to have a greater opportunity of being called up for the 2002 World Cup. He was made captain and was given the number 10 shirt, playing as an attacking midfielder.

Despite injury problems during the first half of the season, Baggio re-found his form and managed ten goals and ten assists in the 2000–01 season. Brescia finished in a joint seventh place, their best Serie A finish since the league&#x27;s re-establishment in 1946, and qualified for the UEFA Intertoto Cup, also reaching the quarter-finals of the Coppa Italia, losing to eventual winners Fiorentina. Baggio helped Brescia to the final of the 2001 UEFA Intertoto Cup, where they were defeated by Paris Saint-Germain on away goals. Baggio scored one goal in the tournament, in the final from a penalty. His performances earned him a nomination for the 2001 Ballon d&#x27;Or, and he finished 25th overall in the rankings. Baggio was one of the best offensive playmakers in the league, winning the Guerin d&#x27;oro Award in 2001, awarded by the Italian sports magazine &quot;Guerin Sportivo&quot;, to the player with the highest average rating throughout the season with at least 19 appearances.

At the start of 2001–02 season, Baggio scored eight goals in the first nine matches, leading him to the top of the Serie A goalscoring table. In his eighth league appearance of the season, against Piacenza, Baggio scored a goal but later suffered an injury. A week later, against Venezia, he scored from a penalty, but he endured a more serious injury following a hard challenge which caused him to tear the ACL of his left knee, keeping him out of action for four months. He suffered a second serious injury that season, tearing the meniscus in his left knee, after returning to the team, and coming off the bench, in the Coppa Italia semi-final against Parma on 31 January 2002. He was operated on 4 February 2002 and he returned for three matches before the end of the season, making a recovery in 76 days. On 21 April 2002, in the first game after his comeback, Baggio came on as a substitute to score two goals against Fiorentina, helping Brescia win the match. He scored again against Bologna, saving Brescia from relegation on the final matchday, and bringing his seasonal tally to 11 goals in 12 Serie A matches. Despite Baggio&#x27;s performances and public demand, Italy national team head coach Giovanni Trapattoni did not deem him fully fit, prompting the coach to leave Baggio out of the final squad for the 2002 World Cup. Trapattoni also expressed concern about bringing Baggio to the World Cup due to the presence of Francesco Totti and Alessandro Del Piero in his role, believing that this could create a rivalry between the players. After missing out on the tournament, Baggio reversed his initial decision to retire after the World Cup, expressing his intention to surpass the 200 Serie A goal mark.

Baggio maintained a high level of performance under new coach Gianni De Biasi. Baggio managed 12 goals and 9 assists during the 2002–03 season, helping Brescia to an eighth-place finish and another UEFA Intertoto Cup spot. He scored his 300th career goal from a penalty on 15 December 2002, in Brescia&#x27;s 3–1 home victory over Perugia, also setting-up one of Igli Tare&#x27;s goals.

In the 2003–04 season, the final season of his career, Baggio recorded 12 goals and 11 assists. He scored his 200th goal in Serie A in a 2–2 draw against Parma on 14 March 2004, saving Brescia from relegation, as they finished the season in 11th place. Baggio was the first player in almost 30 years to surpass the 200-goal milestone, and is currently only one of seven players to have accomplished the feat. Baggio scored his final and 205th Serie A career goal on the second last matchday, in a 2–1 home win over Coppa Italia winners Lazio on 9 May 2004; he also set up Brescia&#x27;s first goal in that match. Baggio played his last career match on 16 May 2004 on the final matchday of the season at the San Siro against Milan, which ended in a 4–2 loss to the Serie A champions; during the game, he set-up Matuzalém&#x27;s second goal. In the 88th minute, De Biasi substituted Baggio, prompting the 80,000 present at the San Siro to give him a standing ovation; Milan&#x27;s captain, defender Paolo Maldini, who was Baggio&#x27;s former teammate both with the Italy national team and Milan, also embraced him before he left the pitch.

With Brescia, Baggio scored 46 goals in 101 appearances in all competitions, scoring 45 goals in 95 Serie A appearances, and one goal in two European matches. Baggio also made four Coppa Italia appearances with Brescia. Baggio retired as Brescia&#x27;s all-time leading goalscorer in Serie A. He ended his career with 205 goals in Serie A, making him the seventh-highest scorer of all time, behind Silvio Piola, Francesco Totti (who overtook him in 2011), Gunnar Nordahl, Giuseppe Meazza, José Altafini, and Antonio Di Natale (who overtook him in 2015). Baggio&#x27;s number 10 shirt was retired by Brescia in his honour, and he is considered the club&#x27;s greatest ever player. Before Baggio had joined Brescia, they had never been able to avoid relegation after being newly promoted to Serie A, in over 40 years. During the four years under Baggio, Brescia recorded their best ever Serie A run and were never relegated.

== International career ==
=== Youth career and senior debut ===
Baggio totalled 27 goals in 56 caps for his national team at senior level, making him Italy&#x27;s fourth-highest all-time goalscorer, tied with Del Piero, who managed the tally in 91 appearances. At youth level, he was capped for the Italy U16 on four occasions in 1984, scoring three goals. Under Cesare Maldini, he was called up for one Italy under-21 match against Switzerland on 16 October 1987, although he was an unused substitute, and strangely failed to make an appearance for the &quot;azzurrini&quot;.

His first senior International call-up was given to him by manager Azeglio Vicini, and he made his first appearance for Italy on 16 November 1988 at age 21 in a 1–0 friendly victory over the Netherlands, assisting Gianluca Vialli&#x27;s match-winning goal. He scored his first goal for Italy on 22 April 1989, from a free-kick in a 1–1 draw against Uruguay in an international friendly in Verona. Later that year, in his following international appearance in Italy&#x27;s friendly against Bulgaria, held in Cesena on 20 September, he scored his first brace for Italy in a 4–0 victory, also later assisting Andrea Carnevale&#x27;s goal with a cross from a free kick, and contributing to Nikolay Iliev&#x27;s own goal by setting-up Vialli, whose shot was subsequently deflected by the Bulgarian defender.

=== 1990 FIFA World Cup ===

Baggio was called up for his first World Cup tournament in 1990, on home soil. Baggio appeared in five matches, starting in four of them, as Italy manager Azeglio Vicini preferred the more experienced Gianluca Vialli to start against Argentina. Baggio was still able to display his ability throughout the tournament, and Vicini&#x27;s decision not to use him more frequently was later criticised, as Baggio&#x27;s creative combinations with Salvatore Schillaci were praised. Baggio scored twice during the tournament, including the &quot;goal of the tournament&quot; in a 2–0 win in his first competitive international fixture, in Italy&#x27;s final group match against Czechoslovakia. The goal, which drew him comparisons with Giuseppe Meazza, involved an exchange with Giuseppe Giannini on the left wing, followed by a dribbling run from midfield, in which Baggio beat several players, wrong-footing the last defender with a feint, before putting the ball past the goalkeeper. This goal was later recognised as the seventh-best goal in World Cup history in a FIFA poll.

In the round of 16 match against Uruguay, which Italy won 2–0, Baggio started the play which led to Italy&#x27;s first goal, scored by Schillaci. Baggio also scored a goal from a direct free-kick, but it was disallowed as the referee had awarded an indirect free-kick. Baggio also had a goal incorrectly ruled offside in the quarter-final against the Republic of Ireland, which Italy won 1–0; Baggio was once again involved in the build-up which led to Schillaci&#x27;s match winning goal. Italy were eliminated on penalties against defending champions Argentina in the semi-finals after a 1–1 draw, although Baggio was able to score his penalty in the shootout. Baggio had come off the bench in the second half for Giannini, and came close to winning the match with a free-kick, but it was saved by Sergio Goycochea.

In the bronze medal match against England, Baggio returned to the starting line-up, playing behind Schillaci. He scored Italy&#x27;s first goal of the match after stealing the ball from Peter Shilton. David Platt momentarily equalised, but with five minutes left on the clock, Baggio set up Schillaci, who was fouled inside the area by Paul Parker. Although Baggio was the regularly designated penalty taker for his national team, he stepped aside to allow Schillaci to score and capture the Golden Shoe, a gesture which was praised by the Italian media. Baggio assisted a goal by Nicola Berti in the dying minutes of the match, but it was incorrectly ruled offside. Italy won the match 2–1, capturing the third place medal.

Following the World Cup, Baggio was not called up often by Vicini for the Euro 1992 Qualification matches, only making three appearances and scoring two goals as Italy failed to qualify for the tournament, finishing second in their qualifying group behind the Soviet Union.

=== 1994 FIFA World Cup ===
Under Italy&#x27;s new manager, Arrigo Sacchi, Baggio was his team&#x27;s top scorer during their qualifying campaign for the 1994 World Cup, scoring five goals of the team&#x27;s 14 goals in the eight games in also providing seven assists. He helped Italy top their group and qualify for the 1994 World Cup, notably contributing to Dino Baggio&#x27;s winner in the decisive final group match against Portugal, which secured Italy&#x27;s place in the final competition. One of his best performances during the qualifying campaign occurred on 14 October 1992 against Switzerland; Italy were trailing 2–0 at home and Baggio led his team to a 2–2 draw comeback, scoring a goal. Under Sacchi, Baggio made his first and only starting appearance as Italy&#x27;s captain in the 1994 World Cup qualifying match in Glasgow against Scotland on 18 November 1992. However, he was substituted off in the final minutes of the 0–0 draw after injuring his rib.

Despite a series of injuries prior to the tournament, Baggio was expected to be one of the stars of the 1994 World Cup, entering the competition as the reigning Ballon d&#x27;Or winner and FIFA World Player of the Year, and at the peak of his career; after a lacklustre start, he led his team to the final with three match winning performances in the knockout rounds, wearing the number 10 shirt, and scoring five goals in the process. In a disappointing first match against Republic of Ireland at Giants Stadium, New Jersey, Italy were defeated 1–0. In the second match against Norway, he appeared more inspired; however, Italy goalkeeper Gianluca Pagliuca was sent off for handling the ball outside the area. Luca Marchegiani was brought in to replace him, and Arrigo Sacchi decided to sacrifice Baggio in what produced an outcry amidst the fans. Baggio later stated that Sacchi was &quot;crazy&quot;. Italy won the match 1–0. Italy continued to disappoint, as their final group match ended in a 1–1 draw against Mexico, and he again failed to influence the result. The Italians finished third in their group, drawing much criticism from the press, and only advancing from the first round as the fourth-best third-placed team; Juventus president Gianni Agnelli famously called Baggio &quot;un coniglio bagnato&quot; (&quot;a wet rabbit&quot;), referring to his despondent demeanour, hoping the jab would spur him on to score.

After under-performing during the group stage, Baggio refound his form in the knockout stages, where he scored five memorable goals. He scored two in the round of 16, helping a ten-man Italy defeat Nigeria 2–1 at Foxboro Stadium in Boston, after trailing for most of the match. He scored his first goal of the match with two minutes left on the clock, after receiving ball at the edge of the area from Roberto Mussi. He then went on to score the winning goal from a penalty in extra time after setting up Antonio Benarrivo with a lobbed pass, who was then fouled in the penalty area.

Baggio scored another match-winning goal in the quarter-finals to defeat Spain 2–1 with three minutes remaining. After receiving the ball from Giuseppe Signori, he dribbled past the Spanish goalkeeper Andoni Zubizarreta, scoring off-balance from a tight angle. He was also involved in the build-up which led to Italy&#x27;s first goal by his unrelated namesake Dino Baggio. Baggio gave a man of the match performance in the semi-finals; he scored two more goals to beat Bulgaria 2–1 at Giants Stadium, leading Italy to the World Cup final for the first time in 12 years. He scored his first goal after beating two players and curling the ball from outside the area into the bottom-right corner. His second was scored with a half volley from a tight angle, assisted by Demetrio Albertini with a lobbed ball.
Baggio was not fully fit for the final against Brazil at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, California, after pulling his hamstring during the semi-final and playing with the aid of a painkiller injection. Despite being far less dominant than in previous matches, he still tested Brazilian goalkeeper Cláudio Taffarel and was able to set up a few chances for his teammates. The match ended 0–0 after extra time; he took Italy&#x27;s last penalty in the resulting shootout, but he put the decisive spot-kick over the crossbar, which meant the Brazilians won the title, resulting in one of the most upsetting moments in World Cup history, and a miss with which his career would frequently become associated.

Immediately after the match, Baggio stated that he was &quot;very disappointed,&quot; also noting that &quot;a shock of pain&quot; went through his leg as he kicked. Reportedly, Baggio stood near the goal alone for 8 minutes with his head down after missing the penalty, which has given him the moniker &quot;The Man who Died Standing&quot; Baggio has since described the infamous miss as the worst moment of his career, stating that it affected him for years, and that he still &quot;dreams&quot; about it to this day. In his autobiography, when recounting the miss, he later reflected: &quot;Penalties are only missed by those who have the courage to take them.&quot; Before him, two other Italians, Franco Baresi and Daniele Massaro, had already missed penalties. Having led Italy to the final with his memorable performances, Baggio received the Silver Ball as the second-best player of the tournament, behind Romário, and also finished tied for second in goals scored throughout the tournament, although he missed out on the Bronze Boot, which went to Kennet Andersson and Romário. He was also named in the World Cup All-Star Team. Baggio finished runner-up for the Ballon d&#x27;Or, with 136 points from a possible 245, and third place for the FIFA World Player of the Year in 1994.

Despite Baggio&#x27;s association with missing the decisive penalty in the 1994 World Cup final shoot-out, former &quot;Telelatino&quot; broadcaster Alf De Blasis stated in 2010 that he believed that Baggio&#x27;s performance throughout the entire tournament cemented his legacy as a footballer. Reflecting on Baggio&#x27;s performance at the 1994 World Cup in 2001, Stefano Bozzi of BBC Sport stated: &quot;At the USA 94 World Cup, [Baggio] single-handedly hauled Italy to the final.&quot; In 2006, the BBC described him as &quot;Italy&#x27;s best player throughout the [1994] tournament.&quot; In 2017, Emmet Gates instead described Baggio&#x27;s run-up to the 1994 World Cup final with Italy as &quot;the greatest show of individual excellence since another equally majestic number ten [Maradona] dominated the 1986 tournament.&quot; When summarising Baggio&#x27;s 1994 World Cup in 2018, Ed Dove of &quot;ESPN FC&quot; stated that &quot;&#x27;[t]he Divine Ponytail&#x27; had arguably been the outstanding player of the tournament, bailing Italy out on numerous occasions, but his inspirational touch deserted him when it mattered most.&quot; His colleague Nick Miller instead stated that &quot;Roberto Baggio was the best player at the 1994 World Cup, dragging Italy to the final virtually on his own.&quot;

=== Post-World Cup ===
After the 1994 World Cup, Italy head coach Arrigo Sacchi and Baggio infamously fell out. Their relationship deteriorated in September 1994 following a 1–1 draw against Slovenia in a Euro 1996 qualifying match, where Baggio was benched. After a 2–1 defeat to Croatia in a Euro 1996 qualifying match in November, their relationship hit the breaking point, and Baggio, supported by his teammates, asked for the manager&#x27;s dismissal. Due to his disagreements with Sacchi, Baggio was called up to the national team less frequently, only making one more substitute appearance in a 1–0 home win against Slovenia in a Euro 1996 qualifier in September 1995. He eventually lost his spot in the squad, missing out on Italy&#x27;s Euro 1996 squad, despite winning the &quot;scudetto&quot; that year with Milan. Sacchi justified his decision by stating Baggio was not fully fit, and that Enrico Chiesa helped the team more when possession was lost. Italy were eliminated in the group stage of the competition. Baggio was also excluded from Cesare Maldini&#x27;s Italian Olympic squad in 1996.

=== 1998 FIFA World Cup ===
After a lengthy absence from the national team, Baggio was called up by Cesare Maldini for a World Cup qualifying match against Poland on 30 April 1997, in Naples; Baggio came off the bench and scored a goal in a 3–0 win. He was subsequently selected as one of Italy&#x27;s 22 players for the 1998 World Cup following his performances with Bologna.
In Italy&#x27;s opening match of the 1998 World Cup in France, against Chile, Baggio started alongside Christian Vieri, playing all 90 minutes, as Alessandro Del Piero was still recovering from an injury. Vieri opened the scoring from a Baggio assist, but Chile managed to equalise and take the lead through Marcelo Salas. Baggio created several chances, but Italy were unable to equalise. Towards the end of the match, Baggio played a low cross into the box which unintentionally touched Chilean defender Ronald Fuentes&#x27;s hand at the edge of the penalty area, resulting in a fortunate penalty for Italy. Despite missing the decisive penalty in the 1994 World Cup final shootout, Baggio stepped up to take the penalty, and he scored Italy&#x27;s equalising goal, becoming the first Italian player to score in three World Cups. This was the first penalty he had taken for Italy since the 1994 World Cup final miss; Baggio described the goal as &quot;liberating&quot;.

In Italy&#x27;s 3–0 second group match win over Cameroon, Baggio assisted Luigi Di Biagio&#x27;s opening goal with a cross following a corner; however, he was replaced by Del Piero during the second half after sustaining a minor injury. Baggio scored his second goal of the tournament in Italy&#x27;s final group match against Austria, which ended in a 2–1 win to Italy. Baggio came on during the second half, replacing Del Piero, after the crowd had begun to chant his name. He scored the winning goal of the match, after combining with Francesco Moriero and Filippo Inzaghi, as Italy topped their group. With this goal, he tied Paolo Rossi&#x27;s record for most goals by an Italian player in the World Cup finals, with nine; this was also his 27th and final goal for Italy. He was left on the bench for the round of 16 win over Norway as Italy advanced to the quarter-finals.

In the quarter-final match against eventual champions France, Baggio came on as a substitute for Del Piero in the second half, and managed to create some scoring opportunities. The score remained 0–0, and the match went to extra time, although Baggio came the closest to scoring the golden goal, with a volley from a lobbed pass by Albertini, but his shot was put just wide of Fabien Barthez&#x27;s far post. The match eventually went to a penalty shootout. Although Baggio converted his penalty Italy&#x27;s first, the shootout was won by the host nation and Italy was eliminated from a World Cup on penalties for the third consecutive time. Italy&#x27;s coach was criticised for starting the recovering Del Piero ahead of Baggio, and for not allowing the two players to play alongside each other. Despite rumours that the substitutions had created a rivalry between the players, Baggio and Del Piero remain friends. In 2008, Baggio stated that he has great respect for Del Piero, and that there had never been disagreements between them. In turn, Del Piero expressed his admiration for Baggio in 2011.

=== Later career ===
Baggio was initially a regular squad member under Dino Zoff, appearing as a substitute in two UEFA Euro 2000 qualifying matches, and in a 2–0 win against Wales in 1998, setting up a goal for Vieri; and in a 1–1 draw against Belarus in 1999. Baggio made a starting appearance in a 0–0 friendly draw against Norway in 1999, creating several chances, helping to set-up a goal which was ruled offside, and hitting the post from a free-kick. However, he was later dropped from the squad after Inter&#x27;s poor 1998–99 season, and he was not called up for UEFA Euro 2000 due to his limited playing time during the 1999–2000 season, and accusations made against his fitness. Zoff centred his squad around younger offensive players, such as Francesco Totti, Alessandro Del Piero, Stefano Fiore, Marco Delvecchio, Filippo Inzaghi and Vincenzo Montella. Baggio was voted Italy&#x27;s &quot;Player of the Century&quot; in 2000.

Baggio was controversially excluded from Italy&#x27;s 2002 World Cup squad by coach Giovanni Trapattoni, who believed him to not have fully recovered from the serious injury he had sustained during the season. Although he was initially keen to include Baggio in the final 23-man list, he ultimately excluded him from the squad; Baggio had made a direct appeal to him prior to the tournament by writing him a letter. Fans and pundits criticised the omission, as Italy were eliminated by co-hosts South Korea in the round of 16.

Many fans hoped to see him play for Italy at Euro 2004, or with the 2004 Olympic squad that eventually managed a bronze medal, but this was not to be the case. However, he was given an international send-off by Trapattoni at age 37 in a friendly match against Spain on 28 April 2004, in which he wore the number 10 shirt for the final time, as well as the captain&#x27;s armband for part of the match. Although Baggio entertained the crowd with his creativity and skill, he was unable to score, despite winning a free-kick from which Vieri&#x27;s equalising goal arose. The match finished 1–1 and Baggio was given a standing ovation after being substituted off for Fabrizio Miccoli. This was Baggio&#x27;s 56th and final match for Italy, and it was the first time an Italian footballer&#x27;s career had been celebrated this way since Silvio Piola retired.

Baggio is the only Italian player ever to score in three World Cups with nine career World Cup goals, putting him equal with Christian Vieri and Paolo Rossi as Italy&#x27;s top World Cup goalscorers. Despite his performances for Italy in the 1990, 1994, and 1998 World Cups, he never played for Italy in the UEFA European Championships, and is currently the Italian player with the most caps without playing in a European Championship.

== Player profile ==
=== Style of play ===
Described as a &quot;fantasista&quot;, &quot;trequartista&quot;, &quot;mezzapunta&quot;, or &quot;rifinitore&quot; throughout his career in the Italian media, due to his role on the pitch and creative playing style, Baggio was a world class playmaker with an eye for goal, who was renowned for his vision, creativity, ability to read the game, crossing accuracy, and passing ability, which made him an excellent assist provider; however, he usually played as a second striker throughout his career, as he was known for scoring goals as well as creating them. This led Michel Platini to describe him as a &quot;9 and a half&quot;, namely a player whose role lay half-way between that of a forward and a midfielder, as he was not a true number 9 (the shirt number usually associated with a striker), due to his creative ability, but he scored more than a number 10 (the shirt number commonly associated with an advanced playmaker), a description which often saw him identified with the role of an inside forward. He also stated that Baggio&#x27;s playing style coincided with the re-emergence of the attacking midfielder in Italy during the early 2000s; indeed, he served as an inspiration to many future players.
Baggio was a tactically versatile player, with a good understanding of the game, and was comfortable attacking on either flank or through the centre of the pitch; this allowed him to operate anywhere along the front-line. His preferred position was in a free playmaking role behind the forwards, as a creative attacking midfielder, although he was rarely deployed in this position throughout his career due to the prevalence of the 4–4–2 formation, in which he usually functioned either as a main striker, or more frequently in a supporting role as a deep-lying forward. It was only in later years that he was able to play in this free role more frequently. He was also occasionally deployed out of position as a left winger in an attacking trident, as a wide midfielder, or even in central midfield as a &quot;mezzala&quot; or deep-lying playmaker on rarer instances. During the lead-up to the 1994 World Cup, he was also initially employed by Italy&#x27;s manager Arrigo Sacchi as a centre-forward, in a role known in Italian football jargon as &quot;centravanti di manovra&quot; (which literally translates to &quot;manoeuvring centre-forward&quot;), which was a precursor to the modern false-nine role; in this position, Baggio was expected to link-up with other players and create chances for them, in addition to creating space with his movement by dropping deep into midfield, and allowing the team&#x27;s wingers to cut inside and make attacking runs into the centre.

A prolific goalscorer, Baggio was an accurate finisher from both inside and outside the area, and was known for his accurate bending shots and composure in front of goal, rather than his power. Due to his excellent technique, he was a precise volleyer, and he had a penchant for scoring from chip shots. Moreover, he was also a set piece specialist, who was highly regarded for his ball delivery from dead-ball situations, as well as his precision from direct free-kicks and his ability to curl the ball, which earned him a reputation as one of the best free kick takers of his generation. His free-kick technique influenced several other players who came to be renowned for their prowess from dead-ball situations, such as Alessandro Del Piero and Andrea Pirlo. During his time with Juventus, his free kick technique was described as a cross between that of Maradona&#x27;s, Zico&#x27;s, and Platini&#x27;s, as at the time, his ball-striking technique was thought to resemble Platini&#x27;s, although, like Zico and Maradona, he preferred to take free kicks from close range, usually from a distance of around 20 to 16 metres from the goal, or even just outside the area, and to have the ball touched by a teammate first before striking it. Despite his decisive miss in the 1994 World Cup final shootout, Baggio was also a penalty kick specialist.

Although naturally right-footed, Baggio was comfortable using either foot, and often began dribbling with his left foot. Not particularly imposing physically, or in the air, due to his diminutive stature and slender physique, he was known however for his pace and acceleration over short distances, which, along with his movement, positioning, anticipation, technical ability, quick feet, low centre of gravity, and resulting agility, allowed him to lose his markers when making offensive runs into the area, both on and off the ball. Regarded as one of the greatest dribblers ever, and as one of the most technically accomplished players of all time, Baggio possessed an excellent first touch, and was renowned for his skilful dribbling, ball control and balance, as well as his spatial awareness, speed of thought and execution, reactions, close control at speed, and ability to beat opponents with flair, tricks, body feints, or sudden changes of pace or direction, both in one-on-one situations, or during individual dribbling runs. Zico once described Baggio as &quot;technically flawless,&quot; while Gianluigi Buffon, in his 2008 autobiography &quot;Numero 1&quot;, described Baggio as the &quot;most technical player&quot; with whom he had ever shared a pitch, adding that his touch and ball control were &quot;unique&quot;. In 2004, Sacchi stated: &quot;Baggio is creativity, flair, unpredictability, intuition, harmony.&quot; In 2016, Rob Smyth of &quot;The Guardian&quot; praised Baggio for his &quot;instinctive intelligence&quot;, when commenting on his playing style, also describing him as a &quot;conductor&quot; on the pitch &quot;who knew when and how to change the tempo of an attack&quot;.

=== Reception ===
Considered by pundits to be a highly promising prospect in his youth, Baggio later established himself as one of the best players of his generation, and as one of Italy&#x27;s greatest players ever; Baggio is regarded by many in the sport, including his former Milan manager Fabio Capello, as the best Italian footballer of all time, and by many in the sport, as one of the greatest players in the history of the game. Italian journalist Gianni Brera, who had observed both Giuseppe Meazza and Gianni Rivera, stated that Baggio was the best Italian player he had ever seen. During his time at Juventus, the club&#x27;s former chairman, Gianni Agnelli, referred to Baggio as an &quot;artist&quot;, comparing his elegance to the painter &quot;Raffaello&quot;, while he described the emerging talent Alessandro Del Piero as &quot;Pinturicchio&quot;. In a 2011 interview with &quot;La Gazzetta dello Sport&quot;, Del Piero stated that Baggio, along with Zinedine Zidane, was the best player with whom he had ever played, a view shared by Baggio&#x27;s fellow former Juventus teammate Angelo Peruzzi and his former Brescia teammate Pep Guardiola in 2010, as well as his former Inter teammate Javier Zanetti in 2020, while Matthew Le Tissier named Baggio as his best ever opponent in 2012. In 2017, Baggio&#x27;s former teammate Ravanelli instead labelled Baggio as the greatest player of all time. In 1993, Giampiero Boniperti stated that he believed that Baggio was &quot;already one of the greatest number tens ever.&quot; In 2018, Cathal Kelly of &quot;The Globe and Mail&quot; described Baggio playing in the 1994 World Cup as &quot;the best player in the world&quot; at the time, while &quot;The Guardian&quot; described him as &quot;[t]he definitive player of the decade&quot;, also adding that &quot;the 1990s belonged to Il Divin Codino&quot;, and labelled him as &quot;probably the finest player in the world between 1992 and 1995.&quot; In 2015, Les Carpenter of &quot;The Guardian&quot; described Baggio as &quot;perhaps the greatest player of his time,&quot; while his colleague Emmet Gates dubbed him &quot;the best player of his generation.&quot; In 2010, Marco Gori of &quot;TuttoMercatoWeb&quot; labelled Baggio as &quot;one of the best footballers in history.&quot; Throughout his career, pundit Gianni Brera compared his playing style to that of Italian former footballer Giuseppe Meazza, while manager Trapattoni instead compared Baggio&#x27;s technical characteristics to other former number 10s such as Zico, Platini, and Juan Alberto Schiaffino.

In 2017, Baggio received praise from numerous sporting figures and pundits ahead of his 50th birthday, with Stefano Edel of &quot;La Gazzetta di Mantova&quot; describing Baggio as &quot;the Italian Maradona&quot;, and echoing Sacchi&#x27;s words prior to the 1994 World Cup, when he compared Baggio&#x27;s importance to Italy with that of Maradona to Argentina. Zico described him as &quot;one of the best players in the history of Italian football&quot;, while Tommaso Pellizzari of &quot;Il Corriere della Sera&quot; called him &quot;the greatest pure talent of Italian football.&quot; James McHie of &quot;Calciomercato.com&quot; instead named him as Italy&#x27;s greatest player, calling him &quot;the greatest player [...] to pull on the Azzurri shirt&quot;, a view shared by Stefano Discreti of &quot;Mediaset&quot;, who called Baggio &quot;the best Italian footballer of all time&quot; in 2019. Also in 2017, Giuseppe Bergomi described Baggio as &quot;extraordinary&quot; and as a &quot;pure talent&quot;, who was &quot;devastating when he played because he was capable of deciding games on his own.&quot; In 2004, Gianni Rivera described him as &quot;one of the greatest Italian footballers ever.&quot; In 2019, Marco Gentile of &quot;Il Giornale&quot; described Baggio as &quot;one of the best Italian [...] players in the history of football&quot;, and also as &quot;one of the best players in the history of world football.&quot; In 2020, Luca Stamerra of &quot;Eurosport&quot; described him as one of the &quot;best number 10s in the history of this sport.&quot; In 2019, his former Italy manager Dino Zoff listed Baggio as one of the best players he ever coached, while his former Fiorentina manager Sven-Göran Eriksson named him as the most talented player he had ever coached alongside Wayne Rooney in 2021, commenting: &quot;He had everything: incredible technique, vision, pace.&quot; In 2019, author Paolo Condò ranked Baggio among the greatest players of all time, a view shared by Emmanuel Amunike in 2020 as well as Roberto Mancini and John Keilman of the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot;, who both described Baggio as one of the &quot;all-time greats&quot; in 2018 and 2019, respectively. Former RAI commentator Bruno Pizzul, who served as a pundit for the Italy national team&#x27;s World Cup matches between 1986 and 2002, named Baggio as his favourite player, and as one of the best footballers he ever saw, among both Italian and non-Italian players. In 2020, Matteo Marani of &quot;La Stampa&quot; dubbed Baggio as &quot;one of the purest expressions of talent that world football has produced&quot;.

Known for his dislike of the defensive, physical and tactical nature of Italian football in the 1990s, Baggio drew criticism from certain pundits and some of his managers for his limited defensive work-rate when possession was lost, as well as the fact that the athletic part of his game was not his main focus during training sessions in his youth, while in his later career, his physical ailments often forced him to train independently with a personal fitness coach and physiotherapist, rather than with his team; as such, Baggio&#x27;s Milan manager Capello believed that he was not capable of playing for 90 minutes, due to the precarious physical condition of his knees. Luigi Simoni, one of his Inter managers, lauded Baggio for his work-rate in training, stating in 2009 that he would do up to six or seven hours of gym work a day under his tenure, a view which was also shared by Baggio&#x27;s former Bologna teammate Daniele Carnasciali in 2013. Carlo Mazzone and Gianni De Biasi, his managers at Brescia, as well as his former teammates Luca Toni and Emanuele Filippini, also praised Baggio for his discipline, professionalism, and dedication in training during his time with the club, with De Biasi calling him &quot;an example.&quot; Known to be an introvert in the media, due to his quiet private life and reluctance to give interviews, some in the sport, including Gianni Rivera, argued that Baggio lacked leadership qualities on the pitch. His personality is thought to have limited him from being more successful, in particular with larger clubs, with some pundits instead arguing that he excelled more with smaller teams; others instead believed that he had a difficult character due to his disagreements with several of his managers throughout his career, although he was generally regarded as a &quot;correct&quot; and co-operative player by officials, and as a classy and well-behaved footballer in the media. Mazzone also said of him: &quot;Baggio was one of the greatest Italian football players of all time. But I can tell you this, he was an even greater man. He was quiet, polite, respectful, humble. He never let his great talent weigh on anyone else. He was a friend who helped me win games on a Sunday.&quot; In 1995, Fabio Capello described Baggio as a player who was &quot;decisive.&quot; His former teammate Andrea Pirlo instead commented that &quot;[Baggio] was a silent leader, and above all, he was a leader on the pitch. When he played for the team, he made you win the games&quot;, also later describing him as a player who &quot;carried his teammates.&quot;

Despite his talent, success, popularity with the fans, and reputation as one of the greatest players of all time, critical reception of Baggio was occasionally divided throughout his career; this was in part due to his recurring injury struggles, as well as the fact that tactically certain managers struggled to find a suitable playing position for him. His role as a playmaker between the midfield and forward lines, as well as his skilful and creative playing style, were often regarded as being obsolete in modern football, in which managers often favoured the use of the 4–4–2 formation and a more athletic approach to the game; moreover, while Baggio was not an outright forward, he was also thought to lack the stamina to play in midfield, which made him less suited to this particular system, and occasionally led him to be excluded by his managers, although he was ultimately able to adapt to playing as a forward effectively. Baggio&#x27;s unique playing position, style, and approach to the game, combined with his talent, limited work-rate, and injury struggles, led him to have both many admirers and several detractors. Maradona once described Baggio as &quot;a genius&quot; but also as &quot;a great player who was never able to fulfil his entire potential&quot;, something with which Michel Platini concurred, while Pelé instead called him a &quot;legend.&quot; A 1994 article on Baggio by &quot;The Independent&quot; stated: &quot;Among professionals, [Baggio] is regarded as the best&quot;, quoting Ryan Giggs, who said: &quot;You look to Roberto Baggio, and you realise what a good player looks like.&quot; However, the newspaper also went on to say that &quot;Baggio&#x27;s is a brittle influence. There are no half measures in his play. He is either brilliant, or he disappears, looking confused and unhappy. Since Juventus&#x27;s whole pattern of play depends on him, his disappearances can be tricky. The press has interpreted his inconsistency as a lack of commitment.&quot;

In 2015, &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; accused him of going &quot;missing in big games.&quot; In 2020, Daniel Story of &quot;Planet Football&quot; stated he believed that Baggio was one of the most underrated players of the past 30 years. In 2016, Luke Chandley of &quot;The Huffington Post&quot; described Baggio as &quot;Italian football&#x27;s great oxymoron&quot;, noting: &quot;For all the skill he possessed going forward, he was the opposite of the reputation given to Italian football spanning across his whole career. Italian football was defensive know-how and structured play.&quot; His former manager Arrigo Sacchi believed that Baggio was often misused by his coaches, and that he would have been an even greater player had he been born abroad, a view which was also held by journalist Mattia Losi, who felt that Baggio would have been more appreciated had he been born in Brazil or Argentina, rather than in a country with a football legacy like Italy&#x27;s, which often failed to recognise young local talent, and Emmet Gates, who said in 2013 that &quot;Baggio unfortunately was born in the wrong country, or rather, he was born in Italy at the wrong time.&quot; Regarding this contrast and Baggio&#x27;s overall career, Tim Collings of &quot;The Guardian&quot; described him as &quot;Italy&#x27;s greatest player of fantasia&quot; in 2004 but also wrote: Baggio&#x27;s record, as a player for club and country, fails to match his reputation. He is less known for his acts of great success than for his injuries, his misfortunes and his courage; he is an artist in sport whose work is appreciated but no longer used in modern currency. Baggio&#x27;s career is filled by cameos of sublime skill, particular games when his imagination and ability enabled his team to transcend all normal expectations. Yet the lasting memory will be of his missed penalty in the shootout at the end of the 1994 World Cup final in Pasadena.

In 2017, Antonio Martelli of &quot;La Presse&quot; described Baggio as &quot;one of the greatest Italian players of all time maybe the best of the last thirty years&quot;, and as &quot;an &quot;authentic champion who could have been even greater without a series of extremely severe knee injuries that undermined his career since its dawning&quot;, a view shared by Raffaele Di Fusco, who said &quot;who knows what he could have become without all of those injuries&quot;, and also Renzo Ulivieri, who stated that &quot;if he had had fewer injuries, he would have won more.&quot; In 2018, Greg Murray of &quot;Football Italia&quot; described Baggio as &quot;one of the greatest football players of all time&quot; but also lamented that &quot;we never saw him at full fitness and are fortunate we got to enjoy him at all.&quot; He summarised Baggio&#x27;s career with the following: &quot;It is perhaps one of football&#x27;s great injustices that Il Divin Codino is best known globally for his penalty miss in the Final of the 1994 World Cup against Brazil. For fans of Serie A, Baggio is recognised as the best of his generation, despite a career that was blighted by injury and clashes with his Coaches.&quot; He also added: Retiring in 2004, it has been suggested that Baggio was a victim of the era in which he lived. As player with transcendent creativity, but physically fragile, he struggled to fit into his Coaches’ plans during a time when tactics and hard work were everything. Had he been born in the current era, where players are far more protected, he would perhaps have achieved even more. It&#x27;s heart-breaking to think what we missed out on, but we’re also grateful to have experienced the Divine Ponytail at all.

Baggio&#x27;s career was affected by many serious injuries, which led to a gradual loss of pace and mobility as his career progressed, as well as increasing weight-gain in the final years of his career, which eventually forced him to undergo a training regime in order to build muscle mass in his legs and prolong his career during his time at Brescia; his continual physical struggles ultimately led him to retire in 2004, which he later described as a &quot;liberation.&quot; Since suffering his first series of career-threatening injuries with Vicenza and Fiorentina in 1985 and 1986, respectively, he was prone to persistent knee problems in particular, which often limited his playing time; injuries led certain pundits, such as Benedetto Ferrara of &quot;La Repubblica&quot; in 2010, to label Baggio as a &quot;superfine talent&quot; but who was also &quot;inconsistent.&quot; In 1995, Maurizio Crosetti, Ferrara&#x27;s colleague, had previously described Baggio as &quot;fragile.&quot; Regarding the injuries that threatened his career as a youngster, and which haggled him until he retired, Baggio wrote in his 2001 autobiography that &quot;all of my professional career, I played it with a leg and a half. Thousands of hours of work to keep alive a leg which, if it were up to her, would diminish each day. I played it without being fully all right, ever, because if I were to play matches only when I felt one-hundred percent I would play three matches a year.&quot; Despite the numerous physical impairments he faced throughout his career, Baggio also stood out for his longevity, and was able to maintain a consistently high level of performance even in the final years of his career with Brescia into his late 30s. In 2004, Sacchi praised Baggio for his strength of character, which he believed even surpassed his talent, as it allowed him to overcome his injuries and physical struggles, and ultimately &quot;win [his] personal battles against bad luck.&quot; In 2017, Capello noted that Baggio had the extraordinary willpower to carry on playing despite his physical struggles. Baggio attributes his inner strength to Buddhism.

=== Legacy ===

Widely considered to be one of the greatest footballers of all time, Baggio came fourth in the 1999 FIFA Player of the Century internet poll, and was ranked 16th in &quot;World Soccer&quot;&#x27;s list of the 100 greatest footballers of the 20th century, the highest ranked Italian player; in IFFHS&#x27;s election for the best player of the 20th century in the same year, he was elected the ninth-best Italian player and the 53rd-best European player of the Century. He was voted Italy&#x27;s player of the century in 2000. In 2002, Baggio was elected to the FIFA World Cup Dream Team, and in 2003, he was the inaugural winner of the Golden Foot award, awarded for ability and personality. In 2004, he was named by Pelé in the FIFA 100 list of the world&#x27;s greatest living players, and was voted 24th in the online UEFA Golden Jubilee Poll, celebrating the best European footballers of the past 50 years. In 2010, Baggio was named one of the 50 greatest Juventus legends. In 2011, he was the first footballer to be inducted into the Italian Football Hall of Fame. In a 2014 FIFA poll, Baggio was voted the ninth-greatest number 10 of all time, and later that year he was ranked 24th in &quot;The Guardian&quot;&#x27;s list of the 100 greatest World Cup players of all time, ahead of the 2014 World Cup in Brazil.

In 2015, journalists of &quot;La Gazzetta dello Sport&quot; elected the greatest Italian player of all time, with Baggio finishing in second place behind only Gianni Rivera; in a fan poll that was subsequently organised by the newspaper, Baggio was instead voted as the greatest Italian footballer of all time, while Majid Mohamed of &quot;UEFA&quot; ranked him as the twentieth-best player ever not to have won the UEFA Champions League. That same year, &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; also included Baggio at number 12 in their list of &quot;The top 20 overrated football players of all time.&quot; &quot;FourFourTwo&quot; placed Baggio at number 52 in their 2017 list of the &quot;100 Greatest Footballers Ever&quot; and also named him in 2019 as the sixth best player never to win the UEFA Champions League. In July 2019, the same magazine ranked Baggio at number ten in their list of the &quot;101 greatest football players of the last 25 years&quot; since their first edition in the summer of 1994, while in September 2023, he was ranked 27th in their list of the &quot;100 best football players of all time.&quot; In December 2023, Tom Hancock, of the same magazine, placed Baggio at number three, behind only Zidane and Ronaldo, in his list of the greatest footballers of the 1990s. In 2020, Jack Gallagher of 90min.com placed Baggio at number nine in his list of &quot;The 50 Greatest Footballers of All Time&quot;, while Sky Sports ranked him as the fifth-best player ever never to have won the Champions League or European Cup.

== Records and selected statistics ==
Baggio played in 16 World Cup matches for Italy; the Republic of Ireland is the only nation against which he played more than once. He is the joint-highest Italian goalscorer of all time in the World Cup, with nine goals, alongside Paolo Rossi and Christian Vieri. Baggio is the only Italian to have scored in three World Cups (two goals in 1990, five in 1994 and two in 1998). Three of his World Cup goals were scored in the group stage and six were scored during knockout matches. Baggio is the joint fourth-highest scorer for Italy with 27 goals in 56 appearances, with a 0.48 goal per match average. With Baggio, Italy was always eliminated from the World Cup in penalty shootouts: in 1990, in the semi-finals against Argentina; in 1994, in the final against Brazil; and in 1998, in the quarter-finals against France.

Despite his decisive penalty miss in the 1994 World Cup final shoot-out, Baggio is statistically one of the greatest penalty kick specialists in Italian football history, as he scored 85% of his career penalties with only 19 misses, scoring 108 out of 127 penalties in official matches, the most in Italian football history. Baggio scored 10 with Vicenza, 25 with Fiorentina, 38 with Juventus, 5 with Milan, 11 with Bologna, 1 with Inter Milan, 11 with Brescia and 7 with Italy (from 7 attempts, the most goals scored from the spot by a member of the national team). 68 of his penalties were scored in Serie A, from 83 attempts, with an 82% conversion rate, one of the best records in Serie A history. In Serie A, Baggio scored 17 penalties for Fiorentina (from 19 attempts), 25 for Juventus (from 28 attempts), 3 for Milan (from 5 attempts), 11 for Bologna (from 11 attempts), 1 for Inter Milan (from 2 attempts), and 11 for Brescia (from 18 attempts). Baggio has scored penalties for six different Serie A clubs. Four of his fifteen misses in Serie A were then scored on rebounds. Behind Totti, Baggio has scored the most penalties in Serie A history. Of his other penalties, 8 were scored in Serie C (from 8 attempts), 8 in European competitions (from 9 attempts), and 17 in the Coppa Italia (from 20 attempts). In shoot-outs, Baggio converted three of four career penalties: one in the UEFA Cup with Fiorentina, and the other two with Italy at the World Cup; in World Cup shootouts, Baggio scored twice (1990 and 1998), with his only miss in 1994.

Although he never won the Serie A top goalscorer title, Baggio is currently the seventh all-time highest scorer in Serie A, with 205 goals in 452 appearances. Of these goals, 96 were decisive (either equalisers or match winners). Alongside Totti, Baggio has also scored the fourth-highest number of free-kicks in Serie A with 21 goals; ahead of him are only Alessando Del Piero, Andrea Pirlo, and Siniša Mihajlović. Of his open play goals in Serie A, 84 were with his right foot, 26 with his left, and 6 were headers. He also assisted 123 goals in Serie A, making him the second–highest assist provider of all time in Serie A, behind only Totti. He is the fourth-highest scoring Italian in all competitions, behind Del Piero, Giueseppe Meazza and Silvio Piola, with 318 professional career goals in 699 appearances. Alongside Totti and Alberto Gilardino, he has scored against the most different clubs (38) in Serie A. With eight hat-tricks in Serie A, he has also scored the joint-tenth most hat-tricks in the history of the Italian league, alongside Amedeo Amadei, Giampiero Boniperti, Hernán Crespo, and Marco van Basten. Throughout his career, including friendlies, Baggio scored 425 goals.

== After retirement ==

In August 2010, Baggio was appointed president of the technical sector of the Italian Football Federation, replacing his former Italy national team manager Azeglio Vicini. On 23 January 2013, Baggio stepped down from the position, stating the federation had ignored his ideas about improving the system and focusing on youth talent, which prompted him to resign.

Baggio obtained his Italy Category 2 Coaching License (UEFA A License) in mid-2011, which made him eligible to coach Lega Pro teams, or work as vice-coach in Serie A and Serie B. On 5 July 2012, Baggio obtained his Category 1 UEFA Pro Coaching Licence at Coverciano, which officially allows him to coach a professional Serie A club.

== Outside of professional football ==
=== Personal life ===
After his career threatening injury in 1985, Baggio, formerly a Roman Catholic, converted to Buddhism, practicing Nichiren Buddhism, and is a member of the Soka Gakkai International Buddhist organisation. The captain&#x27;s armband that he wore throughout his career bore the colours of this religious school (blue, yellow, and red) and the Japanese motto &quot;We win. We must win&quot; in ideograms of the language. Despite his conversion, he married his long-time girlfriend Andreina Fabbi in 1989 in a traditional Roman Catholic ceremony. They have a daughter, Valentina (1990), and two sons, Mattia (1994) and Leonardo (2005).

Between 1991 and 2012, Baggio was the owner of a sporting goods store in Thiene, Vicenza, called &quot;Baggio Sport&quot;, which he was eventually forced to close due to losses as a result of the 2008 recession.

In 2001, Baggio wrote an autobiography entitled &quot;&quot; (literally &quot;A Door in the Sky&quot;, also known as &quot;A Goal in the Sky&quot;), including details about his career, childhood, religion, personal life and rifts with managers. It won the award for best football book at the 2002 Serie A Awards.

Baggio has close ties with Argentina; he speaks Spanish and owns a ranch property in Rivera, where he enjoys hunting wild game. In March 2008, he gave a lengthy interview with &quot;La Gazzetta Dello Sport&quot;, in which he revealed that he came to support Argentine club Boca Juniors due to their passionate fanbase.

In June 2024, Baggio sustained minor injuries during a robbery at his villa near Vicenza.

=== Philanthropy ===
On 16 October 2002, Baggio was named a Goodwill Ambassador of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Through the organisation, Baggio helped to fund hospitals, raise money for the victims of the Haiti earthquake, contribute to tackling bird flu, and was involved in the Burmese pro-democracy movement, which supported the opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi and her release from prison. Baggio was awarded the 2010 Man of Peace title in Hiroshima, presented by the World Summit of Nobel Peace Laureates in recognition of his charitable work and contribution to social justice and peace.

On 8 October 2008, Baggio appeared in a charity match between Milan and Fiorentina, which had been organised in honour of his former Fiorentina teammate Stefano Borgonovo to raise money for his foundation, his treatment and for ALS research. In 2014, Baggio was one of the many celebrities to take part in the &quot;ALS Ice Bucket Challenge&quot; to raise awareness about the disease and funds for ALS research.

On 1 September 2014, Baggio took part in the &quot;Match for Peace&quot;, which was played at the Stadio Olimpico in Rome, with the proceeds being donated to charity. Baggio set up Juan Iturbe&#x27;s goal and scored from a Diego Maradona assist. On 25 October 2014, Baggio participated in the opening of the SGI Ikeda Cultural Center in Corsico, on the outskirts of Milan. It is the largest Buddhist center in Europe.

=== Media and popular culture ===
In 1994, Italian satirist Corrado Guzzanti parodied Baggio&#x27;s advertisement for Italian Petrol Company IP prior to the 1994 World Cup. Italian poet Giovanni Raboni composed the sonnet &quot;Lode a Baggio&quot; in a tribute to him. He has been referenced in several songs, such as &quot;Baggio, Baggio&quot; by Lucio Dalla, &quot;Marmellata n. 25&quot; by Cesare Cremonini and &quot;Baggio&quot; by Miles Kane.

Baggio has featured in two Italian commercials which reference his infamous penalty miss in the 1994 World Cup final. The first was made for Wind in 2000, and shows Baggio scoring the final penalty to win the tournament. The second, made for Johnnie Walker in 2001, showed how he managed to conquer his grief from the miss by believing in himself and scoring the equalising penalty against Chile in the 1998 World Cup. He has featured in several Diadora commercials, as he endorsed their products. In July 2017, Diadora teamed up with Baggio once again to launch the new Signature Match Winner RB Capsule Collection.

Baggio is popular in Japan, and has held close ties with the country since his conversion to Buddhism. He has endorsed several Japanese football video games, such as Human Entertainment&#x27;s &quot;Super Formation Soccer 95: della Serie A&quot;, and Sega&#x27;s &quot;Virtua Pro Football&quot; and &quot;Let&#x27;s Make a Soccer Team!&quot;. An animated version of himself appeared in the Japanese football cartoon &quot;Captain Tsubasa&quot;, best known in Italy as &quot;Che Campioni: Holly &amp; Benji&quot;.

In the Channel 4 sitcom &quot;Father Ted&quot;, Baggio (and Alessandro Costacurta) is mentioned during the 1995 episode &quot;Grant Unto Him Eternal Rest&quot; by Father Dougal McGuire (portrayed by Ardal O&#x27;Hanlon), who, when prompted to say the last rites in Latin, ends up saying the footballers&#x27; names. (This stems from Graham Linehan and O&#x27;Hanlon being fans of &quot;Football Italia&quot;). In the music video for the 2010 World Cup song &quot;Waka Waka (This Time for Africa)&quot; by Shakira, footage of Baggio&#x27;s goal against Spain and his penalty miss from the 1994 World Cup are shown.

Throughout his career, Baggio has been nicknamed the &quot;Divin&#x27; Codino&quot; (&quot;Divine Ponytail&quot; in Italian, a reference to the iconic hairstyle he wore for a large part of his career as well as his playing ability and Buddhist beliefs) and Robi, or Roby, by his fans. An alter-ego of his is referenced in the Italian children&#x27;s comics of &quot;Mickey Mouse&quot; and &quot;Duck Tales&quot; (Topolino) in the volume &quot;Topolino e il Giallo alla World Cup&quot; in which he is known as Roberto Paggio. In 2011, Italian sports newspaper &quot;La Gazzetta dello Sport&quot; issued a collection of DVDs entitled &quot;Io Che Sarò Roberto Baggio&quot; recounting his career. Baggio&#x27;s impact on football has been celebrated with the release of an online game called &quot;Baggio&#x27;s Magical Kicks&quot;, in which players try to replicate his accuracy on free-kicks and penalties. In 2015, the arcade game company Konami announced Baggio would feature in their football video game &quot;Pro Evolution Soccer 2016&quot; as one of the new myClub Legends. On 3 August 2018, EA Sports announced on their official Twitter account that Baggio would feature in EA Sports&#x27; football video game &quot;FIFA 19&quot; as one of the new Ultimate Team Icons.

In 2019, Netflix announced the development of a documentary on Roberto Baggio in partnership with Mediaset. In March 2021, Netflix released the trailer of a docudrama film on Baggio&#x27;s career, entitled &quot;&quot;, which was released on 26 May 2021; Andrea Arcangeli portrayed Baggio.

== Career statistics ==
=== Club ===


=== International ===
:&quot;Scores and results list Italy&#x27;s goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Baggio goal.&quot;

== Honours ==
Juventus
*Serie A: 1994–95
*Coppa Italia: 1994–95
*UEFA Cup: 1992–93

AC Milan
*Serie A: 1995–96

Italy
*FIFA World Cup runner-up: 1994; third place 1990

Individual
* Guerin d&#x27;Oro (Serie C best player): 1985
* Bravo Award: 1990
* UEFA Cup Winners&#x27; Cup top scorer: 1990–91 (9 goals)
* &quot;World Soccer&quot;&#x27;s World Player of the Year: 1993
* Ballon d&#x27;Or: 1993 
** 2nd place: 1994 
** 8th place: 1990
* FIFA World Player of the Year: 1993 
** 3rd place: 1994
** 5th place: 1995
* Onze d&#x27;Or: 1993 
** Onze de Bronze: 1994 
** Onze d&#x27;Argent: 1995
* Onze de Onze: 1993, 1994, 1995
* FIFA World Cup Silver Ball: 1994
* FIFA World Cup All-Star Team: 1994
* Don Balón Award: 1994
* Super Onze d&#x27;Or (4th place): 1995
* Serie A top assist-provider: 1995–96 (12 assists)
* &#x27;s Best 50 Players of All Time: 1996
* &quot;Il Venerdì&quot;&#x27;s Best 100 Players of All Time: 1997 (32nd place)
* &quot;World Soccer&quot;&#x27;s Greatest Players of the 20th Century: 1999 (16th place)
* &quot;Guerin Sportivo&quot;&#x27;s Greatest Players of the 20th Century: 1999 (27th place)
* IFFHS Italian Player of the 20th Century: 1999 (9th place)
* IFFHS European Player of the 20th Century: 1999 (53rd place)
* &quot;France Football&quot;&#x27;s Football Player of the Century: 1999 (18th place)
* &quot;Placar&quot;&#x27;s Best 100 Players of All Time: 1999 (91st place)
* FIFA XI: 2000, 2002
* Guerin d&#x27;Oro: 2001
* Premio Nazionale Carriera Esemplare &quot;Gaetano Scirea&quot;: 2001
* Gran Galà del Calcio &#x27;Best Football Book&#x27; Award: 2001
* FIFA World Cup Dream Team: 2002
* Gran Galà del Calcio &#x27;Serie A Most Loved Player&#x27; Award: 2002
* Golden Foot: 2003
* FIFA 100: 2004
* UEFA Golden Jubilee Poll: 2004 (24th place)
* Giuseppe Prisco Award: 2004
* San Siro Gentleman Nazionale Award: 2004
* &quot;Placar&quot;&#x27;s Best 100 World Cup Players: 2005 (24th place)
* Association of Football Statisticians&#x27;s Best 100 Players of All Time: 2007 (79th place)
* AC Milan Hall of Fame
* Man of Peace: 2010
* Italian Football Hall of Fame: 2011
* Juventus F.C. 50 Club Legends: 2011
* Gentleman di Platino: 2015
* Walk of Fame of Italian sport: 2015
* IFFHS&#x27; 48 Football Men&#x27;s Legend Players

Orders
:* 5th Class / Knight: &quot;Cavaliere Ordine al Merito della Repubblica Italiana&quot;: 1991

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 

== External links ==
* 
* Profile at FIGC.it </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q67964" start="0" end="14" title="Roberto Baggio" label="Roberto Baggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="75" end="85" title="Association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109" end="123" title="Forward (association football)#Second striker" label="second striker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="134" end="154" title="Midfielder#Attacking midfielder" label="attacking midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q201897" start="281" end="308" title="Italian Football Federation" label="Italian Football Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201458" start="340" end="349" title="playmaker" label="playmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379266" start="354" end="363" title="Direct free kick" label="set piece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756277" start="393" end="400" title="Curl (football)" label="curling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="413" end="422" title="Dribbling#Association football" label="dribbling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="550" end="576" title="FIFA Player of the Century#FIFA Internet vote" label="FIFA Player of the Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q115786" start="614" end="639" title="FIFA World Cup Dream Team" label="FIFA World Cup Dream Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q182529" start="671" end="700" title="FIFA World Player of the Year" label="FIFA World Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q166177" start="713" end="729" title="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q12897" start="756" end="760" title="Pelé" label="Pelé"/>
<link wikidata="Q485048" start="768" end="776" title="FIFA 100" label="FIFA 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="849" end="854" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="886" end="911" title="Italy national football team#Top goalscorers" label="fourth-highest goalscorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="993" end="1012" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q101751" start="1021" end="1035" title="1994 FIFA World Cup" label="1994 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q389104" start="1053" end="1062" title="1994 FIFA World Cup Final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1087" end="1098" title="FIFA World Cup awards#Golden Ball" label="Silver Ball"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1120" end="1143" title="FIFA World Cup awards#All-Star Team" label="World Cup All-Star Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="1277" end="1283" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="1330" end="1340" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cups"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1383" end="1435" title="Italy national football team records#Goalscorers" label="most goals scored in World Cup tournaments for Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178628" start="1448" end="1459" title="Paolo Rossi" label="Paolo Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q188696" start="1464" end="1479" title="Christian Vieri" label="Christian Vieri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1594" end="1643" title="Football records in Italy#Highest-scoring Italian players in all competitions" label="fifth-highest scoring Italian in all competitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804" start="1778" end="1785" title="Serie A" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1798" end="1847" title="Football records in Italy#Goalscoring" label="seventh-highest goalscorer of all time in Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052" start="1888" end="1898" title="ACF Fiorentina" label="Fiorentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="1902" end="1910" title="Juventus FC" label="Juventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913307" start="1917" end="1942" title="World football transfer record" label="world record transfer fee"/>
<link wikidata="Q169918" start="1977" end="1989" title="Coppa Italia" label="Coppa Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="1997" end="2005" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q56542463" start="2068" end="2075" title="L.R. Vicenza Virtus" label="Vicenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="2099" end="2107" title="A.C. Milan" label="AC Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893" start="2109" end="2116" title="Bologna F.C. 1909" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q631" start="2118" end="2129" title="Inter Milan" label="Inter Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651" start="2135" end="2142" title="Brescia Calcio" label="Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q653122" start="2196" end="2204" title="Ponytail" label="Ponytail"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="2291" end="2299" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841897" start="2339" end="2358" title="FAO Goodwill Ambassador" label="Goodwill Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="2366" end="2399" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q83710" start="2467" end="2478" title="Golden Foot" label="Golden Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746404" start="2547" end="2559" title="Man of Peace" label="Man of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="2575" end="2592" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847685" start="2673" end="2702" title="Italian Football Hall of Fame" label="Italian Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q48011" start="2749" end="2757" title="Caldogno" label="Caldogno"/>
<link wikidata="Q988373" start="2857" end="2868" title="Eddy Baggio" label="Eddy Baggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q56542463" start="3259" end="3266" title="L.R. Vicenza Virtus" label="Vicenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q677397" start="3473" end="3481" title="Serie C1" label="Serie C1"/>
<link wikidata="Q459794" start="3541" end="3549" title="Piacenza Calcio 1919" label="Piacenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957670" start="3675" end="3695" title="1983–84 Serie C1" label="the following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651" start="3749" end="3756" title="Brescia Calcio" label="Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252836" start="3861" end="3881" title="Coppa Italia Serie C" label="Coppa Italia Serie C"/>
<link wikidata="Q289289" start="3905" end="3912" title="Legnano Calcio" label="Legnano"/>
<link wikidata="Q169918" start="3951" end="3963" title="Coppa Italia" label="Coppa Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674" start="4011" end="4018" title="U.S. Città di Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q284490" start="4044" end="4056" title="1984–85 Coppa Italia" label="Coppa Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6703" start="4084" end="4090" title="Empoli F.C." label="Empoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q16160060" start="4122" end="4138" title="1984–85 Lanerossi Vicenza season" label="1984–85 Serie C1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645783" start="4160" end="4172" title="Bruno Giorgi (footballer)" label="Bruno Giorgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q194052" start="4250" end="4257" title="Serie B" label="Serie B"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052" start="4346" end="4356" title="ACF Fiorentina" label="Fiorentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q47526" start="4413" end="4417" title="Zico (footballer)" label="Zico"/>
<link wikidata="Q611127" start="4579" end="4605" title="anterior cruciate ligament" label="anterior cruciate ligament"/>
<link wikidata="Q289713" start="4669" end="4675" title="Rimini Calcio" label="Rimini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625958" start="5346" end="5358" title="1985–86 A.C. Fiorentina season" label="first season"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804" start="5399" end="5406" title="Serie A" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q839986" start="5522" end="5534" title="1985–86 Coppa Italia" label="Coppa Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804" start="5617" end="5624" title="Serie A" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457" start="5700" end="5709" title="U.C. Sampdoria" label="Sampdoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q756120" start="5787" end="5795" title="1986–87 UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q219703" start="5810" end="5818" title="Boavista F.C." label="Boavista"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625960" start="5992" end="5998" title="1986–87 A.C. Fiorentina season" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515" start="6104" end="6118" title="Diego Maradona" label="Diego Maradona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641" start="6126" end="6132" title="S.S.C. Napoli" label="Napoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q839718" start="6251" end="6263" title="1988–89 Coppa Italia" label="Coppa Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625964" start="6289" end="6303" title="1988–89 A.C. Fiorentina season" label="1988–89 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q218369" start="6318" end="6337" title="Sven-Göran Eriksson" label="Sven-Göran Eriksson"/>
<link wikidata="Q727425" start="6496" end="6503" title="1988–89 Serie A" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q461306" start="6534" end="6548" title="capocannoniere" label="capocannoniere"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="6651" end="6659" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q515901" start="6693" end="6707" title="Roberto Pruzzo" label="Roberto Pruzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739" start="6742" end="6746" title="A.S. Roma" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q538794" start="6795" end="6812" title="Stefano Borgonovo" label="Stefano Borgonovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352078" start="7077" end="7092" title="Miguel Montuori" label="Miguel Montuori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201458" start="7177" end="7186" title="Playmaker" label="number 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625963" start="7372" end="7386" title="1989–90 A.C. Fiorentina season" label="1989–90 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q744369" start="7415" end="7434" title="1990 UEFA Cup Final" label="1990 UEFA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="7476" end="7484" title="Juventus FC" label="Juventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q179075" start="7583" end="7594" title="FC Dynamo Kyiv" label="Dynamo Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q115921120" start="7660" end="7681" title="UEFA club competitions" label="European competitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691960" start="7738" end="7746" title="Penalty shootout (football)" label="shootout"/>
<link wikidata="Q8701" start="7755" end="7770" title="Atlético Madrid" label="Atlético Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q483629" start="7864" end="7880" title="Marco van Basten" label="Marco van Basten"/>
<link wikidata="Q554495" start="7902" end="7913" title="Bravo Award" label="Bravo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983575" start="7997" end="8018" title="1990 Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="1990 Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q55602924" start="8188" end="8219" title="ACF Fiorentina–Juventus F.C. rivalry" label="one of Fiorentina&amp;#x27;s rivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913307" start="8251" end="8272" title="World football transfer record" label="world record transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581895" start="8320" end="8335" title="Squad number (association football)" label="number 10 shirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261" start="8354" end="8368" title="Michel Platini" label="Michel Platini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="8429" end="8437" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3763371" start="8671" end="8691" title="Gianmatteo Mareggini" label="Gianmatteo Mareggini"/>
<link wikidata="Q723843" start="8720" end="8737" title="Luigi De Agostini" label="Luigi De Agostini"/>
<link wikidata="Q844321" start="9182" end="9194" title="1990–91 Serie A" label="first season"/>
<link wikidata="Q967765" start="9307" end="9321" title="Luigi Maifredi" label="Luigi Maifredi"/>
<link wikidata="Q40241" start="9472" end="9502" title="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q838680" start="9503" end="9512" title="1990–91 European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163" start="9659" end="9671" title="Johan Cruyff" label="Johan Cruyff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="9679" end="9688" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q839970" start="9772" end="9784" title="1990–91 Coppa Italia" label="Coppa Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220409" start="9867" end="9886" title="1990 Supercoppa Italiana" label="Supercoppa Italiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609" start="10055" end="10060" title="S.S. Lazio" label="Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q838760" start="10089" end="10102" title="1991–92 Serie A" label="second season"/>
<link wikidata="Q44420" start="10122" end="10141" title="Giovanni Trapattoni" label="Giovanni Trapattoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q461306" start="10205" end="10221" title="Capocannoniere" label="top scorer title"/>
<link wikidata="Q183108" start="10300" end="10313" title="Fabio Capello" label="Fabio Capello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="10321" end="10329" title="A.C. Milan" label="AC Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2693" start="10349" end="10354" title="Parma Calcio 1913" label="Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q734392" start="10362" end="10380" title="1991–92 Coppa Italia" label="Coppa Italia final"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10816" end="10820" title="List of Juventus F.C. players#Club captains" label="team"/>
<link wikidata="Q715772" start="10821" end="10828" title="Captain (association football)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q843573" start="10837" end="10851" title="1992–93 Serie A" label="1992–93 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q268859" start="10961" end="10969" title="1992–93 UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q840485" start="10970" end="10975" title="1993 UEFA Cup Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q41420" start="11054" end="11071" title="Borussia Dortmund" label="Borussia Dortmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q483020" start="11181" end="11200" title="Paris Saint-Germain F.C." label="Paris Saint-Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q731778" start="11340" end="11352" title="1992–93 Coppa Italia" label="Coppa Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q137523" start="11378" end="11390" title="Derby della Mole" label="local rivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2768" start="11403" end="11409" title="Torino F.C." label="Torino"/>
<link wikidata="Q155919" start="11604" end="11618" title="Andreas Möller" label="Andreas Möller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798" start="11743" end="11750" title="Udinese Calcio" label="Udinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q166177" start="12347" end="12378" title="European Footballer of the Year" label="European Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q182529" start="12425" end="12454" title="FIFA World Player of the Year" label="FIFA World Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049896" start="12487" end="12501" title="Onze d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Onze d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q729035" start="12511" end="12548" title="World Soccer (magazine)" label="World Soccer Player of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q843569" start="12558" end="12572" title="1993–94 Serie A" label="1993–94 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q239688" start="12624" end="12639" title="Gianluca Vialli" label="Gianluca Vialli"/>
<link wikidata="Q299493" start="12643" end="12661" title="Fabrizio Ravanelli" label="Fabrizio Ravanelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q523877" start="12927" end="12935" title="1993–94 UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900" start="12944" end="12952" title="Cagliari Calcio" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074" start="13018" end="13023" title="Genoa C.F.C." label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432645" start="13328" end="13349" title="1994 Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="1994 Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q994921" start="13364" end="13398" title="1994 FIFA World Player of the Year" label="1994 FIFA World Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q838282" start="13449" end="13463" title="1994–95 Serie A" label="1994–95 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q43304" start="13496" end="13510" title="Marcello Lippi" label="Marcello Lippi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13621" end="13636" title="Formation (association football)#4–3–3" label="4–3–3 formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8428" start="13758" end="13764" title="Padova Calcio" label="Padova"/>
<link wikidata="Q428779" start="13970" end="13982" title="1994–95 Coppa Italia" label="Coppa Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609" start="14002" end="14007" title="S.S. Lazio" label="Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="14011" end="14015" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q139399" start="14200" end="14206" title="Foggia Calcio" label="Foggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23718511" start="14346" end="14354" title="scudetto" label="scudetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="14534" end="14539" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q428779" start="14583" end="14595" title="1994–95 Coppa Italia" label="Coppa Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q531197" start="14740" end="14754" title="1994–95 UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q607424" start="14945" end="14959" title="1995 UEFA Cup Final" label="UEFA Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056569" start="15135" end="15151" title="1995 Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q994923" start="15176" end="15216" title="1995 FIFA World Player of the Year" label="1995 FIFA World Player of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q173139" start="15280" end="15291" title="George Weah" label="George Weah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15313" end="15372" title="List of Juventus F.C. records and statistics#All-time top 10 goalscorers" label="Juventus&amp;#x27; ninth-highest goalscorer in all competitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q62252" start="15451" end="15466" title="Pietro Anastasi" label="Pietro Anastasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q67990" start="15885" end="15900" title="Roberto Bettega" label="Roberto Bettega"/>
<link wikidata="Q967846" start="15905" end="15920" title="Umberto Agnelli" label="Umberto Agnelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q60643" start="16142" end="16155" title="Luciano Moggi" label="Luciano Moggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="16316" end="16324" title="A.C. Milan" label="AC Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11860" start="16334" end="16351" title="Silvio Berlusconi" label="Silvio Berlusconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q631" start="16519" end="16530" title="Inter Milan" label="Inter Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="16532" end="16543" title="Real Madrid C.F." label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="16557" end="16571" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="16578" end="16595" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="16600" end="16616" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q644108" start="16819" end="16836" title="1995–96 Serie A" label="the Serie A title"/>
<link wikidata="Q644108" start="17055" end="17062" title="1995–96 Serie A" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q772832" start="17830" end="17845" title="1996–97 Serie A" label="1996–97 Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q15149" start="17870" end="17883" title="Óscar Tabárez" label="Óscar Tabárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q294259" start="18451" end="18464" title="Arrigo Sacchi" label="Arrigo Sacchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q101751" start="18538" end="18552" title="1994 FIFA World Cup" label="1994 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q839898" start="18954" end="18966" title="1996–97 Coppa Italia" label="Coppa Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="18984" end="19005" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q196515" start="19019" end="19033" title="1996–97 UEFA Champions League" label="1996–97 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977775" start="19149" end="19173" title="1996 Supercoppa Italiana" label="1996 Supercoppa Italiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q174614" start="19680" end="19695" title="Carlo Ancelotti" label="Carlo Ancelotti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19891" end="19906" title="Formation (association football)#4–4–2" label="4–4–2 formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9354" start="19999" end="20014" title="Gianfranco Zola" label="Gianfranco Zola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893" start="20100" end="20107" title="Bologna F.C. 1909" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="20175" end="20194" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q865552" start="20300" end="20307" title="1997–98 Serie A" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q182068" start="20417" end="20435" title="UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="UEFA Intertoto Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q839799" start="20669" end="20681" title="1997–98 Coppa Italia" label="Coppa Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933080" start="20817" end="20831" title="Renzo Ulivieri" label="Renzo Ulivieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q608401" start="21158" end="21176" title="Giancarlo Marocchi" label="Giancarlo Marocchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6703" start="21259" end="21265" title="Empoli F.C." label="Empoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165632" start="21327" end="21343" title="1998 Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q596167" start="21352" end="21381" title="1998 FIFA World Player of the Year" label="FIFA World Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q13493765" start="21476" end="21514" title="Serie A Italian Footballer of the Year" label="Serie A Italian Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q930810" start="21519" end="21549" title="Serie A Footballer of the Year" label="Serie A Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q529207" start="21597" end="21604" title="Ronaldo (Brazilian footballer)" label="Ronaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q279736" start="21766" end="21787" title="1998–99 UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21855" end="21918" title="1998–99 UEFA Champions League#Second qualifying round" label="second round of the qualifying stages of the latter competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q223823" start="21981" end="21990" title="Skonto FC" label="Skonto FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q115970" start="21994" end="21998" title="Arena Garibaldi – Stadio Romeo Anconetani" label="Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537282" start="22103" end="22115" title="Luigi Simoni" label="Luigi Simoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q342698" start="22117" end="22131" title="Mircea Lucescu" label="Mircea Lucescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q203781" start="22137" end="22148" title="Roy Hodgson" label="Roy Hodgson"/>
<link wikidata="Q754684" start="22339" end="22353" title="1998–99 Serie A" label="1998–99 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q839833" start="22443" end="22455" title="1998–99 Coppa Italia" label="Coppa Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q927336" start="22887" end="22906" title="1998 UEFA Champions League Final" label="defending champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q755113" start="22947" end="22963" title="1999–2000 Serie A" label="1999–2000 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q188696" start="23425" end="23440" title="Christian Vieri" label="Christian Vieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q168287" start="23445" end="23462" title="Christian Panucci" label="Christian Panucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q839844" start="23661" end="23673" title="1999–2000 Coppa Italia" label="Coppa Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q862108" start="23709" end="23721" title="Derby della Madonnina" label="local rivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q22980158" start="23803" end="23808" title="2000 Coppa Italia Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q8639" start="24015" end="24028" title="Hellas Verona F.C." label="Hellas Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q651988" start="24752" end="24775" title="La Gazzetta dello Sport" label="La Gazzetta dello Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q296909" start="24950" end="24965" title="Massimo Moratti" label="Massimo Moratti"/>
<link wikidata="Q8476" start="25295" end="25302" title="Reggina Calcio" label="Reggina"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="25340" end="25347" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042327" start="25452" end="25465" title="Carlo Mazzone" label="Carlo Mazzone"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="25591" end="25605" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q543205" start="25830" end="25844" title="2000–01 Serie A" label="2000–01 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q674465" start="26047" end="26059" title="2000–01 Coppa Italia" label="Coppa Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q603713" start="26142" end="26165" title="2001 UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="2001 UEFA Intertoto Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973694" start="26350" end="26371" title="2001 Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="2001 Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201458" start="26456" end="26465" title="playmaker" label="playmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q646222" start="26494" end="26511" title="Guerin d&amp;#x27;oro" label="Guerin d&amp;#x27;oro"/>
<link wikidata="Q313033" start="26572" end="26587" title="Guerin Sportivo" label="Guerin Sportivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q754493" start="26710" end="26724" title="2001–02 Serie A" label="2001–02 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q501245" start="26974" end="26981" title="A.C. Venezia" label="Venezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q901392" start="27317" end="27329" title="2001–02 Coppa Italia" label="Coppa Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20110" start="28127" end="28142" title="Francesco Totti" label="Francesco Totti"/>
<link wikidata="Q562201" start="28476" end="28491" title="Gianni De Biasi" label="Gianni De Biasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q691294" start="28542" end="28556" title="2002–03 Serie A" label="2002–03 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q925079" start="28612" end="28630" title="2003 UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="UEFA Intertoto Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16344" start="28745" end="28752" title="A.C. Perugia Calcio" label="Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q472159" start="28777" end="28786" title="Igli Tare" label="Igli Tare"/>
<link wikidata="Q755519" start="28809" end="28823" title="2003–04 Serie A" label="2003–04 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q839269" start="29317" end="29337" title="2003–04 Coppa Italia" label="Coppa Italia winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q133566" start="29509" end="29517" title="San Siro" label="San Siro"/>
<link wikidata="Q381207" start="29612" end="29621" title="Matuzalém" label="Matuzalém"/>
<link wikidata="Q483027" start="29799" end="29812" title="Paolo Maldini" label="Paolo Maldini"/>
<link wikidata="Q110111" start="30398" end="30412" title="Gunnar Nordahl" label="Gunnar Nordahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q62182" start="30431" end="30444" title="José Altafini" label="José Altafini"/>
<link wikidata="Q167281" start="30450" end="30467" title="Antonio Di Natale" label="Antonio Di Natale"/>
<link wikidata="Q930912" start="30530" end="30537" title="Retired numbers in football (soccer)" label="retired"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="30976" end="30989" title="Italy national football team" label="national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q624" start="31077" end="31086" title="Alessandro Del Piero" label="Del Piero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873502" start="31167" end="31176" title="Italy national under-16 football team" label="Italy U16"/>
<link wikidata="Q296350" start="31231" end="31245" title="Cesare Maldini" label="Cesare Maldini"/>
<link wikidata="Q922698" start="31272" end="31286" title="Italy national under-21 football team" label="Italy under-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q678582" start="31301" end="31312" title="Switzerland national under-21 football team" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q444684" start="31513" end="31527" title="Azeglio Vicini" label="Azeglio Vicini"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="31637" end="31648" title="Netherlands national football team" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q134916" start="31795" end="31802" title="Uruguay national football team" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="31835" end="31841" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q180845" start="31935" end="31943" title="Bulgaria national football team" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q493607" start="32052" end="32068" title="Andrea Carnevale" label="Andrea Carnevale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339029" start="32132" end="32145" title="Nikolay Iliev" label="Nikolay Iliev"/>
<link wikidata="Q295307" start="32720" end="32739" title="Salvatore Schillaci" label="Salvatore Schillaci"/>
<link wikidata="Q182072" start="32949" end="32963" title="Czechoslovakia national football team" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q445694" start="33050" end="33067" title="Giuseppe Giannini" label="Giuseppe Giannini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313922" start="33206" end="33211" title="Dummy (football)" label="feint"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="33340" end="33344" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q163547" start="33703" end="33722" title="Republic of Ireland national football team" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="33905" end="33914" title="Argentina national football team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q316205" start="34152" end="34168" title="Sergio Goycochea" label="Sergio Goycochea"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="34205" end="34212" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q244799" start="34357" end="34370" title="Peter Shilton" label="Peter Shilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q312143" start="34372" end="34383" title="David Platt (footballer)" label="David Platt"/>
<link wikidata="Q769780" start="34507" end="34518" title="Paul Parker (footballer)" label="Paul Parker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34663" end="34674" title="FIFA World Cup awards#Golden Boot" label="Golden Shoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q461305" start="34752" end="34764" title="Nicola Berti" label="Nicola Berti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864350" start="34971" end="34994" title="UEFA Euro 1992 qualifying Group 3" label="Euro 1992 Qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q161810" start="35091" end="35101" title="UEFA Euro 1992" label="tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q189275" start="35157" end="35169" title="Soviet Union national football team" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589411" start="35298" end="35340" title="1994 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA – Group 1)" label="qualifying campaign for the 1994 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q328770" start="35533" end="35544" title="Dino Baggio" label="Dino Baggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q267245" start="35601" end="35609" title="Portugal national football team" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q165141" start="35766" end="35777" title="Switzerland national football team" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645478" start="35943" end="35963" title="List of Italy national football team captains" label="Italy&amp;#x27;s captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q776955" start="35971" end="35996" title="1994 FIFA World Cup qualification" label="1994 World Cup qualifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="36006" end="36013" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="36022" end="36030" title="Scotland national football team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q375365" start="36644" end="36658" title="Giants Stadium" label="Giants Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="36660" end="36670" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="36725" end="36731" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q313480" start="36786" end="36803" title="Gianluca Pagliuca" label="Gianluca Pagliuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q440920" start="36857" end="36873" title="Luca Marchegiani" label="Luca Marchegiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q164089" start="37161" end="37167" title="Mexico national football team" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q356351" start="37394" end="37408" title="Gianni Agnelli" label="Gianni Agnelli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37729" end="37740" title="1994 FIFA World Cup#Round of 16" label="round of 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q181930" start="37773" end="37780" title="Nigeria national football team" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q339850" start="37788" end="37803" title="Foxboro Stadium" label="Foxboro Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="37807" end="37813" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q552965" start="37977" end="37990" title="Roberto Mussi" label="Roberto Mussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q530759" start="38080" end="38097" title="Antonio Benarrivo" label="Antonio Benarrivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q42267" start="38233" end="38238" title="Spain men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q334684" start="38303" end="38319" title="Giuseppe Signori" label="Giuseppe Signori"/>
<link wikidata="Q215963" start="38361" end="38379" title="Andoni Zubizarreta" label="Andoni Zubizarreta"/>
<link wikidata="Q180845" start="38630" end="38638" title="Bulgaria national football team" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q245011" start="38928" end="38946" title="Demetrio Albertini" label="Demetrio Albertini"/>
<link wikidata="Q389104" start="39000" end="39005" title="1994 FIFA World Cup Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="39014" end="39020" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q582280" start="39028" end="39037" title="Rose Bowl (stadium)" label="Rose Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q485176" start="39041" end="39061" title="Pasadena, California" label="Pasadena, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q295891" start="39260" end="39276" title="Cláudio Taffarel" label="Cláudio Taffarel"/>
<link wikidata="Q189984" start="40368" end="40381" title="Franco Baresi" label="Franco Baresi"/>
<link wikidata="Q352826" start="40386" end="40401" title="Daniele Massaro" label="Daniele Massaro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40516" end="40527" title="FIFA World Cup awards#Golden Ball" label="Silver Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q178649" start="40580" end="40587" title="Romário" label="Romário"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40696" end="40707" title="FIFA World Cup awards#Golden Boot" label="Bronze Boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q352241" start="40723" end="40739" title="Kennet Andersson" label="Kennet Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40778" end="40801" title="FIFA World Cup awards#All-Star Team" label="World Cup All-Star Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q166177" start="40837" end="40853" title="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q182529" start="40916" end="40945" title="FIFA World Player of the Year" label="FIFA World Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517311" start="41076" end="41086" title="Telelatino" label="Telelatino"/>
<link wikidata="Q552359" start="41340" end="41349" title="BBC Sport" label="BBC Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q46938" start="41770" end="41785" title="1986 FIFA World Cup" label="1986 tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046181" start="41865" end="41872" title="ESPN FC" label="ESPN FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q172221" start="42460" end="42468" title="Slovenia national football team" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q837987" start="42474" end="42500" title="UEFA Euro 1996 qualification" label="Euro 1996 qualifying match"/>
<link wikidata="Q134479" start="42550" end="42557" title="Croatia national football team" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180563" start="43015" end="43024" title="UEFA Euro 1996" label="Euro 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q345026" start="43171" end="43184" title="Enrico Chiesa" label="Enrico Chiesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q754575" start="43345" end="43374" title="Football at the 1996 Summer Olympics" label="Italian Olympic squad in 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q949455" start="43498" end="43518" title="1998 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA)" label="World Cup qualifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q166196" start="43533" end="43539" title="Poland national football team" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q172025" start="43825" end="43830" title="Chile national football team" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q295438" start="44062" end="44075" title="Marcelo Salas" label="Marcelo Salas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436039" start="44260" end="44274" title="Ronald Fuentes" label="Ronald Fuentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q175309" start="44775" end="44783" title="Cameroon national football team" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q314053" start="44801" end="44816" title="Luigi Di Biagio" label="Luigi Di Biagio"/>
<link wikidata="Q163534" start="45054" end="45061" title="Austria national football team" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q585252" start="45265" end="45282" title="Francesco Moriero" label="Francesco Moriero"/>
<link wikidata="Q126503" start="45287" end="45302" title="Filippo Inzaghi" label="Filippo Inzaghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="45661" end="45667" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q191139" start="45984" end="45998" title="Fabien Barthez" label="Fabien Barthez"/>
<link wikidata="Q180661" start="46783" end="46792" title="Dino Zoff" label="Dino Zoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q839757" start="46827" end="46852" title="UEFA Euro 2000 qualifying" label="UEFA Euro 2000 qualifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="46887" end="46892" title="Wales national football team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q186252" start="46957" end="46964" title="Belarus national football team" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131239" start="47284" end="47298" title="UEFA Euro 2000" label="UEFA Euro 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q318226" start="47506" end="47519" title="Stefano Fiore" label="Stefano Fiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q250093" start="47521" end="47537" title="Marco Delvecchio" label="Marco Delvecchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q297768" start="47559" end="47576" title="Vincenzo Montella" label="Vincenzo Montella"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="47706" end="47720" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q543842" start="48147" end="48158" title="South Korea national football team" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q102920" start="48225" end="48234" title="UEFA Euro 2004" label="Euro 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q565645" start="48248" end="48260" title="Football at the 2004 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2004 Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q136959" start="48845" end="48861" title="Fabrizio Miccoli" label="Fabrizio Miccoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q178628" start="49183" end="49194" title="Paolo Rossi" label="Paolo Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="49280" end="49284" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q101751" start="49286" end="49290" title="1994 FIFA World Cup" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="49296" end="49310" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="49346" end="49372" title="UEFA European Championship" label="UEFA European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49539" end="49549" title="Playmaker#Advanced playmakers" label="fantasista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427106" start="49862" end="49870" title="Cross (association football)" label="crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141428" start="49930" end="49936" title="Assist (association football)" label="assist"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="49979" end="49993" title="second striker" label="second striker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261" start="50086" end="50100" title="Michel Platini" label="Michel Platini"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="50513" end="50527" title="inside forward" label="inside forward"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50851" end="50856" title="Forward (association football)#Winger" label="flank"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="51040" end="51060" title="attacking midfielder" label="attacking midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="51227" end="51234" title="Striker (association football)" label="striker"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="51485" end="51500" title="wide midfielder" label="wide midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="51513" end="51529" title="central midfield" label="central midfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="51541" end="51548" title="mezzala" label="mezzala"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="51558" end="51578" title="deep-lying playmaker" label="deep-lying playmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q294259" start="51696" end="51709" title="Arrigo Sacchi" label="Arrigo Sacchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="51715" end="51729" title="centre-forward" label="centre-forward"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51920" end="51930" title="Forward (association football)#False 9" label="false-nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139520" start="52450" end="52458" title="Volley (association football)" label="volleyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205353" start="52499" end="52503" title="Chip (association football)" label="chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q767411" start="52535" end="52544" title="Set piece (football)" label="set piece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379266" start="52667" end="52676" title="Free kick (association football)" label="free-kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q624" start="52931" end="52951" title="Alessandro Del Piero" label="Alessandro Del Piero"/>
<link wikidata="Q43926" start="52956" end="52968" title="Andrea Pirlo" label="Andrea Pirlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515" start="53066" end="53074" title="Diego Maradona" label="Maradona"/>
<link wikidata="Q47526" start="53083" end="53087" title="Zico (footballer)" label="Zico"/>
<link wikidata="Q279532" start="53531" end="53543" title="Penalty kick (association football)" label="penalty kick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53648" end="53657" title="Dribbling#Association football" label="dribbling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313922" start="54478" end="54484" title="Dummy (football)" label="feints"/>
<link wikidata="Q68060" start="54664" end="54680" title="Gianluigi Buffon" label="Gianluigi Buffon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="55021" end="55033" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q773580" start="55724" end="55736" title="Gianni Brera" label="Gianni Brera"/>
<link wikidata="Q230046" start="55780" end="55793" title="Gianni Rivera" label="Gianni Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="56027" end="56036" title="Raffaello Sanzio da Urbino" label="Raffaello"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591" start="56113" end="56125" title="Pinturicchio" label="Pinturicchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835" start="56236" end="56251" title="Zinedine Zidane" label="Zinedine Zidane"/>
<link wikidata="Q294565" start="56366" end="56380" title="Angelo Peruzzi" label="Angelo Peruzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q164038" start="56413" end="56426" title="Pep Guardiola" label="Pep Guardiola"/>
<link wikidata="Q52876" start="56473" end="56487" title="Javier Zanetti" label="Javier Zanetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q317803" start="56503" end="56521" title="Matthew Le Tissier" label="Matthew Le Tissier"/>
<link wikidata="Q604525" start="56837" end="56855" title="The Globe and Mail" label="The Globe and Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q332064" start="57824" end="57847" title="Juan Alberto Schiaffino" label="Juan Alberto Schiaffino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099813" start="57983" end="58002" title="Gazzetta di Mantova" label="Gazzetta di Mantova"/>
<link wikidata="Q309135" start="58340" end="58362" title="Il Corriere della Sera" label="Il Corriere della Sera"/>
<link wikidata="Q368151" start="58657" end="58665" title="Mediaset" label="Mediaset"/>
<link wikidata="Q235159" start="58766" end="58782" title="Giuseppe Bergomi" label="Giuseppe Bergomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051115" start="59093" end="59104" title="Il Giornale" label="Il Giornale"/>
<link wikidata="Q21484379" start="59323" end="59332" title="Eurosport" label="Eurosport"/>
<link wikidata="Q266613" start="59651" end="59663" title="Wayne Rooney" label="Wayne Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q431526" start="59851" end="59867" title="Emmanuel Amunike" label="Emmanuel Amunike"/>
<link wikidata="Q48330" start="59887" end="59902" title="Roberto Mancini" label="Roberto Mancini"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="59933" end="59948" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q19616" start="60063" end="60066" title="RAI" label="RAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547906" start="60079" end="60091" title="Bruno Pizzul" label="Bruno Pizzul"/>
<link wikidata="Q923353" start="60354" end="60363" title="La Stampa" label="La Stampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541244" start="61401" end="61420" title="Daniele Carnasciali" label="Daniele Carnasciali"/>
<link wikidata="Q186478" start="61522" end="61531" title="Luca Toni" label="Luca Toni"/>
<link wikidata="Q722994" start="61536" end="61554" title="Emanuele Filippini" label="Emanuele Filippini"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="63808" end="63816" title="Midfielder" label="midfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="64483" end="64498" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q10524" start="64588" end="64598" title="Ryan Giggs" label="Ryan Giggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="65086" end="65105" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q18049522" start="65344" end="65363" title="The Huffington Post" label="The Huffington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083289" start="67047" end="67056" title="La Presse (Canadian newspaper)" label="La Presse"/>
<link wikidata="Q517878" start="67378" end="67395" title="Raffaele Di Fusco" label="Raffaele Di Fusco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465853" start="67622" end="67637" title="Football Italia" label="Football Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q85329" start="69508" end="69521" title="La Repubblica" label="La Repubblica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71007" end="71033" title="FIFA Player of the Century#FIFA Internet vote" label="FIFA Player of the Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q729035" start="71072" end="71096" title="World Soccer (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;World Soccer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383" start="71200" end="71205" title="IFFHS" label="IFFHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q115786" start="71467" end="71492" title="FIFA World Cup Dream Team" label="FIFA World Cup Dream Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q83710" start="71542" end="71553" title="Golden Foot" label="Golden Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q12897" start="71623" end="71627" title="Pelé" label="Pelé"/>
<link wikidata="Q485048" start="71635" end="71643" title="FIFA 100" label="FIFA 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q935015" start="71727" end="71751" title="UEFA Golden Jubilee Poll" label="UEFA Golden Jubilee Poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847685" start="71945" end="71974" title="Italian Football Hall of Fame" label="Italian Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q79859" start="72199" end="72213" title="2014 FIFA World Cup" label="2014 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372529" start="72833" end="72844" title="FourFourTwo" label="FourFourTwo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="73015" end="73036" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q24039221" start="73544" end="73553" title="90min.com" label="90min.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340204" start="73657" end="73667" title="Sky Sports" label="Sky Sports"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75123" end="75158" title="Italy national football team records#Goalscorers" label="the most goals scored from the spot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75751" end="75779" title="Football records in Italy#Most goals from a penalty kick" label="penalties in Serie A history"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76260" end="76318" title="Football records in Italy#Goalscoring" label="seventh all-time highest scorer in Serie A, with 205 goals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76454" end="76500" title="Football records in Italy#Most goals from a free kick" label="fourth-highest number of free-kicks in Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q294351" start="76577" end="76594" title="Siniša Mihajlović" label="Siniša Mihajlović"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76752" end="76805" title="Football records and statistics in Italy#Most assists in Serie A" label="second–highest assist provider of all time in Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q182451" start="77016" end="77033" title="Alberto Gilardino" label="Alberto Gilardino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77156" end="77220" title="Football records in Italy#Most hat-tricks in Serie A" label="joint-tenth most hat-tricks in the history of the Italian league"/>
<link wikidata="Q460577" start="77232" end="77245" title="Amedeo Amadei" label="Amedeo Amadei"/>
<link wikidata="Q160206" start="77268" end="77281" title="Hernán Crespo" label="Hernán Crespo"/>
<link wikidata="Q201897" start="77478" end="77505" title="Italian Football Federation" label="Italian Football Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q444684" start="77556" end="77570" title="Azeglio Vicini" label="Azeglio Vicini"/>
<link wikidata="Q20012074" start="77881" end="77889" title="Lega Pro" label="Lega Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760088" start="77990" end="77998" title="UEFA Pro Licence" label="UEFA Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3664907" start="78019" end="78029" title="Centro Tecnico Federale di Coverciano" label="Coverciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q871371" start="78273" end="78290" title="Nichiren Buddhism" label="Nichiren Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11398042" start="78315" end="78340" title="Soka Gakkai International" label="Soka Gakkai International"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="78988" end="79002" title="2008 recession" label="2008 recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="79367" end="79374" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531132" start="79404" end="79410" title="Rivera, Buenos Aires Province" label="Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q170703" start="79592" end="79604" title="Boca Juniors" label="Boca Juniors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537" start="79720" end="79727" title="Vicenza" label="Vicenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841897" start="79790" end="79809" title="FAO Goodwill Ambassador" label="Goodwill Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="79817" end="79850" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="79858" end="79872" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q36740" start="80113" end="80129" title="Aung San Suu Kyi" label="Aung San Suu Kyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746404" start="80187" end="80199" title="Man of Peace" label="Man of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q34664" start="80209" end="80218" title="Hiroshima" label="Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036277" start="80237" end="80274" title="World Summit of Nobel Peace Laureates" label="World Summit of Nobel Peace Laureates"/>
<link wikidata="Q206901" start="80588" end="80591" title="Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis" label="ALS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17521923" start="80680" end="80700" title="Ice Bucket Challenge" label="Ice Bucket Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q159884" start="80871" end="80886" title="Stadio Olimpico" label="Stadio Olimpico"/>
<link wikidata="Q968361" start="80954" end="80965" title="Juan Iturbe" label="Juan Iturbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052910" start="81252" end="81268" title="Corrado Guzzanti" label="Corrado Guzzanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092012" start="81378" end="81393" title="Giovanni Raboni" label="Giovanni Raboni"/>
<link wikidata="Q167546" start="81540" end="81551" title="Lucio Dalla" label="Lucio Dalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849713" start="81559" end="81575" title="Marmellata n. 25" label="Marmellata n. 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056805" start="81585" end="81601" title="Cesare Cremonini (singer-songwriter)" label="Cesare Cremonini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81612" end="81618" title="Baggio (song)" label="Baggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q713880" start="81628" end="81638" title="Miles Kane" label="Miles Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q650467" start="81782" end="81786" title="Wind Telecomunicazioni" label="Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q502268" start="81883" end="81897" title="Johnnie Walker" label="Johnnie Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208130" start="82087" end="82094" title="Diadora" label="Diadora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408214" start="82425" end="82444" title="Human Entertainment" label="Human Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="" start="82458" end="82498" title="Super Formation Soccer 95: della Serie A" label="Super Formation Soccer 95: della Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="82510" end="82514" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934915" start="82528" end="82547" title="Virtua Pro Football" label="Virtua Pro Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532503" start="82564" end="82594" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Make a Soccer Team!" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Make a Soccer Team!"/>
<link wikidata="Q647486" start="82681" end="82696" title="Captain Tsubasa" label="Captain Tsubasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="82780" end="82789" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366945" start="82803" end="82813" title="Father Ted" label="Father Ted"/>
<link wikidata="Q213828" start="82833" end="82854" title="Alessandro Costacurta" label="Alessandro Costacurta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596568" start="82899" end="82926" title="Grant Unto Him Eternal Rest" label="Grant Unto Him Eternal Rest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292714" start="82972" end="82991" title="Ardal O&amp;#x27;Hanlon" label="Ardal O&amp;#x27;Hanlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q869217" start="83024" end="83034" title="last rites" label="last rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="83038" end="83043" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q947387" start="83106" end="83120" title="Graham Linehan" label="Graham Linehan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465853" start="83159" end="83174" title="Football Italia" label="Football Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q176883" start="83210" end="83224" title="2010 FIFA World Cup" label="2010 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q155894" start="83236" end="83268" title="Waka Waka (This Time for Africa)" label="Waka Waka (This Time for Africa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q34424" start="83278" end="83285" title="Shakira" label="Shakira"/>
<link wikidata="Q11934" start="83754" end="83766" title="Mickey Mouse" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83783" end="83793" title="DuckTales (1987 TV series)#DuckTales" label="Duck Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q45700" start="84327" end="84333" title="Konami" label="Konami"/>
<link wikidata="Q20098839" start="84400" end="84425" title="Pro Evolution Soccer 2016" label="Pro Evolution Soccer 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q869106" start="84484" end="84493" title="EA Sports" label="EA Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="84522" end="84529" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q869106" start="84567" end="84576" title="EA Sports" label="EA Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q54153179" start="84609" end="84616" title="FIFA 19" label="FIFA 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="84672" end="84679" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q368151" start="84761" end="84769" title="Mediaset" label="Mediaset"/>
<link wikidata="Q33093142" start="84918" end="84934" title="Andrea Arcangeli" label="Andrea Arcangeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804" start="85161" end="85168" title="Serie A" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q838282" start="85170" end="85177" title="1994–95 Serie A" label="1994–95"/>
<link wikidata="Q169918" start="85179" end="85191" title="Coppa Italia" label="Coppa Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q428779" start="85193" end="85200" title="1994–95 Coppa Italia" label="1994–95"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="85202" end="85210" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q268859" start="85212" end="85219" title="1992–93 UEFA Cup" label="1992–93"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804" start="85231" end="85238" title="Serie A" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q644108" start="85240" end="85247" title="1995–96 Serie A" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="85256" end="85270" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q101751" start="85282" end="85286" title="1994 FIFA World Cup" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="85300" end="85304" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q607965" start="85338" end="85345" title="Serie C" label="Serie C"/>
<link wikidata="Q554495" start="85367" end="85378" title="Bravo Award" label="Bravo Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85387" end="85424" title="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup records and statistics#Most goals in a single season" label="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup top scorer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85426" end="85433" title="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup 1990–91#Top goalscorers" label="1990–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q729035" start="85452" end="85464" title="World Soccer (magazine)" label="World Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q166177" start="85511" end="85527" title="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657499" start="85529" end="85533" title="1993 Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432645" start="85549" end="85553" title="1994 Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983575" start="85569" end="85573" title="1990 Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q182529" start="85576" end="85605" title="FIFA World Player of the Year" label="FIFA World Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q932099" start="85607" end="85611" title="1993 FIFA World Player of the Year" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q994921" start="85627" end="85631" title="1994 FIFA World Player of the Year" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q994923" start="85646" end="85650" title="1995 FIFA World Player of the Year" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049896" start="85653" end="85667" title="Onze d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Onze d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049896" start="85678" end="85692" title="Onze d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Onze de Bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049896" start="85703" end="85721" title="Onze d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Onze d&amp;#x27;Argent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717275" start="85730" end="85742" title="Onze Mondial" label="Onze de Onze"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85763" end="85789" title="FIFA World Cup awards#Golden Ball" label="FIFA World Cup Silver Ball"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85791" end="85795" title="1994 FIFA World Cup#Awards" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85798" end="85826" title="FIFA World Cup awards#All-Star Team" label="FIFA World Cup All-Star Team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85828" end="85832" title="1994 FIFA World Cup#All-star team" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232365" start="85835" end="85850" title="Don Balón Award" label="Don Balón Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049896" start="85859" end="85879" title="Onze d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Super Onze d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q644108" start="85929" end="85936" title="1995–96 Serie A" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148478" start="86002" end="86012" title="Il Venerdì di Repubblica" label="Il Venerdì"/>
<link wikidata="Q729035" start="86082" end="86094" title="World Soccer (magazine)" label="World Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="86108" end="86144" title="World Soccer (magazine)#Greatest Players of the 20th century" label="Greatest Players of the 20th Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q313033" start="86172" end="86187" title="Guerin Sportivo" label="Guerin Sportivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383" start="86259" end="86299" title="IFFHS" label="IFFHS Italian Player of the 20th Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383" start="86320" end="86361" title="IFFHS" label="IFFHS European Player of the 20th Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q308705" start="86389" end="86404" title="France Football" label="France Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q664707" start="86476" end="86482" title="Placar" label="Placar"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="86546" end="86553" title="FIFA" label="FIFA XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q646222" start="86568" end="86585" title="Guerin d&amp;#x27;Oro" label="Guerin d&amp;#x27;Oro"/>
<link wikidata="Q543205" start="86587" end="86591" title="2000–01 Serie A" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910599" start="86594" end="86656" title="Premio Nazionale Carriera Esemplare &amp;quot;Gaetano Scirea&amp;quot;" label="Premio Nazionale Carriera Esemplare &amp;quot;Gaetano Scirea&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="86665" end="86722" title="Gran Galà del Calcio#Serie A Most Loved Player" label="Gran Galà del Calcio &amp;#x27;Best Football Book&amp;#x27; Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q115786" start="86731" end="86756" title="FIFA World Cup Dream Team" label="FIFA World Cup Dream Team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="86765" end="86829" title="Gran Galà del Calcio#Serie A Most Loved Player" label="Gran Galà del Calcio &amp;#x27;Serie A Most Loved Player&amp;#x27; Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q83710" start="86838" end="86849" title="Golden Foot" label="Golden Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q485048" start="86858" end="86866" title="FIFA 100" label="FIFA 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q935015" start="86875" end="86899" title="UEFA Golden Jubilee Poll" label="UEFA Golden Jubilee Poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q664707" start="87000" end="87006" title="Placar" label="Placar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076622" start="87068" end="87105" title="Association of Football Statisticians" label="Association of Football Statisticians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746404" start="87187" end="87199" title="Man of Peace" label="Man of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847685" start="87208" end="87237" title="Italian Football Hall of Fame" label="Italian Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q24933232" start="87313" end="87342" title="Walk of Fame of Italian sport" label="Walk of Fame of Italian sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383" start="87351" end="87356" title="IFFHS" label="IFFHS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87363" end="87400" title="IFFHS World&amp;#x27;s Best Player#Men Legends" label="48 Football Men&amp;#x27;s Legend Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059569" start="87438" end="87490" title="Order of Merit of the Italian Republic" label="Cavaliere Ordine al Merito della Repubblica Italiana"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25625" wikidata="Q325130" url="?curid=25625" title="Richard Matheson">
<text>Richard Burton Matheson (February 20, 1926 – June 23, 2013) was an American author and screenwriter, primarily in the fantasy, horror, and science fiction genres.

He is best known as the author of &quot;I Am Legend&quot;, a 1954 science fiction horror novel that has been adapted for the screen three times. Matheson himself was co-writer of the first film version, &quot;The Last Man on Earth&quot;, starring Vincent Price, which was released in 1964. The other two adaptations were &quot;The Omega Man&quot;, starring Charlton Heston, and &quot;I Am Legend&quot;, with Will Smith. Matheson also wrote 16 television episodes of &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;, including &quot;Nightmare at 20,000 Feet&quot;, &quot;Little Girl Lost&quot; and &quot;Steel&quot;, as well as several adaptations of Edgar Allan Poe stories for Roger Corman and American International Pictures – &quot;House of Usher&quot;, &quot;The Pit and the Pendulum&quot;, &quot;Tales of Terror&quot; and &quot;The Raven&quot;. He adapted his 1971 short story &quot;Duel&quot; as a screenplay, directed by Steven Spielberg as the television film of the same name that year.

In addition to &quot;I Am Legend&quot; and &quot;Duel&quot;, nine more of his novels and short stories have been adapted as motion pictures: &quot;The Shrinking Man&quot; (filmed as &quot;The Incredible Shrinking Man&quot;), &quot;Hell House&quot; (filmed as &quot;The Legend of Hell House&quot;), &quot;What Dreams May Come&quot;, &quot;Bid Time Return&quot; (filmed as &quot;Somewhere in Time&quot;), &quot;A Stir of Echoes&quot;, &quot;Steel&quot; (filmed as &quot;Real Steel&quot;), and &quot;Button, Button&quot; (filmed as &quot;The Box&quot;). The movie &quot;Cold Sweat&quot; was based on his novel &quot;Ride the Nightmare&quot;, and &quot;Les seins de glace&quot; (&quot;Icy Breasts&quot;) was based on his novel &quot;Someone Is Bleeding&quot;. Both &quot;Steel&quot; and &quot;Button&quot; had previously been episodes of &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;.

==Early life==
Matheson was born in Allendale, New Jersey, to Norwegian immigrants Bertolf and Fanny Matheson. They divorced when he was eight, and he was raised in Brooklyn, New York, by his mother. His early writing influences were the film &quot;Dracula&quot; (1931), novels by Kenneth Roberts, and a poem which he read in the newspaper &quot;Brooklyn Eagle&quot;, where he published his first short story at age eight. He entered Brooklyn Technical High School in 1939, graduated in 1943, and served with the Army in Europe during World War II; this formed the basis for his 1960 novel &quot;The Beardless Warriors&quot;. He attended the Missouri School of Journalism at the University of Missouri, earning his BA in 1949, then moved to California.

==Career==
===1950s and 1960s===
His first-written novel, &quot;Hunger and Thirst&quot;, was ignored by publishers for several decades before eventually being published in 2010, but his short story &quot;Born of Man and Woman&quot; was published in &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction&quot;&#x27;s summer 1950 issue, the new quarterly&#x27;s third issue, and attracted attention. It is the tale of a monstrous child chained by its parents in the cellar, written in the form of the creature&#x27;s diary and using non-idiomatic English. Later that year, Matheson placed stories in the first and third issues of &quot;Galaxy Science Fiction&quot;, a new monthly. His first anthology of work was published in 1954. Between 1950 and 1971, he produced dozens of stories, frequently blending elements of the science fiction, horror, and fantasy genres.

He was a member of the &quot;Southern California Sorcerers&quot; group in the 1950s and 1960s, a collective of west coast writers which included Charles Beaumont, Ray Bradbury, George Clayton Johnson, William F. Nolan, Jerry Sohl, and others.

Matheson&#x27;s first novel to be published, &quot;Someone Is Bleeding&quot;, appeared from Lion Books in 1953. In the 1950s, he published a handful of Western stories (later collected in &quot;By the Gun&quot;), and in the 1990s, he published Western novels such as &quot;Journal of the Gun Years&quot;, &quot;The Gunfight&quot;, &quot;The Memoirs of Wild Bill Hickok&quot;, and &quot;Shadow on the Sun&quot;.

His other early novels include &quot;The Shrinking Man&quot; (1956, filmed in 1957 as &quot;The Incredible Shrinking Man&quot;, again from Matheson&#x27;s own screenplay) and a science fiction vampire novel, &quot;I Am Legend&quot; (1954, filmed as &quot;The Last Man on Earth&quot; in 1964, &quot;The Omega Man&quot; in 1971, and &quot;I Am Legend&quot; in 2007). In 1960, Matheson published &quot;The Beardless Warriors&quot;, a non-fantastic, autobiographical novel about teenage American soldiers in World War II. It was filmed in 1967 as &quot;The Young Warriors&quot;, though most of Matheson&#x27;s plot was jettisoned. 

Matheson wrote teleplays for several television programs, including the Westerns &quot;Cheyenne&quot;, &quot;Have Gun – Will Travel&quot;, and &quot;Lawman&quot;. He also wrote the &quot;Star Trek&quot; episode &quot;The Enemy Within&quot; (1966). However, he is most closely associated with the American TV series &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;, for which he wrote more than a dozen episodes, including &quot;Steel&quot; (1963), &quot;Nightmare at 20,000 Feet&quot; (1963), &quot;Little Girl Lost&quot; (1962), and &quot;Death Ship&quot; (1963). For all of his &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; scripts, Matheson wrote the introductory and closing statements spoken by creator Rod Serling. He adapted five works of Edgar Allan Poe for Roger Corman&#x27;s Poe series, including &quot;House of Usher&quot; (1960), &quot;The Pit and the Pendulum (1961)&quot;, and &quot;The Raven&quot; (1963). He was one of the key screenwriters in Corman&#x27;s career.

For Hammer Film Productions, he wrote the screenplay for &quot;Fanatic&quot; (1965; US title: &quot;Die! Die! My Darling!&quot;), starring Tallulah Bankhead and Stefanie Powers and based on the novel &quot;Nightmare&quot; by Anne Blaisdell; he also adapted for Hammer Dennis Wheatley&#x27;s &quot;The Devil Rides Out&quot; (1968).

===1970s and 1980s===
In 1971, Mattheson&#x27;s short story &quot;Duel&quot; was adapted into the TV movie of the same name. In 1973, Matheson earned an Edgar Award from the Mystery Writers of America for his teleplay for &quot;The Night Stalker&quot; (1972), one of two TV movies written by Matheson for producer Dan Curtis, the other being &quot;The Night Strangler&quot; (1973), which preceded the TV series &quot;&quot;. Matheson worked extensively with Curtis; the 1977 television anthology film &quot;Dead of Night&quot; features three stories written for the screen by Matheson: &quot;Second Chance&quot; (based on the story by Jack Finney); &quot;No Such Thing as a Vampire&quot; (based on Matheson&#x27;s story of the same name); and &quot;Bobby&quot;, an original script written for this anthology by Matheson.

Three of his short stories were filmed together as &quot;Trilogy of Terror&quot; (1975), including &quot;Prey&quot; (initially published in the April 1969 issue of &quot;Playboy&quot; magazine), a tale of a Zuni warrior fetish doll. The doll later reappeared in the final segment of the belated sequel to the first movie, &quot;Trilogy of Terror II&quot; (1996), and &quot;Bobby&quot; from &quot;Dead of Night&quot; was refilmed with different actors for the second segment of the film.

Other Matheson novels adapted into films in the 1970s include &quot;Bid Time Return&quot; (1975, released as &quot;Somewhere in Time&quot; in 1980), and &quot;Hell House&quot; (1971, released as &quot;The Legend of Hell House&quot; in 1973), both adapted and scripted by Matheson himself.

In the 1980s, Matheson published the novel &quot;Earthbound&quot;, wrote several screenplays for the TV series &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;, and continued to publish short fiction.

===1990s===
Matheson published four Western novels in this decade, as well as the suspense novel &quot;Seven Steps to Midnight&quot; (1993) and the darkly comic locked-room mystery novel &quot;Now You See It ...&quot; (1995), dedicated to Robert Bloch.

He also wrote the screenplays for several movies, including the comedy &quot;Loose Cannons&quot; (1990) and the television biopic &quot;The Dreamer of Oz: The L. Frank Baum Story&quot; (1990), as well as a segment of &quot;Twilight Zone: Rod Serling&#x27;s Lost Classics&quot; (1994) and segments of &quot;Trilogy of Terror II&quot;. Matheson continued to write short stories, and two more of his novels were adapted by others for the big screen: &quot;What Dreams May Come&quot; (1998) and &quot;A Stir of Echoes&quot; (1999, as &quot;Stir of Echoes&quot;). In 1999, Matheson published a non-fiction work, &quot;The Path&quot;, inspired by his interest in psychic phenomena.

===21st century===
Many previously unpublished novels by Matheson appeared late in his career, as did various collections of his work and previously unpublished screenplays. He also wrote new works, such as the suspense novel &quot;Hunted Past Reason&quot; (2002) and the children&#x27;s illustrated fantasy &quot;Abu and the 7 Marvels&quot; (2002).

==Style==

Several of Matheson&#x27;s stories, including &quot;Third from the Sun&quot; (1950), &quot;Deadline&quot; (1959), and &quot;Button, Button&quot; (1970), are simple sketches with twist endings; others, like &quot;Trespass&quot; (1953), &quot;Being&quot; (1954), and &quot;Mute&quot; (1962), explore their characters&#x27; dilemmas over 20 or 30 pages. Some tales, such as &quot;The Doll that Does Everything&quot; (1954) and &quot;The Funeral&quot; (1955), incorporate satirical humor at the expense of genre clichés, and are written in bombastic prose that differed from Matheson&#x27;s usual pared-down style. Others, like &quot;The Test&quot; (1954) and &quot;Steel&quot; (1956), portray the moral and physical struggles of ordinary people, rather than those of scientists and superheroes, in situations which are at once futuristic and quotidian. Still others, such as &quot;Mad House&quot; (1953), &quot;The Curious Child&quot; (1954) and &quot;Duel&quot; (1971), are tales of paranoia, in which the commonplace environment of the present day becomes inexplicably alien or threatening.

===Sources of inspiration===
Matheson cited specific inspirations for many of his works. &quot;Duel&quot; was derived from an incident in which he and friend Jerry Sohl were dangerously tailgated by a large truck on the same day as the assassination of John F. Kennedy. 

According to film critic Roger Ebert, Matheson&#x27;s scientific approach to the supernatural in &quot;I Am Legend&quot; and other novels from the 1950s and early 1960s &quot;anticipated pseudorealistic fantasy novels like &quot;Rosemary&#x27;s Baby&quot; and &quot;The Exorcist&quot;.&quot;

==Personal life and death==
In 1952, Matheson married Ruth Ann Woodson, whom he met in California. They had four children: Bettina Mayberry, Richard Christian, Christopher Matheson and Ali Marie Matheson. Richard, Chris, and Ali became writers of fiction and screenplays.

Matheson died on June 23, 2013, at his home in Calabasas, California, at the age of 87.&lt;ref name=&quot;washingtonpost/richard-matheson-87&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

==Awards==
Matheson received the World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement in 1984 and the Bram Stoker Award for Lifetime Achievement from the Horror Writers Association in 1991. In 1993, he won the World Horror Convention Grand Master Award. The Science Fiction Hall of Fame inducted him in 2010.

At the annual World Fantasy Conventions, he won two judged, annual literary awards for particular works: World Fantasy Awards for &quot;Bid Time Return&quot; as the best novel of 1975 and &quot;Richard Matheson: Collected Stories&quot; as the best collection of 1989.

In 1989, he won the Bram Stoker Award for best Fiction Collection for &quot;Richard Matheson: Collected Stories&quot; &amp; was nominated in 2002 for the Bram Stoker Award for Work for Young Readers for &quot;Abu and the 7 Marvels&quot;.

In 1991 he won the Spur Award for Best Western Novel for &quot;Journal of the Gun Years&quot;.

In 2008, he won the Geffen Award for Science Fiction &amp; the Tähtivaeltaja Award for &quot;I Am Legend&quot;.

Matheson died just days before he was due to receive the Visionary Award at the 39th Saturn Awards ceremony. As a tribute, the ceremony was dedicated to him and the award was presented posthumously. Academy president Robert Holguin said, &quot;Richard&#x27;s accomplishments will live on forever in the imaginations of everyone who read or saw his inspired and inimitable work.&quot;

==Influence==
===Other writers===
Stephen King has listed Matheson as a creative influence, and his novels &quot;Cell&quot; (2006) and &quot;Elevation&quot; (2018) are dedicated to Matheson, along with filmmaker George A. Romero. Romero frequently acknowledged Matheson as an inspiration and listed the shambling vampire creatures that appear in &quot;The Last Man on Earth&quot;, the first film version of &quot;I Am Legend&quot;, as the inspiration for the zombie &quot;ghouls&quot; he envisioned in &quot;Night of the Living Dead&quot;.

Anne Rice stated that Matheson&#x27;s short story &quot;Dress of White Silk&quot; was an early influence on her interest in vampires and fantasy fiction.

===Directors===
After his death, several figures offered tributes to his life and work. Director Steven Spielberg said: 

Another frequent collaborator, Roger Corman, said: 

On Twitter, director Edgar Wright wrote, &quot;If it&#x27;s true that the great Richard Matheson has passed away, 140 characters can&#x27;t begin to cover what he has given the sci fi &amp; horror genre.&quot; Director Richard Kelly added, &quot;I loved Richard Matheson&#x27;s writing and it was a huge honor getting to adapt his story &#x27;Button, Button&#x27; into a film. RIP.&quot;
== Works==
===Novels===

*&quot;Someone Is Bleeding&quot; (1953); filmed as &quot;Icy Breasts&quot;
*&quot;Fury on Sunday&quot; (1953)
*&quot;I Am Legend&quot; (1954); filmed as &quot;The Last Man on Earth&quot; (1964), &quot;The Omega Man&quot; (1971), &quot;I Am Omega&quot; (2007) and &quot;I Am Legend&quot; (2007)
*&quot;The Shrinking Man&quot; (1956); filmed as &quot;The Incredible Shrinking Man&quot; (1957) and subsequently reprinted under that title; also the basis of the film &quot;The Incredible Shrinking Woman&quot; (1981)
*&quot;A Stir of Echoes&quot; (1958); filmed as &quot;Stir of Echoes&quot; (1999)
*&quot;Ride the Nightmare&quot; (1959); adapted as an episode of &quot;The Alfred Hitchcock Hour&quot; and later filmed as &quot;Cold Sweat&quot; (1970)
*&quot;The Beardless Warriors&quot; (1960); filmed as &quot;The Young Warriors&quot; (1967)
*&quot;The Comedy of Terrors&quot; (1964); adapted by Elsie Lee from Matheson&#x27;s screenplay, filmed as &quot;The Comedy of Terrors&quot; (1963)
*&quot;Hell House&quot; (1971); filmed as &quot;The Legend of Hell House&quot; (1973)
*&quot;Bid Time Return&quot; (1975); filmed as &quot;Somewhere in Time&quot; (1980) and subsequently reprinted under that title
*&quot;What Dreams May Come&quot; (1978); filmed as &quot;What Dreams May Come&quot; (1998)
*&quot;Earthbound&quot; (Playboy Publications, 1982), as by Logan Swanson – editorially abridged version; restored text published as by Richard Matheson, UK: Robinson Books, 1989
*&quot;Journal of the Gun Years&quot; (1992)
*&quot;The Gunfight&quot; (1993)
*&quot;7 Steps to Midnight&quot; (1993)
*&quot;Shadow on the Sun&quot; (1994)
*&quot;Now You See It ...&quot; (1995)
*&quot;The Memoirs of Wild Bill Hickok&quot; (1996)
*&quot;Passion Play&quot; (2000)
*&quot;Hunger and Thirst&quot; (2000)
*&quot;Camp Pleasant&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Abu and the Seven Marvels&quot; (2002) (with William Stout)
*&quot;Hunted Past Reason&quot; (2002)
*&quot;Come Fygures, Come Shadowes&quot; (2003)
*&quot;Woman&quot; (2005)
*&quot;The Link&quot; (2006)
*&quot;Other Kingdoms&quot; (2011)
*&quot;Generations&quot; (2012)
*&quot;: Nightkillers&quot; (2017); co-written by Chuck Miller, based on an unfilmed teleplay for the TV series 
===Short stories===

*&quot;Born of Man and Woman&quot; (1950)
*&quot;Third from the Sun&quot; (1950); adapted as a &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; episode (1960)
*&quot;The Waker Dreams&quot; (a.k.a. &quot;When the Waker Sleeps&quot;) (1950)
*&quot;Blood Son&quot; (1951)
*&quot;Through Channels&quot; (1951)
*&quot;Clothes Make the Man&quot; (1951)
*&quot;Return&quot; (1951)
*&quot;The Thing&quot; (1951)
*&quot;Witch War&quot; (1951)
*&quot;Dress of White Silk&quot; (1951)
*&quot;F---&quot; (a.k.a. &quot;The Foodlegger&quot;) (1952)
*&quot;Shipshape Home&quot; (1952)
*&quot;SRL Ad&quot; (1952)
*&quot;Advance Notice&quot; (a.k.a. &quot;Letter to the Editor&quot;) (1952)
*&quot;Lover, When You&#x27;re Near Me&quot; (1952)
*&quot;Brother to the Machine&quot; (1952)
*&quot;To Fit the Crime&quot; (1952)
*&quot;The Wedding&quot; (1953)
*&quot;Wet Straw&quot; (1953)
*&quot;Long Distance Call&quot; (a.k.a. &quot;Sorry, Right Number&quot;) (1953)
*&quot;Slaughter House&quot; (1953)
*&quot;Mad House&quot; (1953)
*&quot;The Last Day&quot; (1953)
*&quot;Lazarus II&quot; (1953)
*&quot;Legion of Plotters&quot; (1953)
*&quot;Death Ship&quot; (1953); adapted as a &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; episode (1963)
*&quot;Disappearing Act&quot; (1953); adapted as a &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; episode (1959)
*&quot;The Disinheritors&quot; (1953)
*&quot;Dying Room Only&quot; (1953)
*&quot;Full Circle&quot; (1953)
*&quot;Mother by Protest&quot; (a.k.a. &quot;Trespass&quot;) (1953)
*&quot;Little Girl Lost&quot; (1953); adapted as a &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; episode (1962)
*&quot;Being&quot; (1954)
*&quot;The Curious Child&quot; (1954)
*&quot;When Day Is Dun&quot; (1954)
*&quot;Dance of the Dead&quot; (1954); adapted as a &quot;Masters of Horror&quot; episode (2005)
*&quot;The Man Who Made the World&quot; (1954)
*&quot;The Traveller&quot; (1954)
*&quot;The Test&quot; (1954)
*&quot;The Conqueror&quot; (1954)
*&quot;Dear Diary&quot; (1954)
*&quot;The Doll That Does Everything&quot; (1954)
*&quot;Descent&quot; (1954)
*&quot;Miss Stardust&quot; (1955)
*&quot;The Funeral&quot; (1955); adapted as story segment for Rod Serling&#x27;s &quot;Night Gallery&quot; (1972)
*&quot;Too Proud to Lose&quot; (1955)
*&quot;One for the Books&quot; (1955)
*&quot;Pattern for Survival&quot; (1955)
*&quot;A Flourish of Strumpets&quot; (1956)
*&quot;The Splendid Source&quot; (1956); adapted as a &quot;Family Guy&quot; episode
*&quot;Steel&quot; (1956); adapted as a &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; episode (1963); loosely filmed as &quot;Real Steel&quot; (2011)
*&quot;The Children of Noah&quot; (1957)
*&quot;A Visit to Santa Claus&quot; (a.k.a. &quot;I&#x27;ll Make It Look Good&quot;, as Logan Swanson) (1957)
*&quot;The Holiday Man&quot; (1957)
*&quot;Old Haunts&quot; (1957)
*&quot;The Distributor&quot; (1958)
*&quot;The Edge&quot; (1958)
*&quot;Lemmings&quot; (1958)
*&quot;Now Die in It&quot; (1958)
*&quot;Mantage&quot; (1959)
*&quot;Deadline&quot; (1959)
*&quot;The Creeping Terror&quot; (a.k.a. &quot;A Touch of Grapefruit&quot;) (1959)
*&quot;No Such Thing as a Vampire&quot; (1959); adapted as segment of the TV film &quot;Dead of Night&quot; (1977)
*&quot;Big Surprise&quot; (a.k.a. &quot;What Was in the Box&quot;) (1959); adapted as a &quot;Night Gallery&quot; short
*&quot;Crickets&quot; (1960)
*&quot;Day of Reckoning&quot; (a.k.a. &quot;The Faces,&quot; &quot;Graveyard Shift&quot;) (1960)
*&quot;First Anniversary&quot; (1960); adapted as an &quot;Outer Limits&quot; episode (1996)
*&quot;From Shadowed Places&quot; (1960)
*&quot;Nightmare at 20,000 Feet&quot; (1961); adapted as a &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; episode in 1963, as segment four of &quot;Twilight Zone: The Movie&quot; in 1983, and as one of the Twilight Zone radio dramas. Loosely inspired &quot;Nightmare at 30,000 Feet&quot; in the 2019 revival series. Has also been parodied numerous times, most notably as a segment of the fourth installment of &quot;The Simpsons&quot;&#x27; Treehouse of Horror series.
*&quot;Finger Prints&quot; (1962)
*&quot;Mute&quot; (1962); adapted as a &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; episode (1963)
*&quot;The Likeness of Julie&quot; (as Logan Swanson) (1962); adapted into &quot;Julie&quot; in the 1975 TV film &quot;Trilogy of Terror&quot;
*&quot;The Jazz Machine&quot; (1963)
*&quot;Crescendo&quot; (a.k.a. &quot;Shock Wave&quot;) (1963)
*&quot;Girl of My Dreams&quot; (1963); adapted by Robert Bloch and Michael J. Bird as an episode of the 1968 Hammer TV series &quot;Journey to the Unknown&quot; 
*&quot;&#x27;Tis the Season to Be Jelly&quot; (1963)
*&quot;Deus Ex Machina&quot; (1963)
*&quot;Interest&quot; (1965)
*&quot;A Drink of Water&quot; (1967)
*&quot;Needle in the Heart&quot; (a.k.a. &quot;Therese&quot;) (1969); adapted into &quot;Millicent and Therese&quot; in the 1975 TV anthology film &quot;Trilogy of Terror&quot;
*&quot;Prey&quot; (1969); adapted into &quot;Amelia&quot; in the 1975 TV anthology film &quot;Trilogy of Terror&quot;
*&quot;Button, Button&quot; (1970); filmed as a &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; episode in 1986; filmed as &quot;The Box&quot; (2009)
*&quot;&#x27;Til Death Do Us Part&quot; (1970)
*&quot;By Appointment Only&quot; (1970)
*&quot;The Finishing Touches&quot; (1970)
*&quot;Duel&quot; (1971); filmed as &quot;Duel&quot; (1971)
*&quot;Leo Rising&quot; (1972)
*&quot;Where There&#x27;s a Will&quot; (with Richard Christian Matheson) (1980)
*&quot;And Now I&#x27;m Waiting&quot; (1983)
*&quot;Blunder Buss&quot; (1984)
*&quot;Getting Together&quot; (1986)
*&quot;Buried Talents&quot; (1987)
*&quot;The Near Departed&quot; (1987)
*&quot;Shoo Fly&quot; (1988)
*&quot;Person to Person&quot; (1989)
*&quot;CU: Mannix&quot; (1991)
*&quot;Two O&#x27;Clock Session&quot; (1991)
*&quot;The Doll&quot;; adapted as an &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; episode (1986)
*&quot;Go West, Young Man&quot; (1993)
*&quot;Gunsight&quot; (1993)
*&quot;Little Jack Cornered&quot; (1993)
*&quot;Of Death and Thirty Minutes&quot; (1993)
*&quot;Always Before Your Voice&quot; (1999)
*&quot;Relics&quot; (1999)
*&quot;And in Sorrow&quot; (2000)
*&quot;The Prisoner&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Purge Among Peanuts&quot; (2001)
*&quot;He Wanted to Live&quot; (2002)
*&quot;The Last Blah in the Etc.&quot; (a.k.a. &quot;All and Only Silence&quot;) (2002)
*&quot;Life Size&quot; (2002)
*&quot;Maybe You Remember Him&quot; (2002)
*&quot;Mirror, Mirror...&quot; (2002)
*&quot;Phone Call From Across The Street&quot; (2002)
*&quot;Professor Fritz and the Runaway House&quot; (2002)
*&quot;That Was Yesterday&quot; (2002)
*&quot;Man With a Club&quot; (2003)
*&quot;Haircut&quot; (2006)
*&quot;Life Size&quot; (2008)
*&quot;An Element Never Forgets&quot; (2010)
*&quot;Backteria&quot; (2011)
===Short story collections===

*&quot;Born of Man and Woman&quot; (1954)
*&quot;The Shores of Space&quot; (1957)
*&quot;Shock!&quot; (1961)
*&quot;Shock 2&quot; (1964)
*&quot;Shock 3&quot; (1966)
*&quot;Shock Waves&quot; (1970); published as &quot;Shock 4&quot; in the UK (1980)
*&quot;Button, Button&quot; (1970); basis for the movie &quot;The Box&quot; (2009)
*&quot;Richard Matheson: Collected Stories&quot; (1989)
*&quot;By the Gun&quot; (1993)
*&quot;Nightmare at 20,000 Feet&quot; (2002)
*&quot;Pride&quot; (2002); co-written with Richard Christian Matheson
*&quot;Duel&quot; (2002)
*&quot;Offbeat: Uncollected Stories&quot; (2002)
*&quot;Darker Places&quot; (2004)
*&quot;Unrealized Dreams&quot; (2004)
*&quot;Duel and the Distributor&quot; (2005); previously unpublished screenplays of these two stories
*&quot;Button, Button: Uncanny Stories&quot; (2008)
*&quot;Uncollected Matheson: Volume 1&quot; (2008)
*&quot;Uncollected Matheson: Volume 2&quot; (2010)
*&quot;Steel: And Other Stories&quot; (2011)
*&quot;Bakteria and Other Improbable Tales&quot; (2011) (e-book exclusive)
*&quot;The Best of Richard Matheson&quot; (2017)
===Films===
&quot;For television films, see Television section below.&quot;
*&quot;The Incredible Shrinking Man&quot; (1957)
*&quot;The Beat Generation&quot; (1959)
*&quot;House of Usher&quot; (1960)
*&quot;Master of the World&quot; (1961)
*&quot;The Pit and the Pendulum&quot; (1961)
*&quot;Burn Witch Burn&quot; (1962); a.k.a. &quot;Night of the Eagle&quot; (screenplay co-written with Charles Beaumont and George Baxt, based on the novel &quot;Conjure Wife&quot; by Fritz Leiber)
*&quot;Tales of Terror&quot; (1962)
*&quot;The Raven&quot; (1963)
*&quot;The Comedy of Terrors&quot; (1963)
*&quot;The Last Man on Earth&quot; (as &quot;Logan Swanson&quot;, based on his novel &quot;I Am Legend&quot;) (1964)
*&quot;Fanatic&quot; (1965)
*&quot;The Young Warriors&quot; (based on his novel &quot;The Beardless Warriors&quot;) (1967)
*&quot;The Devil Rides Out&quot; (based on the novel by Dennis Wheatley) (1968)
*&quot;De Sade&quot; (1969)
*&quot;Cold Sweat&quot; (based on his novel &quot;Ride the Nightmare&quot;) (1970)
*&quot;The Omega Man&quot; (based on his novel &quot;I Am Legend&quot;) (1971)
*&quot;The Legend of Hell House&quot; (based on his novel &quot;Hell House&quot;) (1973)
*&quot;Icy Breasts&quot; (based on his novel &quot;Someone Is Bleeding&quot;) (1974)
*&quot;Somewhere in Time&quot; (based on his novel &quot;Bid Time Return&quot;) (1980)
*&quot;Twilight Zone: The Movie&quot;: fourth segment, &quot;Nightmare at 20,000 Feet&quot; (1983)
*&quot;Jaws 3-D&quot; (1983)
*&quot;Loose Cannons&quot; (1990)
*&quot;What Dreams May Come&quot; (based on his novel) (1998)
*&quot;Stir of Echoes&quot; (1999) (based on his novel)
*&quot;I Am Legend&quot; (based on his novel) (2007)
*&quot;The Box&quot; (based on his short story &quot;Button, Button&quot;) (2009)
*&quot;Real Steel&quot; (based on his short story &quot;Steel&quot;) (2011)
===Television===

*&quot;Buckskin&quot;: &quot;Act of Faith&quot; (1959)
*&quot;&quot;: &quot;The Healing Woman&quot; (1959)
*&quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;: (16 episodes) (1959–1964)
*&quot;Have Gun Will Travel&quot;: &quot;The Lady on The Wall&quot; (1960)
*&quot;Bourbon Street Beat&quot;: &quot;Target of Hate&quot; (1960)
*&quot;Cheyenne&quot;: &quot;Home Is the Brave&quot; (1960)
*&quot;Lawman&quot; (Six episodes) (1960–1962)
*&quot;Thriller&quot;: &quot;The Return of Andrew Bentley&quot; (1961)
*&quot;Combat!&quot;: &quot;Forgotten Front&quot; (as Logan Swanson) (1962)
*&quot;The Alfred Hitchcock Hour&quot;: &quot;Ride the Nightmare&quot; (1962)
*&quot;The Alfred Hitchcock Hour&quot;: &quot;The Thirty-First of February&quot; (1963)
*&quot;The Girl from U.N.C.L.E.&quot;: &quot;The Atlantis Affair&quot; (1966)
*&quot;Bob Hope Presents The Chrysler Theater&quot;: &quot;Time of Flight&quot; (1966)
*&quot;Star Trek: The Original Series&quot;: &quot;The Enemy Within&quot; (1966)
*&quot;Duel&quot; (1971)
*&quot;The Night Stalker&quot; (1972)
*&quot;Night Gallery&quot; (1972): &quot;The Funeral&quot; (1972)
*&quot;The Night Strangler&quot; (1973)
*&quot;Dying Room Only&quot; (1973)
*&quot;Circle of Fear&quot; (1973) (originally titled &quot;Ghost Story&quot;)
*&quot;Bram Stoker&#x27;s Dracula&quot; (1974)
*&quot;Scream of the Wolf&quot; (1974)
*&quot;The Morning After&quot; (1974)
*&quot;Trilogy of Terror&quot; (1975) (TV anthology film, directed by Dan Curtis)
*&quot;Dead of Night&quot; (1977) (TV anthology film, directed by Dan Curtis)
*&quot;The Strange Possession of Mrs. Oliver&quot; (1977)
*&quot;The Martian Chronicles&quot; mini-series (1979, 1980)
*&quot;Twilight Zone&quot;: &quot;Button, Button&quot; (as Logan Swanson) (1986)
*&quot;Amazing Stories&quot;: &quot;The Doll&quot; (1986)
*&quot;Amazing Stories&quot;: &quot;One for the Books&quot; (1987)
*&quot;The Dreamer of Oz: The L. Frank Baum Story&quot; (1990)
*&quot;Rod Serling&#x27;s Lost Classics&quot; (1994)
*&quot;Trilogy of Terror II&quot; (1996) (TV anthology film, directed by Dan Curtis)
===Nonfiction===
*&quot;The Path: Metaphysics for the 90s&quot; (1993)
*&quot;The Path: A New Look at Reality&quot; (1999)

===Further reading===
*&quot;California Sorcery&quot;, edited by William F. Nolan and William Schafer
*Jad Hatem, &quot;Charité de l&#x27;infinitésimal&quot;, Paris, L&#x27;Harmattan, 2007

==References==
==External links==
*
*Matheson biography at tabula-rasa.info
*Richard Matheson featured on AMC-TV&#x27;s Sci-Fi Department webshow
* 

*Richard Matheson Archive of American Television Interview</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q325130" start="0" end="23" title="Richard Matheson" label="Richard Burton Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q734493" start="204" end="215" title="I Am Legend (novel)" label="I Am Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745426" start="230" end="252" title="science fiction horror" label="science fiction horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242772" start="373" end="394" title="The Last Man on Earth (1964 film)" label="The Last Man on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q219640" start="411" end="424" title="Vincent Price" label="Vincent Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q784610" start="491" end="504" title="The Omega Man" label="The Omega Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q80739" start="521" end="536" title="Charlton Heston" label="Charlton Heston"/>
<link wikidata="Q212689" start="548" end="559" title="I Am Legend (film)" label="I Am Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q40096" start="572" end="582" title="Will Smith" label="Will Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q14329491" start="636" end="653" title="The Twilight Zone" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793913" start="677" end="701" title="Nightmare at 20,000 Feet" label="Nightmare at 20,000 Feet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4334776" start="715" end="731" title="Little Girl Lost (The Twilight Zone)" label="Little Girl Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529074" start="748" end="753" title="Steel (The Twilight Zone)" label="Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="795" end="810" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q318292" start="823" end="835" title="Roger Corman" label="Roger Corman"/>
<link wikidata="Q465224" start="840" end="871" title="American International Pictures" label="American International Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049168" start="880" end="894" title="House of Usher (film)" label="House of Usher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170048" start="908" end="932" title="The Pit and the Pendulum (1961 film)" label="The Pit and the Pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451844" start="946" end="961" title="Tales of Terror" label="Tales of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196370" start="978" end="987" title="The Raven (1963 film)" label="The Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="1073" end="1089" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q583407" start="1093" end="1129" title="Duel (1971 film)" label="the television film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219445" start="1289" end="1306" title="The Shrinking Man" label="The Shrinking Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q972001" start="1330" end="1358" title="The Incredible Shrinking Man" label="The Incredible Shrinking Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q615807" start="1373" end="1383" title="Hell House (novel)" label="Hell House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210392" start="1407" end="1431" title="The Legend of Hell House" label="The Legend of Hell House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991087" start="1446" end="1466" title="What Dreams May Come (Matheson novel)" label="What Dreams May Come"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223617" start="1480" end="1495" title="Bid Time Return" label="Bid Time Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305728" start="1519" end="1536" title="Somewhere in Time (film)" label="Somewhere in Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q975298" start="1551" end="1567" title="A Stir of Echoes" label="A Stir of Echoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q261759" start="1610" end="1620" title="Real Steel" label="Real Steel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1639" end="1653" title="Button, Button (The Twilight Zone)#Short story" label="Button, Button"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346258" start="1677" end="1684" title="The Box (2009 film)" label="The Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q32734" start="1709" end="1719" title="Cold Sweat (1970 film)" label="Cold Sweat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235406" start="1823" end="1834" title="Icy Breasts" label="Icy Breasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q14329491" start="1982" end="1999" title="The Twilight Zone" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082510" start="2044" end="2065" title="Allendale, New Jersey" label="Allendale, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="2173" end="2181" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q279378" start="2257" end="2264" title="Dracula (1931 English-language film)" label="Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q346729" start="2289" end="2304" title="Kenneth Roberts (author)" label="Kenneth Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974820" start="2354" end="2368" title="Brooklyn Eagle" label="Brooklyn Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737843" start="2442" end="2472" title="Brooklyn Technical High School" label="Brooklyn Technical High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="2521" end="2525" title="United States Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2543" end="2555" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716042" start="2604" end="2626" title="The Beardless Warriors" label="The Beardless Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879703" start="2650" end="2679" title="Missouri School of Journalism" label="Missouri School of Journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223714" start="2966" end="2987" title="Born of Man and Woman" label="Born of Man and Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q937202" start="3017" end="3062" title="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction" label="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147869" start="3295" end="3304" title="Idiom (language structure)" label="idiomatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007573" start="3394" end="3416" title="Galaxy Science Fiction" label="Galaxy Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958511" start="3771" end="3787" title="Charles Beaumont" label="Charles Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q40640" start="3789" end="3801" title="Ray Bradbury" label="Ray Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q325422" start="3803" end="3825" title="George Clayton Johnson" label="George Clayton Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578761" start="3827" end="3843" title="William F. Nolan" label="William F. Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687871" start="3845" end="3855" title="Jerry Sohl" label="Jerry Sohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="4022" end="4029" title="Western (genre)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q44677" start="4222" end="4238" title="&amp;quot;Wild Bill&amp;quot; Hickok" label="Wild Bill Hickok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219445" start="4319" end="4336" title="The Shrinking Man" label="The Shrinking Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q972001" start="4374" end="4402" title="The Incredible Shrinking Man" label="The Incredible Shrinking Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q46721" start="4475" end="4482" title="vampire" label="vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q734493" start="4496" end="4507" title="I Am Legend (novel)" label="I Am Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242772" start="4537" end="4558" title="The Last Man on Earth (1964 film)" label="The Last Man on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q784610" start="4580" end="4593" title="The Omega Man" label="The Omega Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q212689" start="4619" end="4630" title="I Am Legend (film)" label="I Am Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4786" end="4798" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723834" start="4831" end="4849" title="The Young Warriors (film)" label="The Young Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q367591" start="4983" end="4991" title="Western fiction" label="Westerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071394" start="4998" end="5006" title="Cheyenne (1955 TV series)" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248082" start="5020" end="5042" title="Have Gun – Will Travel" label="Have Gun – Will Travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809074" start="5060" end="5066" title="Lawman (TV series)" label="Lawman"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5098" end="5107" title="Star Trek: The Original Series" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5128" end="5144" title="The Enemy Within (Star Trek: The Original Series)" label="The Enemy Within"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="5232" end="5249" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529074" start="5320" end="5325" title="Steel (The Twilight Zone)" label="Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793913" start="5346" end="5370" title="Nightmare at 20,000 Feet" label="Nightmare at 20,000 Feet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4334776" start="5391" end="5407" title="Little Girl Lost (The Twilight Zone)" label="Little Girl Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669980" start="5432" end="5442" title="Death Ship (The Twilight Zone)" label="Death Ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q435920" start="5580" end="5591" title="Rod Serling" label="Rod Serling"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="5618" end="5633" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q318292" start="5638" end="5650" title="Roger Corman" label="Roger Corman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049168" start="5686" end="5700" title="House of Usher (film)" label="House of Usher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170048" start="5721" end="5745" title="The Pit and the Pendulum (1961 film)" label="The Pit and the Pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196370" start="5770" end="5779" title="The Raven (1963 film)" label="The Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433745" start="5860" end="5883" title="Hammer Film Productions" label="Hammer Film Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545496" start="5919" end="5926" title="Fanatic (film)" label="Fanatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q255815" start="5995" end="6012" title="Tallulah Bankhead" label="Tallulah Bankhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q256474" start="6017" end="6032" title="Stefanie Powers" label="Stefanie Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q201862" start="6081" end="6095" title="Elizabeth Linington" label="Anne Blaisdell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189595" start="6124" end="6139" title="Dennis Wheatley" label="Dennis Wheatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q583407" start="6286" end="6311" title="Duel (1971 film)" label="TV movie of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q833154" start="6341" end="6352" title="Edgar Award" label="Edgar Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720621" start="6362" end="6388" title="Mystery Writers of America" label="Mystery Writers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754110" start="6416" end="6433" title="The Night Stalker (1972 film)" label="The Night Stalker"/>
<link wikidata="Q692808" start="6502" end="6512" title="Dan Curtis" label="Dan Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754108" start="6536" end="6555" title="The Night Strangler (film)" label="The Night Strangler"/>
<link wikidata="Q336144" start="6674" end="6688" title="anthology film" label="anthology film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704223" start="6695" end="6708" title="Dead of Night (1977 film)" label="Dead of Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q115674" start="6823" end="6834" title="Jack Finney" label="Jack Finney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998814" start="7067" end="7084" title="Trilogy of Terror" label="Trilogy of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="7180" end="7187" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q231317" start="7217" end="7221" title="Zuni people" label="Zuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842097" start="7338" end="7358" title="Trilogy of Terror II" label="Trilogy of Terror II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305728" start="7613" end="7630" title="Somewhere in Time (film)" label="Somewhere in Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q615807" start="7657" end="7667" title="Hell House (novel)" label="Hell House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210392" start="7699" end="7723" title="The Legend of Hell House" label="The Legend of Hell House"/>
<link wikidata="Q325130" start="7837" end="7847" title="Earthbound (novel)" label="Earthbound"/>
<link wikidata="Q940102" start="7905" end="7920" title="Amazing Stories (1985 TV series)" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141200" start="8130" end="8149" title="locked-room mystery" label="locked-room mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q355879" start="8208" end="8220" title="Robert Bloch" label="Robert Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194122" start="8300" end="8313" title="Loose Cannons (1990 film)" label="Loose Cannons"/>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="8346" end="8352" title="biographical film" label="biopic"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8359" end="8401" title="The Dreamer of Oz: The L. Frank Baum Story" label="The Dreamer of Oz: The L. Frank Baum Story"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8446" end="8493" title="Twilight Zone: Rod Serling&amp;#x27;s Lost Classics" label="Twilight Zone: Rod Serling&amp;#x27;s Lost Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991087" start="8676" end="8696" title="What Dreams May Come (1978 novel)" label="What Dreams May Come"/>
<link wikidata="Q975298" start="8720" end="8736" title="A Stir of Echoes" label="A Stir of Echoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q975358" start="8759" end="8773" title="Stir of Echoes" label="Stir of Echoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q85739521" start="9214" end="9235" title="Abu and the 7 Marvels" label="Abu and the 7 Marvels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296789" start="9314" end="9332" title="Third from the Sun" label="Third from the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321123" start="9440" end="9452" title="twist ending" label="twist ending"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="9730" end="9739" title="satire" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229994" start="10243" end="10251" title="paranoia" label="paranoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="10589" end="10621" title="assassination of John F. Kennedy" label="assassination of John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4482" start="10638" end="10649" title="Film criticism" label="film critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="10650" end="10661" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194339" start="10854" end="10874" title="Rosemary&amp;#x27;s Baby (novel)" label="Rosemary&amp;#x27;s Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193210" start="10891" end="10903" title="The Exorcist (novel)" label="The Exorcist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430640" start="11059" end="11076" title="Richard Christian Matheson" label="Richard Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732130" start="11078" end="11098" title="Chris Matheson (screenwriter)" label="Christopher Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q629088" start="11238" end="11259" title="Calabasas, California" label="Calabasas, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625727" start="11388" end="11428" title="World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement" label="World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910469" start="11445" end="11487" title="Bram Stoker Award for Lifetime Achievement" label="Bram Stoker Award for Lifetime Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905197" start="11497" end="11523" title="Horror Writers Association" label="Horror Writers Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035829" start="11553" end="11595" title="World Horror Convention Grand Master Award" label="World Horror Convention Grand Master Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11601" end="11629" title="EMP Museum#Science Fiction Hall of Fame" label="Science Fiction Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419048" start="11667" end="11691" title="World Fantasy Convention" label="World Fantasy Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q848963" start="11942" end="11959" title="Bram Stoker Award" label="Bram Stoker Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314500" start="12180" end="12190" title="Spur Award" label="Spur Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530024" start="12277" end="12289" title="Geffen Award" label="Geffen Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q747089" start="12320" end="12339" title="Tähtivaeltaja Award" label="Tähtivaeltaja Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q105447" start="12455" end="12467" title="Saturn Award" label="Saturn Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="12789" end="12801" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q469889" start="12868" end="12872" title="Cell (novel)" label="Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q54488555" start="12896" end="12905" title="Elevation (novella)" label="Elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q51511" start="12967" end="12983" title="George A. Romero" label="George A. Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q623051" start="13263" end="13287" title="Night of the Living Dead" label="Night of the Living Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q184785" start="13296" end="13305" title="Anne Rice" label="Anne Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="13548" end="13564" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q318292" start="13604" end="13616" title="Roger Corman" label="Roger Corman"/>
<link wikidata="Q522057" start="13647" end="13659" title="Edgar Wright" label="Edgar Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q711022" start="13845" end="13858" title="Richard Kelly (director)" label="Richard Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235406" start="14096" end="14107" title="Icy Breasts" label="Icy Breasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q734493" start="14156" end="14167" title="I Am Legend (novel)" label="I Am Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242772" start="14198" end="14219" title="The Last Man on Earth (1964 film)" label="The Last Man on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q784610" start="14240" end="14253" title="The Omega Man" label="The Omega Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655150" start="14274" end="14284" title="I Am Omega" label="I Am Omega"/>
<link wikidata="Q212689" start="14308" end="14319" title="I Am Legend (film)" label="I Am Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219445" start="14340" end="14357" title="The Shrinking Man" label="The Shrinking Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q972001" start="14388" end="14416" title="The Incredible Shrinking Man" label="The Incredible Shrinking Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q549031" start="14508" end="14538" title="The Incredible Shrinking Woman" label="The Incredible Shrinking Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q975298" start="14559" end="14575" title="A Stir of Echoes" label="A Stir of Echoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q975358" start="14606" end="14620" title="Stir of Echoes" label="Stir of Echoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247206" start="14705" end="14730" title="The Alfred Hitchcock Hour" label="The Alfred Hitchcock Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q32734" start="14757" end="14779" title="Cold Sweat (1970 film)" label="&amp;quot;Cold Sweat&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716042" start="14794" end="14816" title="The Beardless Warriors" label="The Beardless Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723834" start="14847" end="14865" title="The Young Warriors (film)" label="The Young Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429269" start="14992" end="15013" title="The Comedy of Terrors" label="The Comedy of Terrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q615807" start="15034" end="15044" title="Hell House (novel)" label="Hell House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210392" start="15075" end="15099" title="The Legend of Hell House" label="The Legend of Hell House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223617" start="15120" end="15135" title="Bid Time Return" label="Bid Time Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305728" start="15166" end="15183" title="Somewhere in Time (film)" label="Somewhere in Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991087" start="15248" end="15268" title="What Dreams May Come (1978 novel)" label="What Dreams May Come"/>
<link wikidata="Q839434" start="15299" end="15319" title="What Dreams May Come (film)" label="What Dreams May Come"/>
<link wikidata="Q85739521" start="15871" end="15896" title="Abu and the Seven Marvels" label="Abu and the Seven Marvels"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018893" start="15916" end="15929" title="William Stout" label="William Stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223714" start="16281" end="16302" title="Born of Man and Woman" label="Born of Man and Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q14329491" start="16375" end="16388" title="The Twilight Zone" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296789" start="16395" end="16402" title="Third from the Sun" label="episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q14329491" start="17419" end="17432" title="The Twilight Zone" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669980" start="17439" end="17446" title="Death Ship (The Twilight Zone)" label="episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q14329491" start="17511" end="17524" title="The Twilight Zone" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696488" start="17531" end="17538" title="And When the Sky Was Opened" label="episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q14329491" start="17777" end="17790" title="The Twilight Zone" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4334776" start="17797" end="17804" title="Little Girl Lost (The Twilight Zone)" label="episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q586486" start="17970" end="17987" title="Masters of Horror" label="Masters of Horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028248" start="17994" end="18001" title="Dance of the Dead (Masters of Horror)" label="episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q639433" start="18383" end="18396" title="Night Gallery" label="Night Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="18631" end="18641" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051308" start="18648" end="18655" title="The Splendid Source" label="episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q14329491" start="18702" end="18715" title="The Twilight Zone" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529074" start="18722" end="18729" title="Steel (The Twilight Zone)" label="episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q261759" start="18762" end="18772" title="Real Steel" label="Real Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704223" start="19360" end="19373" title="Dead of Night (1977 film)" label="Dead of Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q639433" start="19481" end="19494" title="Night Gallery" label="Night Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621450" start="19692" end="19704" title="The Outer Limits (1995 TV series)" label="Outer Limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545617" start="19711" end="19718" title="First Anniversary (The Outer Limits)" label="episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q14329491" start="19832" end="19845" title="The Twilight Zone" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793913" start="19852" end="19859" title="Nightmare at 20,000 Feet" label="episode"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19894" end="19918" title="Twilight Zone: The Movie" label="Twilight Zone: The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="20162" end="20174" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418035" start="20187" end="20206" title="Treehouse of Horror" label="Treehouse of Horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q14329491" start="20294" end="20307" title="The Twilight Zone" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749057" start="20314" end="20321" title="Mute (The Twilight Zone)" label="episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998814" start="20448" end="20465" title="Trilogy of Terror" label="Trilogy of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q355879" start="20621" end="20633" title="Robert Bloch" label="Robert Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703996" start="20638" end="20653" title="Michael J. Bird" label="Michael J. Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767233" start="20703" end="20725" title="Journey to the Unknown" label="Journey to the Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998814" start="21041" end="21058" title="Trilogy of Terror" label="Trilogy of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998814" start="21159" end="21176" title="Trilogy of Terror" label="Trilogy of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21190" end="21204" title="Button, Button (The Twilight Zone)#Short story" label="Button, Button"/>
<link wikidata="Q14329491" start="21237" end="21254" title="The Twilight Zone" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q573836" start="21261" end="21268" title="Button, Button (The Twilight Zone)" label="episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346258" start="21294" end="21301" title="The Box (2009 film)" label="The Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q583407" start="21486" end="21490" title="Duel (1971 film)" label="Duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q940102" start="21988" end="22003" title="Amazing Stories (1985 TV series)" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q4945912" start="22950" end="22983" title="Born of Man and Woman (collection)" label="&amp;quot;Born of Man and Woman&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24097" end="24107" title="Richard_Matheson#Television" label="Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q972001" start="24136" end="24164" title="The Incredible Shrinking Man" label="The Incredible Shrinking Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q213457" start="24185" end="24204" title="The Beat Generation" label="The Beat Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049168" start="24225" end="24239" title="House of Usher (film)" label="House of Usher"/>
<link wikidata="Q609852" start="24260" end="24279" title="Master of the World (1961 film)" label="Master of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170048" start="24300" end="24324" title="The Pit and the Pendulum (1961 film)" label="The Pit and the Pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641223" start="24345" end="24360" title="Burn Witch Burn (film)" label="Burn Witch Burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641223" start="24388" end="24406" title="Night of the Eagle" label="Night of the Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958511" start="24441" end="24457" title="Charles Beaumont" label="Charles Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506962" start="24462" end="24473" title="George Baxt" label="George Baxt"/>
<link wikidata="Q313185" start="24522" end="24534" title="Fritz Leiber" label="Fritz Leiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451844" start="24543" end="24558" title="Tales of Terror" label="Tales of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196370" start="24579" end="24588" title="The Raven (1963 film)" label="The Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429269" start="24609" end="24630" title="The Comedy of Terrors" label="The Comedy of Terrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242772" start="24651" end="24672" title="The Last Man on Earth (1964 film)" label="The Last Man on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545496" start="24768" end="24775" title="Fanatic (1965 film)" label="Fanatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723834" start="24796" end="24814" title="The Young Warriors (film)" label="The Young Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279077" start="24891" end="24910" title="The Devil Rides Out (film)" label="The Devil Rides Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189595" start="24940" end="24955" title="Dennis Wheatley" label="Dennis Wheatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019620" start="24971" end="24978" title="De Sade (film)" label="De Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q32734" start="24999" end="25009" title="Cold Sweat (1970 film)" label="Cold Sweat"/>
<link wikidata="Q784610" start="25082" end="25095" title="The Omega Man" label="The Omega Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210392" start="25161" end="25185" title="The Legend of Hell House" label="The Legend of Hell House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235406" start="25250" end="25261" title="Icy Breasts" label="Icy Breasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305728" start="25335" end="25352" title="Somewhere in Time (film)" label="Somewhere in Time"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25422" end="25446" title="Twilight Zone: The Movie" label="Twilight Zone: The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25476" end="25500" title="Twilight Zone: The Movie#Fourth segment .28.22Nightmare at 20.2C000 Feet.22.29" label="Nightmare at 20,000 Feet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199837" start="25521" end="25529" title="Jaws 3-D" label="Jaws 3-D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194122" start="25550" end="25563" title="Loose Cannons (1990 film)" label="Loose Cannons"/>
<link wikidata="Q839434" start="25584" end="25604" title="What Dreams May Come (film)" label="What Dreams May Come"/>
<link wikidata="Q975358" start="25646" end="25660" title="Stir of Echoes" label="Stir of Echoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q212689" start="25702" end="25713" title="I Am Legend (film)" label="I Am Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346258" start="25755" end="25762" title="The Box (2009 film)" label="The Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q261759" start="25837" end="25847" title="Real Steel" label="Real Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983510" start="25931" end="25939" title="Buckskin (TV series)" label="Buckskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="26038" end="26055" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248082" start="26096" end="26116" title="Have Gun Will Travel" label="Have Gun Will Travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248164" start="26171" end="26190" title="Bourbon Street Beat" label="Bourbon Street Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071394" start="26239" end="26247" title="Cheyenne (1955 TV series)" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809074" start="26299" end="26305" title="Lawman (TV series)" label="Lawman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990884" start="26346" end="26354" title="Thriller (U.S. TV series)" label="Thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247850" start="26417" end="26424" title="Combat!" label="Combat!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247206" start="26493" end="26518" title="The Alfred Hitchcock Hour" label="The Alfred Hitchcock Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247482" start="26659" end="26683" title="The Girl from U.N.C.L.E." label="The Girl from U.N.C.L.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q1565710" start="26737" end="26775" title="Bob Hope Presents The Chrysler Theater" label="Bob Hope Presents The Chrysler Theater"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26824" end="26854" title="Star Trek: The Original Series" label="Star Trek: The Original Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984502" start="26868" end="26884" title="The Enemy Within (Star Trek)" label="The Enemy Within"/>
<link wikidata="Q583407" start="26905" end="26909" title="Duel (1971 film)" label="Duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754110" start="26930" end="26947" title="The Night Stalker (1972 film)" label="The Night Stalker"/>
<link wikidata="Q639433" start="26968" end="26981" title="Night Gallery" label="Night Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27002" end="27013" title="Night Gallery#Season 2" label="The Funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754108" start="27034" end="27053" title="The Night Strangler (film)" label="The Night Strangler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208299" start="27074" end="27089" title="Dying Room Only" label="Dying Room Only"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761813" start="27110" end="27124" title="Ghost Story (TV series)" label="Circle of Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254404" start="27189" end="27215" title="Bram Stoker&amp;#x27;s Dracula (1973 film)" label="Bram Stoker&amp;#x27;s Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438906" start="27236" end="27254" title="Scream of the Wolf" label="Scream of the Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752270" start="27275" end="27292" title="The Morning After (1974 film)" label="The Morning After"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998814" start="27313" end="27330" title="Trilogy of Terror" label="Trilogy of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q692808" start="27376" end="27386" title="Dan Curtis" label="Dan Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704223" start="27395" end="27408" title="Dead of Night (1977 film)" label="Dead of Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q77889620" start="27473" end="27510" title="The Strange Possession of Mrs. Oliver" label="The Strange Possession of Mrs. Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750453" start="27531" end="27553" title="The Martian Chronicles (TV miniseries)" label="The Martian Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q559270" start="27592" end="27605" title="The Twilight Zone (1985 TV series)" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q573836" start="27619" end="27633" title="Button, Button (The Twilight Zone)" label="Button, Button"/>
<link wikidata="Q940102" start="27673" end="27688" title="Amazing Stories (1985 TV series)" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q940102" start="27731" end="27746" title="Amazing Stories (1985 TV series)" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27798" end="27840" title="The Dreamer of Oz: The L. Frank Baum Story" label="The Dreamer of Oz: The L. Frank Baum Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356357" start="27861" end="27893" title="Rod Serling&amp;#x27;s Lost Classics" label="Rod Serling&amp;#x27;s Lost Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842097" start="27914" end="27934" title="Trilogy of Terror II" label="Trilogy of Terror II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578761" start="28181" end="28197" title="William F. Nolan" label="William F. Nolan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25628" wikidata="Q2602270" url="?curid=25628" title="Geography of Réunion">
<text>Réunion is an island in Southern Africa, in the Indian Ocean, east of Madagascar. It is an overseas region of France. The total area of the island is 2,512 km2, of which 10 km2 is water. The island has a coastline of 207 km. The maritime claims of Réunion include an exclusive economic zone of 200 nautical miles, and a territorial sea of . Reunion is geologically situated in the Somali Plate.

== Climate ==
The climate in Réunion is tropical, but temperature moderates with elevation. The weather is cool and dry from May to November, and hot and rainy from November to April. The terrain is mostly rugged and mountainous, with fertile lowlands along the coast. The lowest point is the Indian Ocean and the highest is Piton des Neiges at 3,069 m.

== Natural resources ==
Réunion&#x27;s natural resources are fish, arable land and hydropower. In 1993, 60 km2 of the land was irrigated. The use of the land in 1993 is described in the table below:
== Natural hazards ==
Local natural hazards include: periodic, devastating cyclones (December to April), and Piton de la Fournaise (2,631 m) on the southeastern coast, which is an active volcano.
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="0" end="7" title="Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="33" end="39" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="48" end="60" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="70" end="80" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="110" end="116" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="267" end="290" title="Exclusive Economic Zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415528" start="381" end="393" title="Somali Plate" label="Somali Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="414" end="421" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q135712" start="436" end="444" title="tropical climate" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q186131" start="584" end="591" title="terrain" label="terrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="689" end="701" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545452" start="721" end="737" title="Piton des Neiges" label="Piton des Neiges"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="834" end="844" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="878" end="887" title="irrigation" label="irrigated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049644" start="1059" end="1080" title="Piton de la Fournaise" label="Piton de la Fournaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="1137" end="1144" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25629" wikidata="Q3043969" url="?curid=25629" title="Demographics of Réunion">
<text>This article concerns the demography of [[Réunion]]. People of Réunion are &quot;Réunionese&quot;. The official language is French, and Réunionese Creole is widely spoken. The population of Réunion is as of .

==Population==


As of , estimates put the population of Réunion at , with a growth rate of 1.63%. The birth rate was estimated at 21.84 births per 1,000 population, and the death rate at 5.55 deaths per 1,000 population in the same year. The net migration rate was zero in 2000. The following table describes age structure and sex ratios in Réunion.

=== Structure of the population ===

Structure of the population (01.01.2010) (Provisional estimates): 
Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 01.I.2015): 
Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2020):

==Vital statistics==

===Life expectancy===
At birth, life expectancy is 76.5 years for male children, and 82.9 for female (figures for 2011).

==Ethnic groups==

Ethnic groups present include people of European, African, Malagasy, Indians and Chinese origin as well as many of mixed race. Local names for these are used: Yabs, Cafres, Malbars and Zarabes (both ethnic groups of Indian origin) and Chinois.

The proportion of people of each ethnicity is not known exactly, since the 1958 constitution bans questions about ethnicity in compulsory censuses in France. Long-established and ongoing intermarriage also blurs the issue. People of primarily African descent make up 35% of the population, those of primarily European and Indian descent number about one-quarter each, and people of Chinese, Malay, Vietnamese descent, along with those identifying as Métis, form roughly 15%.

People of Tamil origin make up the majority of the Indo-Réunionnais people about 12%-13% of the island&#x27;s population; Gujarati, Bihari and other origins form the remainder of the population. The island&#x27;s community of Muslims from modern region of Pakistan and North India and elsewhere is also commonly referred to as Zarabes.

Creoles (a name given to those born on the island, of various ethnic origins), make up the majority of the population. Groups that are not creole include people from Metropolitan France (known as Zoreilles) and those from Mayotte and the Comoros.

=== Genetics ===
In 2005, a genetic study on the racially mixed people of Réunion found the following.
For maternal (mitochondrial) DNA, the haplogroups are Indian (44%), East Asian (27%), European/Middle Eastern (19%) or African (10%). The Indian lineages are M2, M6 and U2i, the East Asian ones are E1, D5a, M7c, and F (E1 and M7c also found only in South East Asia and in Madagascar), the European/Middle Eastern ones are U2e, T1, J, H, and I, and the African ones are L1b1, L2a1, L3b, and L3e1.

For paternal (Y-chromosome) DNA, the haplogroups are European/Middle Eastern (85%) or East Asian (15%). The European lineages are R1b and I, the Middle Eastern one E1b1b1c (formerly E3b3) (also found in Northeast Africa), and the East Asian ones are R1a (found in many parts of the world including Europe and Central and Southern Asia but the particular sequence has been found in Asia) and O3.

== Languages ==
French is the only official language of Reunion. Although not official, Réunion Creole is also commonly spoken by the majority of the population. One can hear it in any administration or office, but education is only in French.

Tamil is taught as optional language in some schools. Due to the diverse population, other languages such as Mandarin, Hakka and Cantonese are also spoken by members of the Chinese community, but fewer people speak these languages as younger generations start to converse in French. The number of speakers of Indian languages (mostly Urdu and Gujarati) is also dropping sharply. Arabic is taught in mosques and spoken by a small community of Arabs.

== Religion ==


The predominant religion is the Catholic branch of Christianity, with Hinduism, Islam and Buddhism also represented, among others.

==See also==
* Demographics of France

==References==
==External links==
*Réunion page at INSEE</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3043969" start="26" end="51" title="Demographics of Réunion" label="demography of [[Réunion]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="124" end="130" title="French Language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q13198" start="136" end="153" title="Réunionese Creole" label="Réunionese Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="253" end="263" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="267" end="274" title="Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q203516" start="313" end="323" title="birth rate" label="birth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="384" end="394" title="death rate" label="death rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932516" start="453" end="471" title="net migration rate" label="net migration rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q329823" start="520" end="533" title="age structure" label="age structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068155" start="538" end="548" title="sex ratios" label="sex ratios"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="831" end="846" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="980" end="988" title="White people" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q385967" start="990" end="997" title="African diaspora" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q310983" start="999" end="1007" title="Malagasy people" label="Malagasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386166" start="1009" end="1016" title="Réunionnais of Indian origin" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963786" start="1021" end="1028" title="Chinois (Réunion)" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="1055" end="1065" title="mixed race" label="mixed race"/>
<link wikidata="Q13233540" start="1105" end="1111" title="Cafres" label="Cafres"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281621" start="1113" end="1120" title="Malbars" label="Malbars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574835" start="1125" end="1132" title="Zarabes" label="Zarabes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386166" start="1139" end="1169" title="Indo-Réunionnais" label="ethnic groups of Indian origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963786" start="1175" end="1182" title="Chinois (Réunion)" label="Chinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q832508" start="1260" end="1277" title="Constitution of France" label="1958 constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q173491" start="1671" end="1676" title="Tamil people" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386166" start="1712" end="1728" title="Indo-Réunionnais" label="Indo-Réunionnais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282294" start="1783" end="1791" title="Gujarati people" label="Gujarati"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529576" start="1793" end="1799" title="Bihari people" label="Bihari"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="1887" end="1893" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="1917" end="1925" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058785" start="1930" end="1941" title="North India" label="North India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574835" start="1988" end="1995" title="Zarabes" label="Zarabes"/>
<link wikidata="Q498640" start="1998" end="2005" title="Réunionnais Creole people" label="Creoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q212429" start="2164" end="2183" title="Metropolitan France" label="Metropolitan France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3576099" start="2194" end="2203" title="Zoreilles" label="Zoreilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063" start="2220" end="2227" title="Mayotte" label="Mayotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q970" start="2236" end="2243" title="Comoros" label="Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="2363" end="2376" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584179" start="2507" end="2509" title="Haplogroup M (mtDNA)" label="M2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584179" start="2511" end="2513" title="Haplogroup M (mtDNA)" label="M6"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2518" end="2521" title="Haplogroup U (mtDNA)#Haplogroup U2" label="U2i"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584154" start="2547" end="2549" title="Haplogroup E (mtDNA)" label="E1"/>
<link wikidata="Q920052" start="2551" end="2554" title="Haplogroup D (mtDNA)" label="D5a"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584179" start="2556" end="2559" title="Haplogroup M (mtDNA)" label="M7c"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526359" start="2565" end="2566" title="Haplogroup F (mtDNA)" label="F"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2671" end="2674" title="Haplogroup U (mtDNA)#Haplogroup U2" label="U2e"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501564" start="2676" end="2678" title="Haplogroup T (mtDNA)" label="T1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375490" start="2680" end="2681" title="Haplogroup J (mtDNA)" label="J"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584156" start="2683" end="2684" title="Haplogroup H (mtDNA)" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584157" start="2690" end="2691" title="Haplogroup I (mtDNA)" label="I"/>
<link wikidata="Q122595" start="2718" end="2722" title="Haplogroup L1 (mtDNA)" label="L1b1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2724" end="2728" title="Haplogroup L2 (mtDNA)#Haplogroup L2a1" label="L2a1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584176" start="2730" end="2733" title="Haplogroup L3 (mtDNA)" label="L3b"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584176" start="2739" end="2743" title="Haplogroup L3 (mtDNA)" label="L3e1"/>
<link wikidata="Q202771" start="2760" end="2772" title="Y-chromosome" label="Y-chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q674896" start="2876" end="2879" title="R1b" label="R1b"/>
<link wikidata="Q429334" start="2884" end="2885" title="Haplogroup I (Y-DNA)" label="I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2910" end="2933" title="Haplogroup E1b1b (Y-DNA)#E1b1b1c (E-M123)" label="E1b1b1c (formerly E3b3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q80658" start="2996" end="2999" title="R1a" label="R1a"/>
<link wikidata="Q428845" start="3137" end="3139" title="Haplogroup O3 (Y-DNA)" label="O3"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="3158" end="3164" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q13198" start="3230" end="3244" title="Réunion Creole" label="Réunion Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="3387" end="3392" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="3496" end="3504" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33375" start="3506" end="3511" title="Hakka language" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033959" start="3516" end="3525" title="Yue Chinese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="3721" end="3725" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137" start="3730" end="3738" title="Gujarati language" label="Gujarati"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="3766" end="3772" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3886" end="3894" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="3905" end="3917" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135755" start="3924" end="3932" title="Hinduism in Réunion" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="3934" end="3939" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="3944" end="3952" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172523" start="4001" end="4023" title="Demographics of France" label="Demographics of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q156616" start="4076" end="4081" title="INSEE" label="INSEE"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25630" wikidata="Q669724" url="?curid=25630" title="Politics of Réunion">
<text>Réunion is an overseas département of France.

The island&#x27;s conventional name is the &quot;Department of Réunion&quot;, or &quot;Réunion&quot;. The French flag is used on the island. The island&#x27;s capital is Saint-Denis, and the island is divided into 4 arrondissements, 24 communes and 25 cantons.

Réunion is governed by French law under Article 73 of the Constitution of France, under which the laws and regulations are applicable as of right, as in metropolitan France. Suffrage is granted universally to all those over the age of 18.

== Executive branch ==
The chief of state is the French President Emmanuel Macron, who is represented by Prefect Jacques Billant. The President of the Regional Council is Huguette Bello. The president of the Departmental Council is Cyrille Melchior.

Elections held in Réunion include the French presidential vote. A prefect is appointed by the president on the advice of the French Ministry of the Interior. The presidents of the General and Regional Councils are elected by members of those councils.
== Legislative branch ==
The regional council has 45 seats, and exercises the powers of a French region and certain specific powers of an overseas region.

The departmental council has 50 seats, and exercises departmental powers.

=== Regional Council composition ===
=== Departmental Council composition ===
=== Deputies ===
Réunion elects seven deputies to the National Assembly for five-year terms.
=== Senators ===
Réunion elects four senators to the Senate for six-year terms.
=== European Parliament ===
Réunion participates in French elections to the European Parliament. It was formerly a part of the Indian Ocean section of the Overseas constituency, before France reverted to a single constituency in 2019.

== Judicial branch ==
The Judicial branch of the overseas département is run by the Cour d&#x27;Appel (Court of Appeals).

== International organization participation ==
Reunion is a member in the Indian Ocean Commission (InOC) since 1986, and of the World Federation of Trade Unions.

== See also ==
* Elections in Réunion
* Regional Council of Réunion

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="0" end="7" title="Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q202216" start="14" end="34" title="overseas département" label="overseas département"/>
<link wikidata="Q47045" start="217" end="228" title="Saint-Denis, Réunion" label="Saint-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q30059" start="263" end="277" title="arrondissement" label="arrondissement"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="283" end="290" title="Communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q184188" start="299" end="305" title="Cantons of France" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195493" start="332" end="342" title="French law" label="French law"/>
<link wikidata="Q832508" start="367" end="389" title="Constitution of France" label="Constitution of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="598" end="614" title="French President" label="French President"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052772" start="615" end="630" title="Emmanuel Macron" label="Emmanuel Macron"/>
<link wikidata="Q131319787" start="654" end="661" title="Colonial and Departmental Heads of Réunion" label="Prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q47485356" start="662" end="677" title="Jacques Billant" label="Jacques Billant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994247" start="700" end="716" title="Regional Council of Réunion" label="Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142774" start="720" end="734" title="Huguette Bello" label="Huguette Bello"/>
<link wikidata="Q23782071" start="757" end="777" title="Departmental Council of Réunion" label="Departmental Council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="781" end="797" title="Cyrille Melchior" label="Cyrille Melchior"/>
<link wikidata="Q40231" start="800" end="809" title="Elections" label="Elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q14006248" start="838" end="862" title="Elections in France" label="French presidential vote"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="866" end="873" title="Prefect#Modern sub-national administration" label="prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518496" start="925" end="956" title="French Ministry of the Interior" label="French Ministry of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q193582" start="1415" end="1432" title="National Assembly (France)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q215987" start="1507" end="1513" title="Senate (France)" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="1610" end="1629" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q556529" start="1689" end="1710" title="Overseas Territories of France (European Parliament constituency)" label="Overseas constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115631" start="1967" end="1990" title="Indian Ocean Commission" label="Indian Ocean Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q748999" start="2021" end="2053" title="World Federation of Trade Unions" label="World Federation of Trade Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354810" start="2073" end="2093" title="Elections in Réunion" label="Elections in Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994247" start="2096" end="2123" title="Regional Council of Réunion" label="Regional Council of Réunion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25631" wikidata="Q3578632" url="?curid=25631" title="Economy of Réunion">
<text>The economy of Réunion has traditionally been based on agriculture. Sugarcane has been the primary crop for more than a century, and in some years it accounts for 85% of exports. The government has been pushing the development of a tourist industry to relieve high unemployment, which amounts to more than 40% of the labour force.

The gap in Réunion between the well-off and the poor is large and accounts for persistent social tensions. The outbreak of severe rioting in February 1991 illustrated the seriousness of socio-economic tensions.

In 2007 the GDP per capita of Réunion at nominal exchange rates, not at PPP, was €17,146 (US$23,501). However, while this is exceptionally high compared with its neighbours in Madagascar and the African continent, it is only 57% of the 30,140 euros per capita GDP of metropolitan France in 2007.Reunion Island is one of the French departments with the highest poverty rate with 42% of the population living below the poverty line.  The total GDP of the island was US$18.8 billion in 2007.

== Other export products ==
* Essential oil (mainly vetyver and rose scent geranium)
* Bourbon vanilla
* Fish &amp; seafood, mainly tuna, swordfish and Patagonian toothfish

== Statistics ==
*Currency: 1 euro (sign: €; code: EUR) = 100 Cent
*Exchange rates: &quot;See:&quot; Euro exchange rate
*Fiscal year: calendar year

== See also ==

* Economy of France in: French Guiana, French Polynesia, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Mayotte, New Caledonia, Réunion, Saint Barthélemy, Saint Martin, Saint Pierre and Miquelon, Wallis and Futuna
* Taxation in France
* Economic history of France
* Poverty in France

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3578632" start="4" end="22" title="Economy of Réunion" label="economy of Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="55" end="66" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="68" end="77" title="Sugarcane" label="Sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="232" end="248" title="tourism" label="tourist industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="265" end="277" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="343" end="350" title="Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="556" end="570" title="GDP per capita" label="GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="616" end="619" title="Purchasing power parity" label="PPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="720" end="730" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q212429" start="811" end="830" title="metropolitan France" label="metropolitan France"/>
<link wikidata="Q170885" start="1064" end="1077" title="Essential oil" label="Essential oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q378568" start="1086" end="1093" title="Chrysopogon zizanioides" label="vetyver"/>
<link wikidata="Q164306" start="1098" end="1117" title="Pelargonium graveolens" label="rose scent geranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q13241" start="1121" end="1136" title="vanilla" label="Bourbon vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146274" start="1166" end="1170" title="tuna" label="tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q164327" start="1172" end="1181" title="swordfish" label="swordfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052665" start="1186" end="1206" title="Patagonian toothfish" label="Patagonian toothfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="1238" end="1242" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q308229" start="1244" end="1248" title="Currency symbol" label="sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q18100" start="1250" end="1251" title="Euro sign" label="€"/>
<link wikidata="Q37431" start="1253" end="1257" title="ISO 4217" label="code"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1309" end="1327" title="Euro#Exchange rates" label="Euro exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578671" start="1397" end="1410" title="Economy of French Guiana" label="French Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578682" start="1412" end="1428" title="Economy of French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012" start="1430" end="1440" title="Economy of Guadeloupe" label="Guadeloupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578676" start="1442" end="1452" title="Economy of Martinique" label="Martinique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297045" start="1454" end="1461" title="Economy of Mayotte" label="Mayotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578679" start="1463" end="1476" title="Economy of New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25362" start="1487" end="1503" title="Economy of Saint Barthélemy" label="Saint Barthélemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333762" start="1505" end="1517" title="Economy of Saint Martin (France)" label="Saint Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34617" start="1519" end="1544" title="Economy of Saint Pierre and Miquelon" label="Saint Pierre and Miquelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148762" start="1546" end="1563" title="Economy of Wallis and Futuna" label="Wallis and Futuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112435" start="1566" end="1584" title="Taxation in France" label="Taxation in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138130" start="1587" end="1613" title="Economic history of France" label="Economic history of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372902" start="1616" end="1633" title="Poverty in France" label="Poverty in France"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25633" wikidata="Q3537867" url="?curid=25633" title="Transport in Réunion">
<text>Réunion possesses a network of highways, which cover a total distance of 2,784 km. Of that length, 2,187 km of the road system is paved. There are no roads going into the cirque of Mafate; thus transportation there has to take place by foot or helicopter.

==Motorways==
A system of highways that run between the main cities has been developed.

*Route national 1 (N1/RN1) connects Saint-Denis to Saint-Pierre, also connecting Le Port, Saint-Paul, La Saline Les Hauts and Saint-Louis. It has a length of 76 km.
*N2 connects Saint-Denis to Saint-Benoît, also connecting Saint-André. Its length is 34 km.
*N3 connects Saint-Pierre to Saint-Benoît, but the motorway only goes from Saint-Pierre to Le Tampon, with a length of 7 km.

==Sea==
There are two major ports in Réunion: Le Port and Pointe des Galets. There are six marinas. Réunion possesses a merchant marine of one ship with a weight exceeding 1,000 gt, which is a chemical tanker.

==Airports==
There are two airports on the island, of which both have paved runways. The main airport is the international Roland Garros Airport located close to Saint-Denis and the second one is the Aéroport de Pierrefond, located near Saint-Pierre in the south of the island.

==Railways==
There are no railways in Réunion, with the exception of a short tourist line, which was originally part of a larger rail network. A 42 km light rail project was cancelled in 2010, after a regional government change in 2010, mostly because the project was considered too expensive (€1.6 billion). The region&#x27;s new president chose to fund a new coastal road instead. In 2019 a new light rail system was proposed to link Le Barachois with the airport.

==Cable car==
Due to huge traffic congestion, channelled by the rough topography on the main coastal road, public authorities invested in a cable car transportation system, linking two districts of Saint-Denis : Le Chaudron to Bois de Nèfles, with three intermediate stops. Built by POMA, a leading French company in cable car systems, it opened in March 2022. With 46 cabins, it is designed to transport up to 1200 persons per hour. This cable car is the first in the whole Indian Ocean.

==References==
===Notes===

===Further reading===
*

==External links==
* Aéroport Roland Garros (Main airport)
* Images of tourist railway</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="0" end="7" title="Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="31" end="38" title="highway" label="highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q184368" start="171" end="177" title="cirque" label="cirque"/>
<link wikidata="Q131830" start="181" end="187" title="Mafate" label="Mafate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="244" end="254" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="283" end="291" title="highways" label="highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363190" start="347" end="363" title="Route nationale 1 (Réunion)" label="Route national 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q47045" start="382" end="393" title="Saint-Denis, Réunion" label="Saint-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q249884" start="397" end="409" title="Saint-Pierre, Réunion" label="Saint-Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q956943" start="427" end="434" title="Le Port, Réunion" label="Le Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q316887" start="436" end="446" title="Saint-Paul, Réunion" label="Saint-Paul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="448" end="467" title="La Saline Les Hauts" label="La Saline Les Hauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617681" start="472" end="483" title="Saint-Louis, Réunion" label="Saint-Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q47045" start="524" end="535" title="Saint-Denis, Réunion" label="Saint-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q478215" start="539" end="551" title="Saint-Benoît, Réunion" label="Saint-Benoît"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649370" start="569" end="580" title="Saint-André, Réunion" label="Saint-André"/>
<link wikidata="Q249884" start="616" end="628" title="Saint-Pierre, Réunion" label="Saint-Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q478215" start="632" end="644" title="Saint-Benoît, Réunion" label="Saint-Benoît"/>
<link wikidata="Q249884" start="678" end="690" title="Saint-Pierre, Réunion" label="Saint-Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q13648" start="694" end="703" title="Le Tampon" label="Le Tampon"/>
<link wikidata="Q956943" start="775" end="782" title="Le Port, Réunion" label="Le Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q972474" start="787" end="804" title="Pointe des Galets" label="Pointe des Galets"/>
<link wikidata="Q721207" start="820" end="826" title="marina" label="marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q865132" start="849" end="864" title="merchant marine" label="merchant marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719498" start="907" end="909" title="Gross Tonnage" label="gt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="967" end="974" title="airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q17430" start="1063" end="1084" title="Roland Garros Airport" label="Roland Garros Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q47045" start="1102" end="1113" title="Saint-Denis, Réunion" label="Saint-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17431" start="1140" end="1162" title="Aéroport de Pierrefond" label="Aéroport de Pierrefond"/>
<link wikidata="Q249884" start="1177" end="1189" title="Saint-Pierre, Réunion" label="Saint-Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="1370" end="1380" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q47045" start="1885" end="1896" title="Saint-Denis, Réunion" label="Saint-Denis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25636" wikidata="Q216672" url="?curid=25636" title="History of Romania">
<text>The Romanian state was formed in 1859 through a personal union of the Danubian Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia. The new state, officially named Romania since 1866, gained independence from the Ottoman Empire in 1877. During World War I, after declaring its neutrality in 1914, Romania fought together with the Allied Powers from 1916. In the aftermath of the war, Bukovina, Bessarabia, Transylvania, and parts of Banat, Crișana, and Maramureș became part of the Kingdom of Romania. In June–August 1940, as a consequence of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact and Second Vienna Award, Romania was compelled to cede Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina to the Soviet Union and Northern Transylvania to Hungary. In November 1940, Romania signed the Tripartite Pact and, consequently, in June 1941 entered World War II on the Axis side, fighting against the Soviet Union until August 1944, when it joined the Allies and recovered Northern Transylvania.

Following the war and occupation by the Red Army, Romania became a socialist republic and a member of the Warsaw Pact. After the 1989 Revolution, Romania began a transition towards democracy and a market economy.

== Prehistory ==

Remains of 34,950-year-old modern humans were discovered in present-day Romania when the &quot;Peștera cu Oase&quot; (&quot;Cave with Bones&quot;) was uncovered in 2002. The Romanian fossils are among the oldest remains of &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; in Europe.

The Neolithic-Age Cucuteni area in northeastern Romania was the western region of one of the earliest European civilizations, known as the Cucuteni–Trypillia culture. The earliest-known salt works is at Poiana Slatinei near the village of Lunca; it was first used in the early Neolithic around 6050 BC by the Starčevo culture and later by the Cucuteni-Trypillia culture in the pre-Cucuteni period.

== Dacia ==
The Dacians, who are widely accepted to be the same people as the Getae, were a branch of Thracians who inhabited Dacia, which corresponds with modern Romania, Moldova, northern Bulgaria, south-western Ukraine, Hungary east of the Danube river and West Banat in Serbia.

The earliest written evidence of people living in the territory of present-day Romania comes from Herodotus in Book IV of his &quot;Histories&quot;, written in 440 BC; He writes that the tribal union/confederation of the Getae were defeated by the Persian Emperor Darius the Great during his campaign against the Scythians.

Strabo&#x27;s account of the lands inhabited by the Getae: 
The Dacians spoke a dialect of the Thracian language but were influenced culturally by the neighbouring Scythians in the east and by the Celtic invaders of Transylvania in the 4th century.

Due to the fluctuating nature of the Dacian states, especially before the time of Burebista and before the 1st century AD, the Dacians would often be split into different kingdoms. Known rulers of the Dacians include Charnabon in the 5th century BC, Cothelas in the 4th century BC, Rex Histrianorum mentioned in 339 BC, Dual in the 3rd century BC, Moskon in the 3rd century BC, Dromichaetes in the 3rd century BC, Zalmodegicus around 200 BC, Rhemaxos also around 200 BC, Rubobostes before 168 BC, Zoltes after 168 BC, Oroles in the 2nd century BC, Dicomes in the 1st century BC, Rholes in the 1st century BC, Dapyx in the 1st century BC, Zyraxes in the 1st century BC, Burebista between 82–44 BC, Deceneus between 44 BC and around 27 BC, Thiamarkos between 1st century BC and 1st century AD, Cotiso between c. 40 BC and c.9 BC, Comosicus between 9 BC and 30 AD, Scorilo between c. 30 AD and 70 AD Coson in the 1st century AD, Duras between c. 69 AD to 87 AD, and Decebalus between 87 AD to 106 AD. Dacia became a province of the Roman Empire in 106 AD, conquered by Emperor Trajan. However the Free Dacians outside of the Roman Empire remain independent under Pieporus, king of Dacian Costoboci in the 2nd century AD, and possibly Tarbus in the 2nd century AD.

The Dacia of King Burebista (82–44 BC) stretched from the Black Sea to the source of the river Tisa and from the Balkan Mountains to Bohemia. During that period, the Geto-Dacians conquered a wider territory and Dacia extended from the Middle Danube to the Black Sea littoral (between Apollonia and Olbia) and from present-day Slovakia&#x27;s mountains to the Balkan mountains. In 53 BC, Julius Caesar stated that the lands of the Dacians started on the eastern edge of the Hercynian Forest (Black Forest).

Geto-Dacians inhabited both sides of the Tisa river prior to the rise of the Celtic Boii and again after the latter were defeated by the Dacians under the king Burebista. It seems likely that the Dacian state arose as a tribal confederacy, which was united only by charismatic leadership. Before 168 BC, under the rule of king Rubobostes in present-day Transylvania, the Dacians&#x27; power in the Carpathian basin increased after they defeated the Celts, who held power in the region since the Celtic invasion of Transylvania in the 4th century BC.
A kingdom of Dacia also existed as early as the first half of the 2nd century BC under King Oroles. Conflicts with the Bastarnae and the Romans (112–109 BC, 74 BC), against whom they had assisted the Scordisci and Dardani, greatly weakened the resources of the Dacians. The Roman historian Trogus Pompeius wrote about king Oroles punishing his soldiers into sleeping at their wives&#x27; feet and doing the household chores, because of their initial failure in defeating the invaders. Subsequently, the now &quot;highly motivated&quot; Dacian army defeated the Bastarnae.
Burebista (Boerebista), a contemporary of Julius Caesar, ruled Geto-Dacian tribes between 82 BC and 44 BC. He reorganised the army and attempted to raise the moral standard and obedience of the people by persuading them to give up wine. During his reign, the limits of the Dacian Kingdom were extended to their maximum. The Bastarnae and Boii were conquered, and even the Greek towns of Olbia and Apollonia on the Black Sea (&quot;Pontus Euxinus&quot;) recognized Burebista&#x27;s authority. In 53 BC, Caesar stated that the Dacian territory was on the eastern border of the Hercynian Forest.
Burebista suppressed the indigenous minting of coinages by four major tribal groups, adopting imported or copied Roman denarii as a monetary standard. During his reign, Burebista transferred the Geto-Dacian capital from Argedava to Sarmizegetusa Regia. For at least one and a half centuries, Sarmizegetusa was the Dacians&#x27; capital and reached its peak under King Decebalus. The Dacians appeared so formidable that Caesar contemplated an expedition against them, which his death in 44 BC prevented. In the same year, Burebista was murdered, and the kingdom was divided into four (later five) parts under separate rulers.
The Dacians are often mentioned during the reign of Augustus, who claimed they were compelled to recognize Roman supremacy. However, they were by no means subdued, and in later times, to maintain their independence, they seized every opportunity to cross the frozen Danube during the winter, ravaging Roman cities in the province of Moesia.

During the War of Actium, King Cotiso found himself courted by the two Roman antagonists, Octavian and Mark Antony. Cotiso was in a strong position to dictate terms of any alliance. Octavian/Augustus worried about the frontier and possible alliance between Mark Antony and the Dacians, and plotted an expedition against Dacia around 35 BC. Despite several small conflicts, no serious campaigns were mounted. King Cotiso chose to ally himself with Mark Antony. According to Alban Dewes Winspear and Lenore Kramp Geweke he &quot;proposed that the war should be fought in Macedonia rather than Epirus. Had his proposal been accepted, the subjection of Antonius might have been less easily accomplished.&quot;


According to Appian, Mark Antony is responsible for the statement that Augustus sought to secure the goodwill of Cotiso by giving him his daughter, and he himself marrying a daughter of Cotiso. According to Suetonius, Cotiso refused the alliance and joined the party of Mark Antony. Suetonius (LXIII, &quot;Life of Augustus&quot;) says Mark Antony wrote that Augustus betrothed his daughter Julia to marry Cotiso to create an alliance between the two men. This failed when Cotiso betrayed Augustus. According to Cassius Dio, the story about the proposed marriages is hardly credible and may have been invented by Mark Antony as propaganda to offset his own alliance with Cleopatra.

After Augustus&#x27;s victory in the civil wars, the Romans punished the Dacian ruler, who was apparently defeated in battle around 25 BC. In his account of his achievements as emperor, the &quot;Res Gestae&quot;, Augustus claimed that the Dacians had been subdued. This was not entirely true, because Dacian troops frequently crossed the Danube to ravage parts of Pannonia and Moesia. He may have survived until the campaign of Marcus Vinicius in the Dacian area c.9 BC. Vinicius was the first Roman commander to cross the Danube and invade Dacia itself. Ioana A. Oltean argues that Cotiso probably died at some point during this campaign. According to Jordanes Cotiso was succeeded by Comosicus, about whom nothing is known beyond the name.
King Scorilo was Comosicus&#x27; successor and may have been the father of Decebalus. The Roman historian Jordanes lists a series of Dacian kings before Decebalus, placing a ruler called &quot;Coryllus&quot; between Comosicus and the independently attested Duras, who preceded Decebalus as king. Coryllus is supposed to have presided over a long peaceful 40-year rule, however, the name Coryllus is not mentioned by any other historian, and it has been argued that it &quot;is a misspelling of Scorilo, a relatively common Dacian name&quot;. On this basis, Coryllus has been equated with the Scorilo named on an ancient Dacian pot bearing the words “Decebalus per Scorilo”. Though far from certain, this has also been translated as &quot;Decebalus son of Scorilo&quot;. If so, this might mean that Decebalus was the son of Scorilo, with Duras possibly being either an older son or a brother of Scorilo. A Dacian king (&quot;dux Dacorum&quot;) called Scorilo is also mentioned by Frontinus, who says he was in power during a period of turmoil in Rome. From this evidence and references to Dacian kings elsewhere, it is suggested that Scorilo probably ruled from the 30s or 40s AD through to 69–70.

The Dacians regularly raided into Roman territory in Moesia. The emperors Tiberius and Caligula solved this problem by paying protection money to the Dacians in the form of annual subsidies. This policy appears to have coincided with the reign of King Scorilo. Scorilo&#x27;s brother was apparently held captive for a period in Rome, but was released in exchange for a promise that the Dacians would not intervene in Rome&#x27;s volatile power-politics. During the reign of Emperor Nero, troops were withdrawn from the Dacian border. When Nero was overthrown in 69, the empire was plunged into turmoil in the Year of Four Emperors. The Dacians appear to have tried to take advantage of the situation to launch an invasion of Moesia in alliance with the Sarmatian Roxolani. The invasion was ill-timed. Licinius Mucianus, a supporter of Vespasian, was advancing with an army through Moesia towards Rome to overthrow Vitellius. The Dacians unexpectedly encountered his forces and suffered a major defeat. Scorilo appears to have died around this time.
King Duras ruled between the years AD 69 and 87, during the time that Domitian ruled the Roman Empire. He was one of a series of rulers following the Great King Burebista. Duras&#x27; immediate successor was Decebalus. Duras may be identical to the &quot;Diurpaneus&quot; (or &quot;Dorpaneus&quot;) identified in Roman sources as the Dacian leader who, in the winter of 85, ravaged the southern banks of the Danube, which the Romans defended for many years. Many authors refer to him as &quot;Duras-Diurpaneus&quot;. Other scholars argue that Duras and Diurpaneus are different individuals, or that Diurpaneus is identical to Decebalus.

The Roman governor of Moesia, Oppius Sabinus, raised an army and went to war with the Dacians following the Dacian (Getae) raids into Roman territory. Diurpaneus and his people defeated and decapitated Oppius Sabinus. When news of the defeat reached Rome, the citizens became fearful that the conquering enemy would invade and spread destruction further into the Empire. Because of this fear, Domitian was obliged to move with his entire army into Illyria and Moesia, the latter of which was now split into Upper and Lower regions. He ordered his commander Cornelius Fuscus to cross the Danube. The Dacians were pushed back across the Danube, but Fuscus suffered a crushing defeat when ambushed by &quot;Diurpaneus&quot;. At this point, the probably elderly Duras seems to have peacefully ceded power to Decebalus.

King Decebalus ruled the Dacians between AD 87 and 106. The frontiers of Decebal&#x27;s Dacia were marked by the Tisa River to the west, by the trans-Carpathians to the north and by the Dniester River to the east.
From AD 85 to 89, the Dacians under Decebalus were engaged in two wars with the Romans. In AD 85, the Dacians had swarmed over the Danube and pillaged Moesia. In AD 87, the Roman troops sent by the Emperor Domitian against them under Cornelius Fuscus, were defeated and Cornelius Fuscus was killed by the Dacians by authority of their ruler, Diurpaneus. After this victory, Diurpaneus took the name of &quot;Decebalus&quot;, but the Romans were victorious in the Battle of Tapae in AD 88 and a truce was drawn up . The next year, AD 88, new Roman troops under Tettius Julianus, gained a significant advantage, but were obligated to make a humiliating peace following the defeat of Domitian by the Marcomanni, leaving the Dacians effectively independent. Decebalus was given the status of &quot;king client to Rome&quot;, receiving military instructors, craftsmen and money from Rome.

To increase the glory of his reign, restore the finances of Rome, and end a treaty perceived as humiliating, Trajan resolved on the conquest of Dacia, the capture of the famous Treasure of Decebalus, and control over the Dacian gold mines of Transylvania. The result of his first campaign (101–102) was the siege of the Dacian capital Sarmizegethusa and the occupation of part of the country. Emperor Trajan recommenced hostilities against Dacia and, following an uncertain number of battles, and with Trajan&#x27;s troops pressing towards the Dacian capital Sarmizegethusa, Decebalus once more sought terms.

Decebalus rebuilt his power over the following years and attacked Roman garrisons again in AD 105. In response Trajan again marched into Dacia, attacking the Dacian capital in the siege of Sarmizegethusa, and razing it to the ground, the defeated Dacian king Decebalus committed suicide. In the following years, a new city was built on the ruins of the Dacian capital named Ulpia Traiana Sarmizegetusa. With part of Dacia quelled as the Roman province Dacia Traiana. Trajan subsequently invaded the Parthian empire to the east. Rome&#x27;s borders in the east were governed indirectly in this period, through a system of client states, which led to less direct campaigning than in the west.

The weapon most associated with the Dacian forces that fought against Trajan&#x27;s army during his invasions of Dacia was the falx, a single-edged scythe-like weapon. The falx was able to inflict horrible wounds on opponents, easily disabling or killing the heavily armored Roman legionaries. Trajan erected the Column of Trajan in Rome to commemorate his victory.

=== Roman Dacia (106–275 AD) ===

Roman Dacia, also known as Dacia Felix, was organized as an imperial province. It is estimated that the population of Roman Dacia ranging from 650,000 to 1,200,000. The area was the focus of a massive Roman colonization. New mines were opened and ore extraction intensified, while agriculture, stock breeding, and commerce flourished. Roman Dacia was of great importance to the military stationed throughout the Balkans and became an urban province, with about ten cities known and all of them originating from old military camps. Eight of these held the highest rank of &quot;colonia&quot;. Ulpia Traiana Sarmizegetusa was the financial, religious, and legislative center and where the imperial &quot;procurator&quot; (finance officer) had his seat, while Apulum was Roman Dacia&#x27;s military center. The region was soon settled by the retired veterans who had served in the Dacian Wars, principally the Fifth (&quot;Macedonia&quot;), Ninth (&quot;Claudia&quot;), and Fourteenth (&quot;Gemina&quot;) legions.

While it is certain that colonists in large numbers were imported from all over the empire to settle in Roman Dacia, this appears to be true for the newly created Roman towns only. The lack of epigraphic evidence for native Dacian names in the towns suggests an urban–rural split between Roman multi-ethnic urban centres and the native Dacian rural population. On at least two occasions the Dacians rebelled against Roman authority: first in 117 AD, which caused the return of Trajan from the east, and in 158 AD when they were put down by Marcus Statius Priscus.

Some scholars have used the lack of &quot;civitates peregrinae&quot; in Roman Dacia, where indigenous peoples were organised into native townships, as evidence for the Roman depopulation of Dacia. Prior to its incorporation into the empire, Dacia was a kingdom ruled by one king, and did not possess a regional tribal structure that could easily be turned into the Roman &quot;civitas&quot; system as used successfully in other provinces of the empire.
As per usual Roman practice, Dacian males were recruited into auxiliary units and dispatched across the empire. The &quot;Vexillation Dacorum Parthica&quot; accompanied the emperor Septimius Severus during his Parthian expedition, while the &quot;cohort I Ulpia Dacorum&quot; was posted to Cappadocia. Others included the &quot;II Aurelia Dacorum&quot; in Pannonia Superior, the &quot;cohort I Aelia Dacorum&quot; in Roman Britain, and the &quot;II Augusta Dacorum milliaria&quot; in Moesia Inferior. There are a number of preserved relics originating from &quot;cohort I Aelia Dacorum&quot;, with one inscription describing the &quot;sica&quot;, a distinctive Dacian weapon. Numerous Roman military diplomas issued for Dacian soldiers discovered after 1990 indicate that veterans preferred to return to their place of origin; per usual Roman practice, these veterans were given Roman citizenship upon their discharge.

In an attempt to fill the cities, cultivate the fields, and mine the ore, a large-scale attempt at colonization took place with colonists coming in &quot;from all over the Roman world&quot;. The colonists were a heterogeneous mix: of the some 3,000 names preserved in inscriptions found by the 1990s, 74% (c. 2,200) were Latin, 14% (c. 420) were Greek, 4% (c. 120) were Illyrian, 2.3% (c. 70) were Celtic, 2% (c. 60) were Thraco-Dacian, and another 2% (c. 60) were Semites from Syria. Regardless of their place of origin, the settlers and colonists were a physical manifestation of Roman civilisation and imperial culture, bringing with them the most effective Romanizing mechanism: the use of Latin as the new &quot;lingua franca&quot;.

The first settlement at Sarmizegetusa was made up of Roman citizens who had retired from their legions. Based upon the location of names scattered throughout the province, it has been argued that a large percentage of colonists originated from Noricum and western Pannonia. Specialist miners (the Pirusti tribesmen) were brought in from Dalmatia.
Although the Romans conquered and destroyed the ancient Kingdom of Dacia, much of the land remained outside of Roman Imperial authority. The conquest changed the balance of power in the region and was the catalyst for a renewed alliance of Germanic and Celtic tribes and kingdoms against the Roman Empire. However, the material advantages of the Roman Imperial system was attractive to the surviving aristocracy. Afterwards, many of the Dacians became Romanised (see also Origin of Romanians). In AD 183, war broke out in Dacia: few details are available, but it appears two future contenders for the throne of emperor Commodus, Clodius Albinus and Pescennius Niger, both distinguished themselves in the campaign.

According to Lactantius, the Roman emperor Decius (AD 249–251) had to restore Roman Dacia from the Carpo-Dacians of Zosimus &quot;having undertaken an expedition against the Carpi, who had then possessed themselves of Dacia and Moesia&quot;.

Even so, the Germanic and Celtic kingdoms, particularly the Gothic tribes, slowly moved toward the Dacian borders, and within a generation were making assaults on the province. Ultimately, the Goths succeeded in dislodging the Romans and restoring the &quot;independence&quot; of Dacia following Emperor Aurelian&#x27;s withdrawal, in 275. At the boundaries of Roman Dacia, Carpi (Free Dacians) were still strong enough to sustain five battles in eight years against the Romans from AD 301–308. Roman Dacia was left in AD 275 by the Romans, to the Carpi again, and not to the Goths. There were still Dacians in AD 336, against whom Constantine the Great fought.

The province was abandoned by Roman troops, and, according to the &quot;Breviarium historiae Romanae&quot; by Eutropius, Roman citizens &quot;from the towns and lands of Dacia&quot; were resettled to the interior of Moesia. Under Diocletian, c. AD 296, in order to defend the Roman border, fortifications were erected by the Romans on both banks of the Danube.

=== Constantinian reconquest of Dacia ===

In 328 the emperor Constantine the Great inaugurated the Constantine&#x27;s Bridge (Danube) at Sucidava, (today Corabia in Romania) in hopes of reconquering Dacia, a province that had been abandoned under Aurelian. In the late winter of 332, Constantine campaigned with the Sarmatians against the Goths. The weather and lack of food cost the Goths dearly: reportedly, nearly one hundred thousand died before they submitted. In celebration of this victory Constantine took the title &quot;Gothicus Maximus&quot; and claimed the subjugated territory as the new province of Gothia. In 334, after Sarmatian commoners had overthrown their leaders, Constantine led a campaign against the tribe. He won a victory in the war and extended his control over the region, as remains of camps and fortifications in the region indicate. Constantine resettled some Sarmatian exiles as farmers in Illyrian and Roman districts, and conscripted the rest into the army. The new frontier in Dacia was along the Brazda lui Novac line supported by Castra of Hinova, Rusidava and Castra of Pietroasele. The limes passed to the north of Castra of Tirighina-Bărboși and ended at Sasyk Lagoon near the Dniester River. Constantine took the title &quot;Dacicus maximus&quot; in 336. Some Roman territories north of the Danube resisted until Justinian.

Victohali, Taifals, and Thervingians are tribes mentioned inhabiting Dacia in 350, after the Romans left. Archeological evidence suggests that Gepids were disputing Transylvania with Taifals and Tervingians. Taifals, once independent from Gothia, became federati of the Romans, from whom they obtained the right to settle Oltenia.

In 376 the region was conquered by Huns, who kept it until the death of Attila in 453. The Gepid tribe, ruled by Ardaric, used it as their base, until in 566 it was destroyed by Lombards. Lombards abandoned the country and the Avars (second half of the 6th century) dominated the region for 230 years, until their kingdom was destroyed by Charlemagne in 791. At the same time, Slavic people arrived.

The &quot;Hellenic chronicle&quot; could possibly qualify to the first testimony of Romanians in Pannonia and Eastern Europe during the time of Attila, implying that the formation of Proto-Romanian (or Common Romanian) from Vulgar Latin started in the 5th century. The words &quot;torna, torna fratre&quot; (return, return brother) recorded in connection with a Roman campaign across the Balkan Mountains by Theophylact Simocatta and Theophanes the Confessor evidence the development of a Romance language in the late 6th century. The words were shouted &quot;in native parlance&quot; by a local soldier in 587 or 588. The 11th-century Persian writer, Gardizi, wrote about a Christian people &quot;from the Roman Empire&quot; called &quot;N.n.d.r&quot;, inhabiting the lands along the Danube. He describes them as &quot;more numerous than the Hungarians, but weaker&quot;. Historian Adolf Armbruster identified this people as the Romanians. Hungarian historiography identifies this people as the Bulgarians.

=== Name ===

The Dacians were known as &quot;Geta&quot; (plural &quot;Getae&quot;) in Ancient Greek writings, and as &quot;Dacus&quot; (plural &quot;Daci&quot;) or &quot;Getae&quot; in Roman documents, but also as &quot;Dagae&quot; and &quot;Gaete&quot; as depicted on the late Roman map &quot;Tabula Peutingeriana&quot;. It was Herodotus who first used the ethnonym &quot;Getae&quot; in his &quot;Histories&quot;. In Greek and Latin, in the writings of Julius Caesar, Strabo, and Pliny the Elder, the people became known as &#x27;the Dacians&#x27;. Getae and Dacians were interchangeable terms, or used with some confusion by the Greeks. Latin poets often used the name &quot;Getae&quot;. Modern historians prefer to use the name &quot;Geto-Dacians&quot;. Strabo describes the Getae and Dacians as distinct but cognate tribes. This distinction refers to the regions they occupied. Strabo and Pliny the Elder also state that Getae and Dacians spoke the same language.

By contrast, the name of &quot;Dacians&quot;, whatever the origin of the name, was used by the more western tribes who adjoined the Pannonians and therefore first became known to the Romans. According to Strabo&#x27;s &quot;Geographica&quot;, the original name of the Dacians was &quot;&quot;Daoi&quot;. The name Daoi (one of the ancient Geto-Dacian tribes) was certainly adopted by foreign observers to designate all the inhabitants of the countries north of Danube that had not yet been conquered by Greece or Rome.

The ethnographic name &quot;Daci&quot; is found under various forms within ancient sources. Greeks used the forms &quot;Dakoi&quot;&quot; (Strabo, Dio Cassius, and Dioscorides) and &quot;Daoi&quot; (singular Daos). The form &quot;Daoi&quot; was frequently used according to Stephan of Byzantium. Latins used the forms &quot;Davus&quot;, &quot;Dacus&quot;, and a derived form &quot;Dacisci&quot; (Vopiscus and inscriptions).

There are similarities between the ethnonyms of the Dacians and those of Dahae (Greek &quot;Dáoi&quot;, &quot;Dáai&quot;, &quot;Dai&quot;, &quot;Dasai&quot;; Latin &quot;Dahae&quot;, &quot;Daci&quot;), an Indo-European people located east of the Caspian Sea, until the 1st millennium BC. Scholars have suggested that there were links between the two peoples since ancient times. The historian David Gordon White has, moreover, stated that the &quot;Dacians ... appear to be related to the Dahae&quot;.

By the end of the first century AD, all the inhabitants of the lands which now form Romania were known to the Romans as Daci, with the exception of some Celtic and Germanic tribes who infiltrated from the west, and Sarmatian and related people from the east.

=== Carpi and Costoboci ===

The Carpi were a sizeable group of tribes, who lived beyond the north-eastern boundary of Roman Dacia. The majority view among modern scholars is that the Carpi were a North Thracian tribe and a subgroup of the Dacians. However, some historians classify them as Slavs.
According to Heather, the Carpi were Dacians from the eastern foothills of the Carpathian range – modern Moldavia and Wallachia – who had not been brought under direct Roman rule at the time of Trajan&#x27;s conquest of Transylvania Dacia. After they generated a new degree of political unity among themselves in the course of the third century, these Dacian groups came to be known collectively as the Carpi.
The ancient sources about the Carpi, before 104 AD, located them on a territory situated between the western side of Eastern European Galicia and the mouth of the Danube. The name of the tribe is homonymous with the Carpathian mountains. Carpi and Carpathian are Dacian words derived from the root &quot;(s)ker&quot;- &quot;cut&quot; cf. Albanian &quot;karp&quot; &quot;stone&quot; and Sanskrit &quot;kar&quot;- &quot;cut&quot;.A quote from the 6th-century Byzantine chronicler Zosimus referring to the Carpo-Dacians (Greek: Καρποδάκαι, Latin: &quot;Carpo-Dacae&quot;), who attacked the Romans in the late 4th century, is seen as evidence of their Dacian ethnicity. In fact, Carpi/Carpodaces is the term used for Dacians outside of Dacia proper. However, that the Carpi were Dacians is shown not so much by the form Καρποδάκαι in Zosimus as by their characteristic place-names in –&quot;dava&quot;, given by Ptolemy in their country. The origin and ethnic affiliations of the Carpi have been debated over the years; in modern times they are closely associated with the Carpathian Mountains, and a good case has been made for attributing to the Carpi a distinct material culture, &quot;a developed form of the Geto-Dacian La Tene culture&quot;, often known as the Poienesti culture, which is characteristic of this area.

The main view is that the &quot;Costoboci&quot; were ethnically Dacian. Others considered them a Slavic or Sarmatian tribe. There was also a Celtic influence, so that some consider them a mixed Celtic and Thracian group that appear, after Trajan&#x27;s conquest, as a Dacian group within the Celtic superstratum. The Costoboci inhabited the southern slopes of the Carpathians. Ptolemy named the Coestoboci (Costoboci in Roman sources) twice, showing them divided by the Dniester and the Peucinian (Carpathian) Mountains. This suggests that they lived on both sides of the Carpathians, but it is also possible that two accounts about the same people were combined. There was also a group, the Transmontani, that some modern scholars identify as Dacian Transmontani Costoboci of the extreme north. The name Transmontani was from the Dacians&#x27; Latin, literally &quot;people over the mountains&quot;. Mullenhoff identified these with the Transiugitani, another Dacian tribe north of the Carpathian mountains.

Based on the account of Dio Cassius, Heather (2010) considers that Hasding Vandals, around 171 AD, attempted to take control of lands which previously belonged to the free Dacian group called the Costoboci. Hrushevskyi mentions that the earlier widespread view that these Carpathian tribes were Slavic has no basis. This would be contradicted by the Coestobocan names themselves that are known from the inscriptions, written by a Coestobocan and therefore presumably accurately. These names sound quite unlike anything Slavic. Scholars such as Tomaschek, Schütte and Russu consider these Costobocian names to be Thraco-Dacian.

=== Culture ===
Body-painting was customary among the Dacians. It is probable that the tattooing originally had a religious significance. They practiced symbolic-ritual tattooing or body painting for both men and women, with hereditary symbols transmitted up to the fourth generation.

Dacian religion was considered by the classic sources as a key source of authority, suggesting to some that Dacia was a predominantly theocratic state led by priest-kings. However, the layout of the Dacian capital Sarmizegethusa indicates the possibility of co-rulership, with a separate high king and high priest. Ancient sources recorded the names of several Dacian high priests (Deceneus, Comosicus and Vezina) and various orders of priests: &quot;god-worshipers&quot;, &quot;smoke-walkers&quot; and &quot;founders&quot;. Both Hellenistic and Oriental influences are discernible in the religious background, alongside chthonic and solar motifs.
According to Herodotus&#x27; account of the story of Zalmoxis or Zamolxis, the Getae (speaking the same language as the Dacians and the Thracians, according to Strabo) believed in the immortality of the soul, and regarded death as merely a change of country. Their chief priest held a prominent position as the representative of the supreme deity, Zalmoxis, who is called also Gebeleizis by some among them. Strabo wrote about the high priest of King Burebista Deceneus: &quot;a man who not only had wandered through Egypt, but also had thoroughly learned certain prognostics through which he would pretend to tell the divine will; and within a short time he was set up as god (as I said when relating the story of Zamolxis)&quot;.

The Goth Jordanes in his &quot;Getica&quot; (&quot;The origin and deeds of the Goths&quot;), also gives an account of Deceneus the highest priest, and considered Dacians a nation related to the Goths. Besides Zalmoxis, the Dacians believed in other deities, such as Gebeleizis, the god of storm and lightning, possibly related to the Thracian god Zibelthiurdos. Another important deity was Bendis, goddess of the moon and the hunt. By a decree of the oracle of Dodona, which required the Athenians to grant land for a shrine or temple, her cult was introduced into Attica by immigrant Thracian residents, and, though Thracian and Athenian processions remained separate, both cult and festival became so popular that in Plato&#x27;s time (c. 429–13 BC) its festivities were naturalised as an official ceremony of the Athenian city-state, called the Bendideia.

== Early Middle Ages ==


Between 271 and 275, the Roman army and administration left Dacia, which was invaded later by the Goths. The Goths mixed with the local people until the 4th century, when the Huns, a nomadic people, arrived. The Gepids, the Avars, the Bulgars and their Slavic subjects ruled Transylvania until the 8th century. The territories of Wallachia and Moldavia were under the control of the First Bulgarian Empire from its establishment in 681 until around the time of the Hungarian conquest of Transylvania at the end of the 10th century.

After the disintegration of Great Bulgaria following Khan Kubrat&#x27;s death in 665, a large group of Bulgars followed Asparukh, the third son of the great Khan, who headed westwards. In the 670&#x27;s they settled in the area known as the Ongal to the north of the Danube delta. From there, Asparukh&#x27;s cavalry in alliance with local Slavs annually attacked the Byzantine territories in the south. In 680, the Byzantine Emperor Constantine IV led a large army to fight the Bulgars but was defeated in the battle of Ongal and the Byzantines were forced to acknowledge the formation of a new country, the First Bulgarian Empire. The northern border of the country followed the southern slopes of the Carpathian mountains from the Iron Gates and reached the Dneper river or possibly just the Dniester river to the east.

The Bulgarians&#x27; main rivals in the area were the Avars to the west and the Khazars to the east. The Khazars were a serious threat; they marched westwards after they crushed the resistance of Kubrat&#x27;s eldest son Bayan and waged a war against Asparukh, who was killed, although not necessarily by a Khazar. To protect their northern borders, the Bulgarians built several enormous ditches that ran the whole length of the border from the Timok river to the Black Sea.

In 803, Krum of Bulgaria became Khan. The new, energetic ruler focused on the north-west where Bulgaria&#x27;s old enemies the Avars experienced difficulties and setbacks against the Franks under Charlemagne. Between 804 and 806, the Bulgarian armies annihilated the Avars and destroyed their state. Krum took the eastern parts of the former Avar Khaganate and took over rule of the local Slavic tribes. Bulgaria&#x27;s territory extended twice from the middle Danube to the north of present-day Budapest to the Dnester, though its possession of Transylvania is debatable. In 813 Khan Krum seized Odrin and plundered the whole of Eastern Thrace. He took 50,000 captives who were settled in &quot;Bulgaria across the Danube&quot;.

== High Middle Ages ==

During the Middle Ages the Bulgarian Empire controlled vast areas to the north of the river Danube (with interruptions) from its establishment in 681 to its fragmentation in 1371–1422. These lands were called by contemporary Byzantine historians Bulgaria across the Danube, or Transdanubian Bulgaria. Original information for the centuries-old Bulgarian rule there is scarce as the archives of the Bulgarian rulers were destroyed and little is mentioned for this area in Byzantine or Hungarian manuscripts. During the First Bulgarian Empire, the Dridu culture developed in the beginning of the 8th century and flourished until the 11th century. It represents an early medieval archaeological culture which emerged in the region of the Lower Danube. In Bulgaria it is usually referred to as Pliska-Preslav culture.

The Pechenegs, the Cumans and Uzes are also mentioned by historic chronicles on the territory of Romania until the founding of the Romanian principalities of Wallachia in the south by Basarab I around 1310 in the High Middle Ages, and Moldavia in the east, by Dragoș around 1352.

The Pechenegs, a semi-nomadic Turkic people of the Central Asian steppes, occupied the steppes north of the Black Sea from the 8th to the 11th centuries, and by the 10th century they were in control of all of the territory between the Don and the lower Danube rivers. During the 11th and 12th centuries, the nomadic confederacy of the Cumans and Eastern Kipchaks dominated the territories between present-day Kazakhstan, southern Russia, Ukraine, southern Moldavia and western Wallachia.

It is debated whether elements of the mixed Daco–Roman population survived in Transylvania through the Dark Ages to become the ancestors of modern Romanians or whether the first Vlachs and Romanians appeared in the area in the 13th century after a northward migration from the Balkan Peninsula. There is also debate over the ethnicity of Transylvania&#x27;s population before the Hungarian conquest.

Several Kings of Hungary invited settlers from Central and Western Europe, such as the Saxons, to occupy Transylvania. The Székelys were brought to southeastern Transylvania as border guards. Romanians are mentioned by the Hungarian documents of a township called &quot;Olahteluk&quot; in 1283 in Bihar County. The &quot;land of Romanians&quot; (&quot;Terram Blacorum&quot;) appeared in Făgăraș and this area was mentioned under the name &quot;Olachi&quot; in 1285.

King Louis I of Hungary dispatched Andrew Lackfi, Count of the Székelys to invade the lands of the Golden Horde in retaliation for the Tatars&#x27;s earlier plundering raids against Transylvania. Lackfi and his army of mainly Székely warriors inflicted a defeat on a large Tatar army on 2 February 1345. The campaign had finally expelled the Tatars and ended the devastations of the Mongols in Transylvania. The Golden Horde was pushed back behind the Dniester River, thereafter the Golden Horde&#x27;s control of the lands between the Eastern Carpathians and the Black Sea weakened. Moldavia was founded in 1346.

Independent Wallachia had been near the border of the Ottoman Empire since the 14th century until it had gradually succumbed to the Ottomans&#x27; influence during the next centuries with brief periods of independence. Vlad III the Impaler was a Prince of Wallachia in 1448, 1456–62, and 1476. Vlad III is remembered for his raids against the Ottoman Empire and his initial success of keeping his small country free for a short time. In the Western world, Vlad is best known for being the inspiration for the main character in Bram Stoker&#x27;s 1897 novel &quot;Dracula&quot;. The evaluates him as a ferocious but just ruler, and the defender of the Wallachian independence and of the European Christianity against Ottoman expansionism.

Stephen the Great () is thought to be the best voivode of Moldavia. Stephen ruled for 47 years, an unusually long period for that time. He was a successful military leader and statesman, losing only two out of fifty battles; he built a shrine to commemorate each victory, founding 48 churches and monasteries, many of which have a unique architectural style and are listed in UNESCO&#x27;s list of World Heritage Sites. Stefan&#x27;s most prestigious victory was over the Ottoman Empire in 1475 at the Battle of Vaslui, for which he raised the Voroneț Monastery. For this victory, Pope Sixtus IV nominated him as &quot;verus christianae fidei athleta&quot; (a true Champion of the Christian Faith). After Stephen&#x27;s death, Moldavia also came under the suzerainty of the Ottoman Empire during the 16th century.

Although the core religious vocabulary of the Romanian language originated from Latin, many terms were adopted from the Slavic Orthodoxy, showing a significant influence dating from the Bulgarian Empire (681–1396).

== Early modern period ==

After the Battle of Mohács in 1526, Transylvania belonged to the Eastern Hungarian Kingdom, from which the Principality of Transylvania emerged in 1570 by the Treaty of Speyer.

By 1541, the entire Balkan peninsula and the southern and central parts of Hungary became Ottoman provinces. Moldavia, Wallachia, and Transylvania came under Ottoman suzerainty but remained fully autonomous and until the 18th century, had some internal independence. However, some Romanian Cities (Tulcea, Constanta, Giurgiu, Turnu, Braila, Timișoara, Arad, Pecica, Tighina, Catetea Alba and Basserabia) were completely under Ottoman control. During this period, the Romanian lands experienced a slow disappearance of the feudalism and the distinguishing of some rulers like Vasile Lupu and Dimitrie Cantemir in Moldavia, Matei Basarab and Constantin Brâncoveanu in Wallachia. At that time, the Russian Empire appeared to become the political and military power the threatened the Romanian principalities.

John II, the non-Habsburg King of Hungary, moved his royal court to Alba Iulia in Transylvania and after his abdication from the Hungarian throne, he became the first Prince of Transylvania. His 1568 Edict of Turda was the first decree of religious freedom in the modern European history. In the aftermath, Transylvania was ruled by mostly Calvinist Hungarian princes until the end of the 17th century, and Protestantism flourished in the region.

Michael the Brave was the Prince of Wallachia from 1593 to 1601, of Transylvania from 1599 to 1600, and of Moldavia in 1600. For a short time during his reign, Transylvania was ruled together with Moldavia and Wallachia in a personal union. After his death the union dissolved and as vassal tributary states, Moldavia and Wallachia still had internal autonomy and some external independence, which was finally lost in the 18th century.

The Principality of Transylvania reached its golden age under the absolutist rule of Gábor Bethlen from 1613 to 1629. In 1690, the Habsburg monarchy gained possession of Transylvania through the Hungarian crown. After the failure Rákóczi&#x27;s War of Independence in 1711 Habsburg control of Transylvania was consolidated, and Hungarian Transylvanian princes were replaced with Habsburg imperial governors. In 1699, Transylvania became a part of the Habsburg monarchy following the Austrian victory over the Turks. The Habsburgs rapidly expanded their empire; in 1718 Oltenia, a major part of Wallachia, was annexed to the Habsburg monarchy and was only returned in 1739. In 1775, the Habsburgs later occupied the north-western part of Moldavia, which was later called Bukovina and was incorporated to the Austrian Empire in 1804. The eastern half of the principality, which was called Bessarabia, was occupied in 1812 by Russia.

During the Austro-Hungarian rule of Transylvania, Romanians formed the majority of the population. 

After their defeat to the Russians, the Ottoman Empire restored the Danube ports of Turnu, Giurgiu and Braila to Wallachia, and agreed to give up their commercial monopoly and recognize freedom of navigation on the Danube as specified in the Treaty of Adrianople, which was signed in 1829. The political autonomy of the Romanian principalities grew as their rulers were elected for life by a Community Assembly consisting of boyars, a method used to reduce political instability and Ottoman interventions. Following the war, Romanian lands came under Russian occupation under the governance of General Pavel Kiselyov until 1844. During his rule, the local boyars enacted the first Romanian constitution.

=== Revolutions of 1848 and formation of modern Romania ===
In 1848, there was a revolution in Moldavia, Wallachia and Transylvania perpetrated by Tudor Vladimirescu and his Pandurs in the Wallachian uprising of 1821. The goals of the revolutionaries were full independence for Moldavia and Wallachia, and national emancipation in Transylvania; these were not fulfilled but were the basis of the subsequent revolutions. The revolution in 1848 already carried the seeds of the national dream of a unified and united Romania, though the &quot;idea of unification&quot; had been known from earlier works of Naum Ramniceanu (1802) and Ion Budai-Deleanu (1804).

=== United Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia ===

After the unsuccessful 1848 revolution, the Great Powers rejected the Romanians&#x27; desire to officially unite in a single state, forcing the Romanians to proceed alone in their struggle against the Turks.

The aftermath of the Russian Empire&#x27;s defeat in the Crimean War brought the 1856 Treaty of Paris, which started a period of common tutelage for the Ottomans and a Congress of Great Powers—the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, the Second French Empire, the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia, the Austrian Empire, Prussia, and, though never again fully, Russia. While the Moldavia-Wallachia unionist campaign, which had come to dominate political demands, was accepted with sympathy by the French, Russians, Prussians, and Sardinians, it was rejected by the Austrian Empire, and looked upon with suspicion by Great Britain and the Ottomans.

Negotiations amounted to an agreement on a minimal formal union, to be known as the United Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia but with separate institutions and thrones and with each principality electing its own prince. However, the Moldavian and Wallachian elections for the ad-hoc divans in 1859 profited from an ambiguity in the text of the final agreement, which, while specifying two separate thrones, did not prevent the same person from occupying both thrones simultaneously and ultimately ushered in the ruling of Alexandru Ioan Cuza as &quot;Domnitor&quot; (Ruling Prince) over both Moldavia and Wallachia from 1859 onwards, uniting both principalities.
Alexander Ioan Cuza carried out reforms including abolishing serfdom and started to unite the institutions one by one in spite of the convention from Paris. With help from unionists, he unified the government and parliament, effectively merging Wallachia and Moldavia into one country and in 1862 the country&#x27;s name was changed to United Principalities of Romania.

Romania was created as a personal union that did not include Transylvania, where the upper class and the aristocracy remained mainly Hungarian, although Romanian nationalism clashed with Hungarian nationalism at the end of the 19th century. Austria-Hungary, especially under the Dual Monarchy of 1867, kept the territory firmly in control even in parts of Transylvania where Romanians constituted a vast majority.

== Independence and Kingdom of Romania ==
In an 1866 &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot;, Cuza was exiled and replaced with Prince Karl of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen. He was appointed Domnitor, Ruling Prince of the United Principality of Romania, as Prince Carol of Romania. Romania declared its independence from the Ottoman Empire after the Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878), in which the Ottomans fought against the Russian empire.
In the 1878 Treaty of Berlin, Romania was officially recognized as an independent state by the Great Powers. In return, Romania ceded the district Bessarabia to Russia in exchange for access to the Black Sea ports and acquired Dobruja. In 1881, Romania&#x27;s principality status was raised to that of a kingdom and on 26 March that year, Prince Carol became King Carol I of Romania.

The period between 1878 and 1914 was one of stability and progress for Romania. During the Second Balkan War, Romania joined Greece, Serbia and Montenegro against Bulgaria. In the Treaty of Bucharest of 1913, Romania gained Southern Dobruja and established the Durostor and Caliacra counties.

The governments of Britain and the United States repeatedly protested the brutal treatment of Romanian Jews, who were regarded as aliens who had no civil or political rights. Romania engaged in arbitrary expulsions of Jews as vagabonds and tolerated violent pogroms against Jews, many of whom fled to the United States.

== World War I ==


Due to Romania&#x27;s unfavorable location between the Russian Empire and Kingdom of Bulgaria as well as King Carol I of Romania&#x27;s German heritage, Romania had a secret treaty of alliance with Germany and Austria-Hungary since 1883. When the war began in 1914, King Carol I summoned an emergency midnight council where he revealed the secret treaty of alliance. While the king favored Germany, the nation&#x27;s political elite favored the Entente. As such, the crown council took the decision to remain neutral. When the Austro-Hungarian Empire invoked a casus foederis on Romania and Italy linked to the secret treaty of alliance since 1883, both Italy and Romania refused to honor the treaty on the grounds that the attacks on Austria were not &quot;unprovoked&quot;, as stipulated in the treaty of alliance.

King Carol I died on 10 October 1914, and his successor, King Ferdinand I of Romania was much more favorable towards the Entente. In August 1916, Romania received an ultimatum to decide whether to join the Entente. The Romanian government agreed to enter the war on the side of the Entente, although the situation on the battle fronts was not favorable. For Romania, the highest priority was taking Transylvania from Hungary, with around 2,800,000 Romanians out of around 5,000,000 people. The Allies wanted Romania to join their side in order to cut rail communications between Germany and Turkey, and to cut off Germany&#x27;s oil supplies. Britain made loans, France sent a military training mission, and Russia promised modern munitions. The Allies promised at least 200,000 soldiers to defend Romania against Bulgaria to the south, and help it invade Austria-Hungary.

On 4 August 1916, Romania and the Entente signed the Political Treaty and Military Convention, which established the parameters of Romania&#x27;s participation in the war. The Allies promised to Romania the Austro-Hungarian regions of Bukovina, Transylvania up to Tisza river and all of Banat. Joining the Entente had large popular support. The Romanian campaign plan (Hypothesis Z) consisted in attacking Austria-Hungary in Transylvania, while defending Southern Dobruja and Giurgiu from Bulgaria in the south.

The German high command was seriously worried about the prospect of Romania entering the war, Paul von Hindenburg writing:

It is certain that so relatively small a state as Rumania had never before been given a role so important, and, indeed, so decisive for the history of the world at so favorable a moment. Never before had two great Powers like Germany and Austria found themselves so much at the mercy of the military resources of a country which had scarcely one twentieth of the population of the two great states. Judging by the military situation, it was to be expected that Rumania had only to advance where she wished to decide the world war in favor of those Powers which had been hurling themselves at us in vain for years. Thus everything seemed to depend on whether Rumania was ready to make any sort of use of her momentary advantage.

On 27 August 1916, the Romanian Army launched an attack against Austria-Hungary, with limited Russian support. The Romanian offensive was initially successful and Romania managed to occupy 1/3rd of Transylvania, but when the German army arrived in Transylvania the Romanians began to be pushed back. While on the southern front, a combined German-Bulgarian-Turkish offensive gradually occupied all of Dobruja and captured Giurgiu. The bulk of the Romanian army managed to escape encirclement from Giurgiu and retreated to Bucharest. As a result of the Battle of Bucharest, the Central Powers occupied Bucharest on 6 December 1916.

In the summer of 1917, one of the largest concentrations of forces in World War I was present in Romania: 9 armies, 80 infantry divisions and 19 cavalry divisions, totaling 974 battalions, 550 squadrons and 923 artillery batteries. 800,000 combatants and 1,000,000 reservists were present.

In 1917, a new Central Powers offensive began, leading to the battles of Mărăști, Mărășești, and Oituz, where the Romanian army managed to defeat the Central Powers offensives and take back some territory in a counter-offensive. Romania lost over 27,000 men while Germany and Austria-Hungary lost over 60,000. Notably, the Romanian heroine Ecaterina Teodoroiu and German General Karl von Wenninger were killed at the end of the Battle of Mărășești. However, shortly after the military victories, the October Revolution threw the Russian Empire out of the war leaving Romania alone on the Eastern Front, completely surrounded by the Central Powers. This forced Romania to drop out of the war, and it signed the Treaty of Bucharest with the Central Powers in May 1918.

In 1939, General August von Mackensen would describe the Central Powers offensive from 1917 as following:

After fighting with the Rumanians in 1916, I thought the Rumanian army had disappeared, that it did not exist in 1917 when I had to make a new effort to conquer the rest of Rumania. But when the battles started in Mărășești, Mărăști, Oituz, I was told that in front of me was the Rumanian army that I was convinced had disappeared. But the Rumanian army has risen from its ashes like the Phoenix bird. The attacks on the bayonet scared everyone, and they were running, the Germans, who didn&#x27;t usually run, this time they were running.

Under the terms of the Treaty of Bucharest, Romania would lose all of Dobruja to Bulgaria, all the Carpathian passes to Austria-Hungary and would lease all of its oil reserves to Germany for 99 years. However, the Central Powers recognized Romania&#x27;s union with Bessarabia who had recently declared independence from the Russian Empire following the October Revolution and voted for union with Romania in April 1918. The parliament signed the treaty, however King Ferdinand refused to sign it, hoping for an Allied victory on the western front. In October 1918, Romania renounced the treaty and on 10 November 1918, one day before the German armistice, Romania reentered the war after the successful Allied advances on the Macedonian front and advanced in Transylvania. The next day, the Treaty of Bucharest was nullified by the terms of the Armistice of Compiègne. Total Romanian deaths from 1914 to 1918, military and civilian, within contemporary borders, were estimated at 748,000.

=== Transylvanian, Bukovinian and Bessarabian Romanians ===

In Austria-Hungary, ethnic Romanians entered the war from the very beginning, with hundreds of thousands of Transylvanian and Bukovinian Romanians being mobilized throughout the war. Although most Transylvanian Romanians were loyal to the Austro-Hungarian Empire, over time, reactionary sentiments emerged, especially after Romania joined the war in 1916. Many of the previously loyal soldiers decided that it was much better to risk their lives through desertion, rather than shoot their ethnical conationals. According to studies made by the army of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, the dedication of the Romanian military to the interest of Austria-Hungary was reduced, only ethnic Italians of the same empire can compete with them for the last place in a ranking according to devotion to the state per 100 soldiers, out of about 300,000 Austro-Hungarian deserters, 150.000 were ethnic Romanians.

The Austro-Hungarian Romanian prisoners of war in the Russian Empire would eventually form the Romanian Volunteer Corps in Russia who would eventually be repatriated to Romania in 1917 and take part in the battles of Mărăști, Mărășești and Oituz and the Romanian Legion in Siberia who resisted the Bolsheviks in cooperation with the Czechoslovak Legion and the White movement during the Russian Civil War, these units were ultimately repatriated to Greater Romania in 1920. While the Austro-Hungarian Romanian prisoners of war in Italy would form the Romanian Volunteer Legion from Italy, which joined the fighting during the last battles on the Italian front and later, after the end of the war, participated in the Hungarian-Romanian War. Out of a total of 60.000 prisoners of war of Romanian origin, 37.000 Romanians requested to join the Romanian Legion in Italy. The ranks of the Austro-Hungarian soldiers enlisted in the Romanian Legion were equivalated to those corresponding of the Italian Royal Army. The sedentary part of the Romanian Legion, under the command of Colonel Camillo Ferraioli, was established at Albano Laziale, and the base camp in the Avezzano camp.

It is estimated that in the period 1914–1918 between 400,000 and 600,000 soldiers of Romanian origin fought on different fronts of Austria-Hungary, which represented a significant percentage of the Romanian ethnics who lived in those times in the Empire. In total, up to 150,000 Romanians were killed in action while fighting as part of the Austro-Hungarian Army.

== Greater Romania (1918–1940) ==

Before World War I, the union of Michael the Brave, who ruled over the three principalities with Romanian population (Wallachia, Transylvania and Moldavia) for a short period of time, was viewed in later periods as the precursor of a modern Romania, a thesis which was argued with noted intensity by Nicolae Bălcescu. This theory became a point of reference for nationalists, as well as a catalyst for various Romanian forces to achieve a single Romanian state. World War I played a crucial part in the development of Romanian national consciousness.

In 1918, the union of Romania with Bukovina was ratified in 1919 in the Treaty of Saint Germain, and some of the Allies recognized the union with Bessarabia in 1920 through the never ratified Treaty of Paris. On 1 December, the Deputies of the Romanians from Transylvania voted to unite Transylvania, Banat, Crișana and Maramureș with Romania by the &quot;Proclamation of Union&quot; of Alba Iulia. Romanians today celebrate this as the Great Union Day, that is a national holiday.

The Romanian expression &quot;România Mare&quot; (Great or Greater Romania) refers to the Romanian state in the interwar period and to the territory Romania covered at the time. At that time, Romania achieved its greatest territorial extent, almost ), including all of the historic Romanian lands.

Most of the claimed territories were granted to the Old Kingdom of Romania, which was ratified in 1920 by the Treaty of Trianon that defined the new border between Hungary and Romania. The union of Bucovina and Bessarabia with Romania was ratified in 1920 by the Treaty of Versailles. Romania also acquired Southern Dobruja territory called &quot;The Quadrilateral&quot; from Bulgaria as a result of its participation in the Second Balkan War in 1913.

As a result of the peace treaties, most regions with clear Romanian majorities were merged into a single state. It also led to the inclusion of sizable minorities. National minorities were recognized by the 1923 Constitution of Romania; they were represented in Parliament and several of them created political parties, although a unique standing of minorities with autonomy on a wide basis, provided for at the Great National Assembly of Alba Iulia on 1 December 1918, was not fulfilled. According to the 1930 Romanian Census, Romania had a population of 18,057,028. Romanians made up 71.9% of the population and 28.1% of the population were ethnic minorities. This occasionally led to violent conflict, as exemplified by the Hungarian–Romanian War and the Tatarbunary Uprising. To contain Hungarian irredentism, Romania, Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia established the Little Entente in 1921. That same year Romania and Poland concluded a defensive alliance against the emergent Soviet Union, and in 1934 the Balkan Entente was formed with Yugoslavia, Greece and Turkey, which were suspicious of Bulgaria.
Until 1938, Romania&#x27;s governments maintained the form, if not always the substance, of a liberal constitutional monarchy. The National Liberal Party, dominant in the years immediately after World War I, became increasingly clientelist and nationalist, and in 1927 was supplanted in power by the National Peasants&#x27; Party. Between 1930 and 1940 there were over 25 separate governments; on several occasions in the last few years before World War II, the rivalry between the fascist Iron Guard and other political groupings approached the level of a civil war.

Upon the death of King Ferdinand in 1927, his son, Prince Carol, was prevented from succeeding him because of previous marital scandals that had resulted in his renunciation of rights to the throne. After living three years in exile, with his brother Nicolae serving as regent and his young son Michael as king, Carol changed his mind and with the support of the ruling National Peasants&#x27; Party he returned and proclaimed himself king.

Iuliu Maniu, leader of the National Peasants&#x27; Party, engineered Carol&#x27;s return on the basis of a promise that he would forsake his mistress Magda Lupescu, and Lupescu herself had agreed to the arrangement. However, it became clear upon Carol&#x27;s first re-encounter with his former wife, Elena, that he had no interest in a reconciliation with her, and Carol soon arranged for Magda Lupescu&#x27;s return to his side. Her unpopularity was to be a millstone around Carol&#x27;s neck for the rest of his reign. Maniu and his National Peasant Party shared the same general political aims of the Iron Guard: both fought against the corruption and dictatorial policies of King Carol II and the National Liberal Party.

The worldwide Great Depression that started in 1929 and was also present in Romania destabilised the country. The early 1930s were marked by social unrest, high unemployment, and strikes. In several instances, the Romanian government violently repressed strikes and riots, notably the 1929 miners&#x27; strike in Valea Jiului and the strike in the Grivița railroad workshops. In the mid-1930s, the Romanian economy recovered and the industry grew significantly, although about 80% of Romanians were still employed in agriculture. French economic and political influence was predominant in the early 1920s but then Germany became more dominant, especially in the 1930s.

As the 1930s progressed, Romania&#x27;s already shaky democracy slowly deteriorated toward fascist dictatorship. The constitution of 1923 gave the king free rein to dissolve parliament and call elections at will; as a result, Romania was to experience over 25 governments in a single decade.

Increasingly, these governments were dominated by a number of antisemitic, ultra-nationalist, and mostly at least quasi-fascist parties. The National Liberal Party steadily became more nationalistic than liberal, but nonetheless lost its dominance over Romanian politics. It was eclipsed by parties like the (relatively moderate) National Peasants&#x27; Party and its more radical Romanian Front offshoot, the National-Christian Defense League (LANC) and the Iron Guard. In 1935, LANC merged with the National Agrarian Party to form the National Christian Party (NCP). The quasi-mystical fascist Iron Guard was an earlier LANC offshoot that, even more than these other parties, exploited nationalist feelings, fear of communism, and resentment of alleged foreign and Jewish domination of the economy.

Already, the Iron Guard had embraced the politics of assassinations, and various governments had reacted more or less in kind. On December 10, 1933, Liberal prime minister Ion Duca &quot;dissolved&quot; the Iron Guard, arresting thousands; consequently, 19 days later he was assassinated by Iron Guard legionnaires.

In December 1937, the king appointed LANC leader, the poet Octavian Goga as prime minister of Romania&#x27;s first Fascist government. Around this time, Carol met with Adolf Hitler, who expressed his wish to see a Romanian government headed by the pro-Nazi Iron Guard. Instead, on 10 February 1938 King Carol II used the occasion of a public insult by Goga toward Lupescu as a reason to dismiss the government and institute a short-lived royal dictatorship, sanctioned seventeen days later by a new constitution under which the king named personally not only the prime minister but all the ministers. The new regime featured corporatist policies that often resembled those of Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany. In parallel with these internal developments, economic pressures and a weak Franco-British response to Hitler&#x27;s aggressive foreign policy caused Romania to start drifting away from the Western Allies and closer to the Axis.

In April 1938, King Carol had Iron Guard leader Corneliu Zelea Codreanu (aka &quot;The Captain&quot;) arrested and imprisoned. On the night of 29–30 November 1938, Codreanu and several other legionnaires were killed while purportedly attempting to escape from prison.

The royal dictatorship was brief. On 7 March 1939, a new government was formed with Armand Călinescu as prime minister; on 21 September 1939, three weeks after the start of World War II, Călinescu, in turn, was also assassinated by legionnaires avenging Codreanu&#x27;s murder.
On 13 April 1939, France and the United Kingdom had pledged to guarantee the independence of the Kingdom of Romania. Negotiations with the Soviet Union concerning a similar guarantee collapsed when Romania refused to allow the Red Army to cross its frontiers. In August 1939, Germany and the Soviet Union signed the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact, which stipulated, among other things, the Soviet &quot;interest&quot; in Bessarabia. After the 1940 territorial losses and growing increasingly unpopular, Carol was compelled to abdicate and name general Ion Antonescu as the new Prime-Minister with full powers in ruling the state by royal decree.

== World War II and aftermath (1940–1947) ==


Eight days later Nazi Germany invaded the Second Polish Republic. Expecting military aid from Britain and France, Poland chose not to activate the Polish-Romanian Alliance in order to be able to use the Romanian Bridgehead strategy. A neutral Romania would be used to resupply the Polish troops and could be used as an escape corridor in case of defeat. Following the fall of Poland, the Polish government, the treasury of the National Bank of Poland and about 120,000 Polish troops withdrew through the Romania, the majority of those troops joined the newly formed Polish Armed Forces in the West in France and the United Kingdom during 1939 and 1940.

Romania officially remained neutral and, under pressure from the Soviet Union and Germany, interned the fleeing Polish government after its members had crossed the Polish–Romanian border on 17 September, forcing them to relegate their authority to what became the Polish government-in-exile. After the assassination of Prime Minister Armand Călinescu on 21 September King Carol II tried to maintain neutrality for several months longer, but the surrender of the Third French Republic and the retreat of British forces from continental Europe rendered the assurances that both countries had made to Romania meaningless.


In 1940 Romania&#x27;s territorial gains made following World War I were largely undone. In July, after a Soviet ultimatum, Romania agreed to give up Bessarabia and northern Bukovina (the Soviets also annexed the city of Hertsa, which was not stated in the ultimatum). Two-thirds of Bessarabia were combined with a small part of the Soviet Union to form the Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic. The rest (northern Bukovina, the northern half of Hotin county and Budjak) was apportioned to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.

Shortly thereafter, on 30 August, under the Second Vienna Award, Germany and Italy mediated a compromise between Romania and the Kingdom of Hungary: Hungary received a region referred to as &#x27;Northern Transylvania&#x27;, while &#x27;Southern Transylvania&#x27; remained part of Romania. Hungary had lost Transylvania after World War I in the Treaty of Trianon. On 7 September, under the Treaty of Craiova, Southern Dobruja (which Bulgaria had lost after the Romanian invasion during the Second Balkan War in 1913), was ceded to Bulgaria under pressure from Germany. Despite the relatively recent acquisition of these territories, they were inhabited by a majority of Romanian speaking people (except Southern Dobruja), so the Romanians had seen them as historically belonging to Romania, and the fact that so much land was lost without a fight shattered the underpinnings of King Carol&#x27;s power.

On 4 July, Ion Gigurtu formed the first Romanian government to include an Iron Guardist minister, Horia Sima. Sima was a particularly virulent antisemite who had become the nominal leader of the movement after the death of Corneliu Codreanu. He was one of the few prominent far-right leaders to survive the bloody infighting and government suppression of the preceding years.

In the immediate wake of the loss of Northern Transylvania, on 4 September the Iron Guard (led by Horia Sima) and General (later Marshal) Ion Antonescu united to form the &quot;National Legionary State&quot;, which forced the abdication of Carol II in favor of his 19-year-old son Michael. Carol and his mistress Magda Lupescu went into exile, and Romania, despite the unfavorable outcome of recent territorial disputes, leaned strongly toward the Axis. As part of the deal, the Iron Guard became the sole legal party in Romania. Antonescu became the Iron Guard&#x27;s honorary leader, while Sima became deputy premier.

In power, the Iron Guard stiffened the already harsh antisemitic legislation, enacted legislation directed against minority businessmen and wreaked vengeance upon its enemies. On 8 October German troops began crossing into Romania. On 23 November Romania joined the Axis powers. On 27 November, 64 former dignitaries or officials were executed by the Iron Guard in Jilava prison while awaiting trial (see &quot;Jilava Massacre&quot;). Later that day, historian and former prime minister Nicolae Iorga and economist Virgil Madgearu, a former government minister, were assassinated.

The cohabitation between the Iron Guard and Antonescu was never an easy one. On 20 January 1941, the Iron Guard attempted a coup, combined with a pogrom against the Jews of Bucharest. Within four days, Antonescu had successfully suppressed the coup. The Iron Guard was forced out of the government. Sima and many other legionnaires took refuge in Germany; others were imprisoned. Antonescu abolished the National Legionary State, in its stead declaring Romania a &quot;National and Social State.&quot;


On 22 June 1941, German armies with Romanian support attacked the Soviet Union. German and Romanian units conquered Bessarabia, Odessa, and Sevastopol, then marched eastward across the Russian steppes toward Stalingrad. Romania welcomed the war because they were allies with Germany. Hitler rewarded Romania&#x27;s loyalty by returning Bessarabia and northern Bukovina and by allowing Romania to administer Soviet lands immediately between the Dniester and the Bug, including Odessa and Nikolaev. Romanian jingoes in Odessa even distributed a geography showing that the Dacians had inhabited most of southern Russia. After recovering Bessarabia and Bukovina (Operation München), Romanian units fought side by side with the Germans onward to Odessa, Sevastopol, Stalingrad and the Caucasus. The total number of troops involved on the Eastern Front with the Romanian Third Army and the Romanian Fourth Army was second only to that of Nazi Germany itself. The Romanian Army had a total of 686,258 men under arms in the summer of 1941 and a total of 1,224,691 men in the summer of 1944. The number of Romanian troops sent to fight in the Soviet Union exceeded that of all of Germany&#x27;s other allies combined. A &quot;Country Study&quot; by the U.S. Federal Research Division of the Library of Congress attributes this to a &quot;morbid competition with Hungary to curry Hitler&#x27;s favor... [in hope of]... regaining northern Transylvania.&quot;

Bessarabia and the Northern Bukovina were now fully re-incorporated into the Romanian state after they had been occupied by the USSR a year earlier. As a substitute for Northern Transylvania, which had been given to Hungary following the Second Vienna Award, Hitler persuaded Antonescu in August 1941 to also take control of the Transnistria territory between the Dniester and the Southern Bug, which would also include Odessa after its eventual fall in October 1941. Although the Romanian administration set up a civil government, the Transnistria Governorate, the Romanian state had not yet formally incorporated Transnistria into its administrative framework by the time it was retaken by Soviet troops in early 1944.

Romanian armies advanced far into the Soviet Union during 1941 and 1942 before being involved in the disaster at the Battle of Stalingrad in the winter of 1942–43. Petre Dumitrescu, one of Romania&#x27;s most important generals, was commander of the Third Army at Stalingrad. In November 1942, the German Sixth Army was briefly put at Dumitrescu&#x27;s disposal during a German attempt to relieve the Third Army following the devastating Soviet Operation Uranus. Prior to the Soviet counteroffensive at Stalingrad, the Antonescu government considered a war with Hungary over Transylvania an inevitability after the expected victory over the Soviet Union.

=== King Michael&#x27;s Coup ===

On 23 August 1944, with the Red Army penetrating German defenses during the Jassy–Kishinev Offensive, King Michael I of Romania led a successful coup against the Axis with support from opposition politicians, most of the army and Communist-led civilians. Michael I, who was initially considered to be not much more than a figurehead, was able to successfully depose the Antonescu dictatorship. The King then offered a non-confrontational retreat to German ambassador Manfred von Killinger. But the Germans considered the coup &quot;reversible&quot; and attempted to turn the situation around by military force. The Romanian First, Second (forming), and what little was left of the Third and the Fourth Armies (one corps) were under orders from the King to defend Romania against any German attacks. King Michael offered to put the Romanian Army, which at that point had a strength of nearly 1,000,000 men, on the side of the Allies. Stalin immediately recognized the king and the restoration of the conservative Romanian monarchy.

In a radio broadcast to the Romanian nation and army on the night of 23 August King Michael issued a cease-fire, proclaimed Romania&#x27;s loyalty to the Allies, announced the acceptance of an armistice (to be signed on September 12) offered by Great Britain, the United States, and the USSR, and declared war on Germany. The coup accelerated the Red Army&#x27;s advance into Romania, but did not avert a rapid Soviet occupation and capture of about 130,000 Romanian soldiers, who were transported to the Soviet Union, where many perished in prison camps. The armistice was signed three weeks later on 12 September 1944, on terms virtually dictated by the Soviet Union. Under the terms of the armistice, Romania announced its unconditional surrender to the USSR and was placed under occupation of the Allied forces with the Soviet Union as their representative, in control of media, communication, post, and civil administration behind the front. Some attribute the postponement of a formal Allied recognition of the &quot;de facto&quot; change of orientation until 12 September (the date the armistice was signed in Moscow) to the complexities of the negotiations between the USSR and UK.


During the Moscow Conference in October 1944 Winston Churchill, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, proposed an agreement to Soviet leader Joseph Stalin on how to split up Eastern Europe into spheres of influence after the war. The Soviet Union was offered a 90% share of influence in Romania.

The Armistice Agreement of 12 September stipulated in Article 18 that &quot;An Allied Control Commission will be established which will undertake until the conclusion of peace the regulation of and control over the execution of the present terms under the general direction and orders of the Allied (Soviet) High Command, acting on behalf of the Allied Powers&quot;. The Annex to Article 18 made clear that &quot;The Romanian Government and their organs shall fulfil all instructions of the Allied Control Commission arising out of the Armistice Agreement.&quot; The Agreement also stipulated that the Allied Control Commission would have its seat in Bucharest. In line with Article 14 of the Armistice Agreement, two Romanian People&#x27;s Tribunals were set up to try suspected war criminals.

As the country declared war on Germany on the night of 23 August 1944, border clashes between Hungarian and Romanian troops erupted almost immediately. On 24 August, German troops attempted to seize Bucharest and suppress Michael&#x27;s coup, but were repelled by the city&#x27;s defenses, which received some support from the United States Air Force. Other Wehrmacht units in the country suffered severe losses: remnants of the Sixth Army retreating west of the Prut River were cut off and destroyed by the Red Army, which was now advancing at an even greater speed, while Romanian units attacked German garrisons at the Ploiești oilfields, forcing them to retreat to Hungary. The Romanian Army captured over 50,000 German prisoners around this time, who were later surrendered to the Soviets.

In early September, Soviet and Romanian forces entered Transylvania and captured the towns of Brașov and Sibiu while advancing toward the Mureș River. Their main objective was Cluj (Cluj-Napoca), a city regarded as the historical capital of Transylvania. However, the Second Hungarian Army was present in the region, and together with the Eighth German Army engaged the Allied forces on 5 September in what was to become the Battle of Turda, which lasted until 8 October and resulted in heavy casualties for both sides. Also around this time, the Hungarian Army carried out its last independent offensive action of the war, penetrating Arad County in western Romania. Despite initial success, a number of ad hoc Romanian cadet battalions managed to stop the Hungarian advance at the Battle of Păuliș, and soon a combined Romanian-Soviet counterattack overwhelmed the Hungarians, who gave ground and evacuated Arad itself on 21 September.

The Romanian Army ended the war fighting against the Wehrmacht alongside the Red Army in Transylvania, Hungary, Yugoslavia, Austria and the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia, from August 1944 until the end of the war in Europe. In May 1945, the First and Fourth armies took part in the Prague Offensive. The Romanian Army incurred heavy casualties fighting Nazi Germany. Of some 538,000 Romanian soldiers who fought against the Axis in 1944–45, some 167,000 were killed, wounded or went missing.

Under the 1947 Treaty of Paris, the Allies did not acknowledge Romania as a co-belligerent nation but instead applied the term &quot;ally of Hitlerite Germany&quot; to all recipients of the treaty&#x27;s stipulations. Like Finland, Romania had to pay $300 million to the Soviet Union as war reparations. However, the treaty specifically recognized that Romania switched sides on 24 August 1944, and therefore &quot;acted in the interests of all the United Nations&quot;. As a reward, Northern Transylvania was, once again, recognized as an integral part of Romania, but the border with the USSR and Bulgaria was fixed at its state in January 1941, restoring the pre-Barbarossa status quo (with one exception). Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, the Eastern territories became part of Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova.

== Communist period (1947–1989) ==


In Romania proper, Soviet occupation following World War II facilitated the rise of the Communist Party as the main political force, leading ultimately to the forced abdication of the King and the establishment of a single-party people&#x27;s republic in 1947.

Romania was proclaimed a people&#x27;s republic and remained under military and economic control of the Soviet Union until the late 1950s. During this period, Romania&#x27;s resources were drained by the &quot;SovRom&quot; agreements; mixed Soviet-Romanian companies were established to mask the Soviet Union&#x27;s looting of Romania.

Romania&#x27;s leader from 1948 to his death in 1965 was Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej, the First Secretary of the Romanian Workers&#x27; Party. The Communist regime was formalized with the constitution of 13 April 1948. On 11 June 1948, all banks and large businesses were nationalized. This started the process of the Romanian Communist Party to collectivize the country&#x27;s resources including agriculture.

In 1946 and 1947, several high-ranking members in the pro-Axis government were executed as war criminals, primarily for their involvement in the Holocaust and for attacking the Soviet Union. Antonescu himself was executed 1 June 1946. Once the Communist government became more entrenched, the number of arrests increased. All strata of society were involved, but particularly targeted were the prewar elites, such as intellectuals, and anybody who could potentially form the nucleus of anti-Communist resistance. According to figures, in the years between 1945 and 1964, 73,334 people were arrested. Between 60,000 and 80,000 political prisoners were detained.

Gheorghiu-Dej attained greater independence for Romania from the Soviet Union by persuading Soviet First Secretary Nikita Khrushchev to withdraw troops from Romania in April 1958. After the negotiated withdrawal of Soviet troops, Romania under the new leadership of Nicolae Ceaușescu started to pursue independent policies, including the condemnation of the Soviet-led 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia—Romania being the only Warsaw Pact country not to take part in the invasion—the continuation of diplomatic relations with Israel after the Six-Day War of 1967 (again, the only Warsaw Pact country to do so), and the establishment of economic (1963) and diplomatic (1967) relations with West Germany. Romania&#x27;s close ties with Arab countries and the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO) allowed to play a key role in the Israel-Egypt and Israel-PLO peace processes by intermediating the visit of Egyptian president Sadat to Israel.

Between 1977 and 1981, Romania&#x27;s foreign debt sharply increased from US$3 to US$10 billion and the influence of international financial organizations such as the IMF and the World Bank grew, in conflict with Ceaușescu&#x27;s autarchic policies. Ceaușescu&#x27;s independent foreign policy meant leaders of Western nations leaders were slow to criticize Romania&#x27;s government which, by the late 1970s, had become arbitrary, capricious and harsh. The Romanian economy grew quickly through foreign credit but this was replaced with austerity and political repression, which became more draconian through the 1980s.

Ceaușescu eventually initiated a project of full reimbursement of the foreign debt; to achieve this, he imposed austerity policies that impoverished Romanians and exhausted the nation&#x27;s economy. The project was completed in 1989, shortly before his overthrow. He greatly extended the authority of the &quot;Securitate&quot; (secret police) and imposed a cult of personality, leading to a dramatic decrease in Ceaușescu&#x27;s popularity and culminating in his overthrow and execution in the bloody Romanian Revolution in December 1989.

== 1989 Revolution ==

The Romanian Revolution resulted in more than 1,100 deaths in Timișoara and Bucharest, and brought the fall of Ceaușescu and the end of the Communist regime in Romania. After a week of unrest in Timișoara, a mass rally summoned in Bucharest in support of Ceaușescu on 21 December 1989 turned hostile. The Ceaușescu couple fled Bucharest by helicopter but ended up in the custody of the army.

After being tried and convicted by a kangaroo court for genocide and other crimes, they were executed on 25 December 1989.

Ion Iliescu, a former Communist Party official marginalized by Ceaușescu, attained national recognition as the leader of an impromptu governing coalition, the National Salvation Front (FSN) that proclaimed the establishment of democracy and civil liberties on 22 December 1989. The Communist Party was initially outlawed by Ion Iliescu, but he soon revoked that decision; as a consequence, Communism is not outlawed in Romania today. However, Ceaușescu&#x27;s most controversial measures, such as bans on abortion and contraception, were among the first laws to be changed after the Revolution.

== Transition to free market (1990–2004) ==

After the fall of Ceaușescu, the National Salvation Front (FSN) led by Ion Iliescu introduced partial multi-party democratic and free market measures. A university professor with family roots in the Communist Party, Petre Roman, was named prime minister of the new government, which mostly consisted of former communist officials. The government initiated modest free market reforms. Several major political parties of the pre-war era, the National Christian Democrat Peasant&#x27;s Party (PNȚ-CD), the National Liberal Party (PNL), and the Romanian Social Democratic Party (PSDR), were reconstituted.

In April 1990, after several major political rallies that January), a sit-in protest questioning the legitimacy of the government began in University Square, Bucharest, organized by the main opposition parties. The protest became ongoing mass demonstration known as the Golaniad. The protesters accused the FSN of being made up of former Communists and members of the Securitate. Presidential and parliamentary elections were held on 20 May 1990. Taking advantage of FSN&#x27;s tight control of the national radio and television, Iliescu won 85% of the vote. The FSN secured two-thirds of the seats in Parliament. Though most protesters left University Square after the government gained a large parliamentary majority, a minority deemed the results undemocratic and demanded the exclusion from political life of the former high-ranking Communist Party members. The peaceful demonstrations degenerated into violence; some of the protesters attacked the police headquarters, national television station, and the Foreign Ministry. After the police failed to bring the demonstrators to order, Ion Iliescu called on the &quot;men of good will&quot; to defend the state institutions in Bucharest.

Various worker groups from Romania&#x27;s industrial platforms responded, some of them engaged in altercations with the protesters. The coal miners of the Jiu Valley, thousands of whom arrived in Bucharest on 14 June, were the most visible and politically influential. According to the miners, most of the violence was perpetrated by government agents who were agitating the crowds. Some of the counter-protesters attacked the headquarters and private residences of opposition leaders. Later parliamentary inquiries showed members of the government intelligence services were involved in the instigation and manipulation of both the protesters and the miners, and in June 1994, a Bucharest court found two former &quot;Securitate&quot; officers guilty of ransacking and stealing $100,000 from the house of a leading opposition politician. Petre Roman&#x27;s government fell in late September 1991, when the miners returned to Bucharest to demand higher salaries. A technocrat, Theodor Stolojan, was appointed to head an ad interim/acting government until new elections could be held.

=== New constitution ===

In December 1991, a new constitution was drafted and subsequently adopted, after a popular referendum, which, however, attracted criticism from international observers. The constitution was most recently revised by a national referendum on 18–19 October 2003, and took effect on 29 October 2003.

In March 1992, the FSN split into two groups: the Democratic National Front (FDSN), led by Ion Iliescu and the Democratic Party (PD), led by Petre Roman. Iliescu won the presidential elections in September 1992 and his FDSN won the general elections held at the same time. With parliamentary support from the nationalist Romanian National Unity Party (PUNR), Greater Romania Party (PRM), and the ex-communist Socialist Workers&#x27; Party (PSM), a new government was formed in November 1992 under Prime Minister Nicolae Văcăroiu. The FDSN changed its name to Party of Social Democracy in Romania (PDSR) in July 1993.

The subsequent disintegration of the National Salvation Front (FSN) produced the Party of Social Democracy in Romania (PDSR) (later Social Democratic Party, PSD), the Democratic Party (PD), and the ApR (Alliance for Romania). The PDSR party governed Romania from 1990 until 1996 through several coalitions and governments with Ion Iliescu as head of state.

Emil Constantinescu of the Democratic Convention (CDR) won the second round of the 1996 presidential election and replaced Iliescu as head of state. The PDSR won the largest number of seats in the Parliament, but was unable to form a viable coalition. Constituent parties of the CDR joined the Democratic Party (PD) and the Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania (UDMR/RMDSZ) to form a centrist coalition government, holding 60% of the seats in Parliament.

This coalition implemented several critical reforms. The new coalition government, under prime minister Victor Ciorbea remained in office until March 1998, when Radu Vasile (PNȚ-CD) took over as prime minister. The former governor of the National Bank, Mugur Isărescu, eventually replaced Radu Vasile as head of the government.

The 2000 election brought Iliescu&#x27;s PDSR, known as Social Democratic Party (PSD) after the merger with the PSDR, back to power. Iliescu won a third term as the country&#x27;s president. Adrian Năstase became the prime minister of the newly formed government.

In 2004, Traian Băsescu was elected president with an electoral coalition called Justice and Truth Alliance (DA). The government was formed by a larger coalition which also included the Conservative Party (PC) and the Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania (UDMR).

== NATO and the European Union membership (2004–present) ==

Post–Cold War Romania developed closer ties with Western Europe, eventually joining NATO in 2004.

Presidential and parliamentary elections took place again on 28 November 2004. No political party secured a viable parliamentary majority and opposition parties alleged the PSD had committed large-scale electoral fraud. There was no winner in the first round of the presidential elections. The joint PNL-PD candidate Traian Băsescu won the second round on 12 December 2004 with 51% of the vote and became the third post-revolutionary president of Romania.

The then PNL leader, Călin Popescu-Tăriceanu was assigned the task of building a coalition government without the PSD. In December 2004, the new coalition government (PD, PNL, PUR —Romanian Humanist Party—which eventually changed its name to Romanian Conservative Party/PC and UDMR/RMDSZ—was sworn in under Prime Minister Tăriceanu.

In June 1993, the country applied for membership in the European Union (EU). It became an Associated State of the EU in 1995, an Acceding Country in 2004, and a full member on 1 January 2007.

Following the free travel agreement and politic of the post–Cold War period, as well as hardship of the life in the post 1990s economic depression, Romania has an increasingly large diaspora. The main emigration targets have been Italy, Germany, Spain, the United Kingdom, the United States and Hungary.

In 2009, President Traian Basescu was re-elected for a second five-year term as the President.

In January 2012, Romania experienced national protests, which were the first significant popular uprising in the country since 1991. They were triggered by proposed health reforms, and were further motivated by wider disillusionment with austerity and the government.

In 2014, Klaus Iohannis was elected as the President of Romania, and he was re-elected by a landslide victory in 2019.

In December 2020, the parliamentary election was won by the then oppositional Social Democrats (PSD). Additionally, former Prime Minister Ludovic Orban resigned because of the defeat of the National Liberal Party (PNL). However, Florin Cîțu, a member of the National Liberal Party (PNL), became the new Prime Minister, forming a three party, center-right coalition consisting of the PNL, the USR PLUS, and the Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania (UDMR/RMDSZ).

In November 2021, Nicolae Ciucă became Romania&#x27;s new prime minister. He formed a coalition government between former arch rivals, his own center-right National Liberal Party (PNL) and center-left Social Democratic Party (PSD). On 15 June 2023, Marcel Ciolacu (PSD) was sworn in as the new Romanian Prime Minister. Rotating premiership had been long agreed as part of a deal by the ruling coalition.

== Romanian rulers ==
* List of Wallachian rulers (up to 1859)
* List of Moldavian rulers (up to 1859)
* List of Transylvanian rulers (up to 1867)
* Domnitori of Romania (1862–1881)
* Kings of Romania (1881–1947)
* Presidents of Romania (since 1974)
* Prime ministers of Romania (since 1862)

== See also ==
* Balkan–Danubian culture
* Bulgarian lands across the Danube
* Historical regions of Romania
* King of Romania
* List of Dacian kings
* List of heads of government of Romania
* List of presidents of Romania
* List of wars involving Romania
* Military history of Romania
* Politics of Romania
* Territorial evolution of Romania

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Sources ==
===Ancient===
* 
* 
===Modern===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
*
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 


* 
* 


* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 

* 


* 
== Further reading ==
* Burks, Richard V. &quot;Romania and the Balkan Crisis of 1875–78.&quot; &quot;Journal of Central European Affairs&quot; 2 (1942): 129+.
* Dinu, Elena Steluța. &quot;Balancing Romania-Russia relations: a grounding of the Balkan crisis through proper application of political conditionalities.&quot; &quot;Revista de Științe Politice. Revue des Sciences Politiques&quot; 45 (2015): 76–88; covers 1885–1913 online.
* Du Nay, Andre. &quot;The origins of the Rumanians: the early history of the Rumanian language&quot; (1996) online free
* Fischer-Galați, Stephen A. &quot;Twentieth century Rumania&quot; (1991) online
* Forbes, Nevill, and Arnold J. Toynbee &amp; D. Mitrany. &quot;The Balkans: A History Of Bulgaria, Serbia, Greece, Rumania, Turkey&quot; (1915) online pp 251–318.
* Gallagher, Tom. &quot;Balkan But Different: Romania and Bulgaria&#x27;s Contrasting Paths to NATO Membership 1994–2002.&quot; &quot;Journal of Communist Studies and Transition Politics&quot; 20.4 (2004): 1–19.
* Gilberg, Trond. &quot;Modernization in Romania since world war II&quot; (Greenwood, 1975).
* Hall, Richard C. &quot;War in the Balkans: An Encyclopedic History from the Fall of the Ottoman Empire to the Breakup of Yugoslavia&quot; (2014) excerpt
* ; 592pp
*
* Jelavich, Barbara. &quot;History of the Balkans&quot; (2 vol 1983)
* Jókai, Mór. &quot;The golden age in Transylvania&quot; (1898) online
* Jowitt, Kenneth, ed. &quot;Social Change in Romania, 1860–1940&quot; (California UP, 1978)
* Lampe, John R. &quot; Balkan Economic History, 1550–1950: From Imperial Borderlands to Developing Nations&quot; (Indiana UP, (1982)
* Miscoiu, Sergiu. &quot;Balkan populisms: the cases of Bulgaria and Romania.&quot; &quot;Southeastern Europe&quot; 38.1 (2014): 1–24.
* Oțetea, Andrei, ed. &quot;A Concise history of Romania&quot; (1985) online
* Pavlowitch, Stevan K. &quot;A History of the Balkans 1804–1945&quot; (Routledge, 2014).
* Roberts, Henry L. &quot;Rumania: Political Problems of an Agrarian State&quot; (Yale UP, 1951)
* Seton-Watson, R. W. A &quot;History of the Roumanians&quot; (Cambridge UP, 1934). excerpt
* Sjöberg, Örjan, and Michael Louis Wyzan, eds. &quot;Economic Change in the Balkan States: Albania, Bulgaria, Romania and Yugoslavia&quot; (Pinter, 1991).
* Stavrianos, L.S. &quot; The Balkans Since 1453&quot; (1958), major scholarly history; online free to borrow
* Treptow, Kurt W., and Marcel Popa. &quot;Historical Dictionary of Romania&quot; (1996) 384pp
* Verdery, Katherine. &quot;National Ideology under Socialism. Identity and Cultural Politics in Ceaușescu’s Romania&quot; (U of California Press, 1991).
* Wachtel, Andrew Baruch. &quot;The Balkans in World History&quot; (New Oxford World History) (2008).
* Watts, Larry L. &quot;Romanian Cassandra: Ion Antonescu &amp; the Struggle for Reform, 1916–1941&quot; (1993) 390pp

=== Historiography and memory ===
* Bucur, Maria. &quot;Heroes and victims: Remembering war in twentieth-century Romania&quot; (Indiana UP, 2009).
* Hitchins, Keith. &quot;Romania.&quot; &quot;American Historical Review&quot; 97.4 (1992): 1064–1083. online
* Livezeanu, Irina. &quot; Cultural Politics in Greater Romania: Regionalism, Nation Building and Ethnic Struggle, 1918–1930&quot; (Cornell UP, 1995)
* Michelson, Paul E. &quot;Recent American historiography on Romania and the second world war&quot; &quot; Romanian Civilization&quot;. (1996) 5#2 pp 23–42.
* Trencsényi, Balázs and Constantin Iordachi. &quot;In Search for a Usable Past: The Question of National Identity in Romanian Studies, 1990–2000&quot; &quot;East European Politics and Societies&quot; 17 (2003), 415–453.
* Turda, Marius. &quot;The Nation as Object: Race, Blood, and Biopolitics in Interwar Romania&quot; &quot;Slavic Review&quot; 66#3, (2007): 413–441 online.
* Weinbaum, Laurence. &quot;The Banality of History and Memory: Romanian Society and the Holocaust&quot;, &quot;Post-Holocaust and Anti-Semitism&quot; No. 45 (June 2006) 
* Zavatti, Francesco. &quot;Writing History in a Propaganda Institute: Political Power and Network Dynamics in Communist Romania&quot; (Diss. Södertörns högskola, 2016) online.

== External links ==
* The Beginning of the Final Solution: Murder of the Jews of Romania on the Yad Vashem website
* History of Romania: Primary Documents
* Gerlinde Schuller: Archiving memories and dreams – Historical family stories about the minorities in Romania (with many archive images)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="48" end="62" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q958291" start="70" end="93" title="United Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia" label="Danubian Principalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="97" end="105" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="110" end="119" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="202" end="216" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="233" end="244" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q185963" start="266" end="276" title="Neutral country" label="neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q553157" start="294" end="300" title="Romania in World War I" label="fought"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="319" end="332" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="373" end="381" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="383" end="393" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="395" end="407" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="422" end="427" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q268034" start="429" end="436" title="Crișana" label="Crișana"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975458" start="442" end="451" title="Maramureș" label="Maramureș"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="471" end="489" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Kingdom of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="536" end="559" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q243618" start="564" end="583" title="Second Vienna Award" label="Second Vienna Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="655" end="667" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q917134" start="672" end="693" title="Northern Transylvania" label="Northern Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q153122" start="743" end="758" title="Tripartite Pact" label="Tripartite Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="799" end="811" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="819" end="828" title="Axis powers" label="Axis side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357609" start="830" end="863" title="Romania in World War II" label="fighting against the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q575347" start="891" end="897" title="1944 Romanian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="joined"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="902" end="908" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="987" end="995" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="1014" end="1032" title="Socialist Republic of Romania" label="socialist republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="1053" end="1064" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="1076" end="1091" title="Romanian Revolution" label="1989 Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q966381" start="1101" end="1119" title="History of Romania (1989–present)" label="began a transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="1128" end="1137" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="1144" end="1158" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="1206" end="1218" title="modern human" label="modern human"/>
<link wikidata="Q946978" start="1274" end="1289" title="Peștera cu Oase" label="Peștera cu Oase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="1408" end="1420" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060209" start="1457" end="1465" title="Cucuteni" label="Cucuteni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162419" start="1578" end="1604" title="Cucuteni–Trypillia culture" label="Cucuteni–Trypillia culture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1642" end="1657" title="Poiana Slatinei" label="Poiana Slatinei"/>
<link wikidata="Q12089397" start="1678" end="1683" title="Vânători-Neamț" label="Lunca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483547" start="1748" end="1764" title="Starčevo culture" label="Starčevo culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060209" start="1820" end="1828" title="Cucuteni" label="Cucuteni"/>
<link wikidata="Q212853" start="1854" end="1861" title="Dacians" label="Dacians"/>
<link wikidata="Q19012" start="1916" end="1921" title="Getae" label="Getae"/>
<link wikidata="Q144964" start="1940" end="1949" title="Thracians" label="Thracians"/>
<link wikidata="Q173082" start="1964" end="1969" title="Dacia" label="Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="2010" end="2017" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="2081" end="2087" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="2112" end="2118" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="2219" end="2228" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q746583" start="2253" end="2262" title="Histories (Herodotus)" label="Histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q19012" start="2342" end="2347" title="Getae" label="Getae"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="2369" end="2376" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="2385" end="2401" title="Darius the Great" label="Darius the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="2434" end="2443" title="Scythians" label="Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="2446" end="2452" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19012" start="2498" end="2503" title="Getae" label="Getae"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="2662" end="2674" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660394" start="2913" end="2922" title="Charnabon" label="Charnabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12283915" start="2946" end="2954" title="Cothelas" label="Cothelas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148918" start="3044" end="3050" title="Moskon" label="Moskon"/>
<link wikidata="Q554861" start="3074" end="3086" title="Dromichaetes" label="Dromichaetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065539" start="3110" end="3122" title="Zalmodegicus" label="Zalmodegicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429312" start="3138" end="3146" title="Rhemaxos" label="Rhemaxos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376178" start="3167" end="3177" title="Rubobostes" label="Rubobostes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575706" start="3193" end="3199" title="Zoltes" label="Zoltes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163499" start="3214" end="3220" title="Oroles" label="Oroles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273877" start="3244" end="3251" title="Dicomes" label="Dicomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321270" start="3275" end="3281" title="Rholes" label="Rholes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221823" start="3305" end="3310" title="Dapyx" label="Dapyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075954" start="3334" end="3341" title="Zyraxes" label="Zyraxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q309869" start="3365" end="3374" title="Burebista" label="Burebista"/>
<link wikidata="Q15091905" start="3393" end="3401" title="Deceneus" label="Deceneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q241597" start="3488" end="3494" title="Cotiso" label="Cotiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155232" start="3524" end="3533" title="Comosicus" label="Comosicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12740540" start="3558" end="3565" title="Scorilo" label="Scorilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28146955" start="3593" end="3598" title="Coson" label="Coson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316259" start="3622" end="3627" title="Duras (Dacian king)" label="Duras"/>
<link wikidata="Q28928" start="3659" end="3668" title="Decebalus" label="Decebalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="3725" end="3737" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="3770" end="3776" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q869369" start="3856" end="3864" title="Pieporus" label="Pieporus"/>
<link wikidata="Q869369" start="3881" end="3890" title="Costoboci" label="Costoboci"/>
<link wikidata="Q309869" start="3976" end="3985" title="Burebista" label="Burebista"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="4016" end="4025" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q170427" start="4071" end="4087" title="Balkan Mountains" label="Balkan Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="4091" end="4098" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="4345" end="4358" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q157676" start="4549" end="4553" title="Boii" label="Boii"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376178" start="4792" end="4802" title="Rubobostes" label="Rubobostes"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="4818" end="4830" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="4863" end="4879" title="Carpathian basin" label="Carpathian basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="4914" end="4919" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163499" start="5107" end="5113" title="Oroles" label="Oroles"/>
<link wikidata="Q755749" start="5134" end="5143" title="Bastarnae" label="Bastarnae"/>
<link wikidata="Q540432" start="5215" end="5224" title="Scordisci" label="Scordisci"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043335" start="5229" end="5236" title="Dardani" label="Dardani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="5289" end="5294" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q316119" start="5305" end="5320" title="Trogus Pompeius" label="Trogus Pompeius"/>
<link wikidata="Q755749" start="5576" end="5585" title="Bastarnae" label="Bastarnae"/>
<link wikidata="Q309869" start="5587" end="5596" title="Burebista" label="Burebista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="5629" end="5642" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q755749" start="5911" end="5920" title="Bastarnae" label="Bastarnae"/>
<link wikidata="Q157676" start="5925" end="5929" title="Boii" label="Boii"/>
<link wikidata="Q13630" start="5974" end="5979" title="Olbia" label="Olbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q271925" start="5984" end="5993" title="Apollonia, Thrace" label="Apollonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="6001" end="6010" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q309869" start="6051" end="6060" title="Burebista" label="Burebista"/>
<link wikidata="Q699675" start="6162" end="6178" title="Hercynian Forest" label="Hercynian Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927347" start="6400" end="6408" title="Argedava" label="Argedava"/>
<link wikidata="Q739802" start="6412" end="6431" title="Sarmizegetusa Regia" label="Sarmizegetusa Regia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28928" start="6548" end="6557" title="Decebalus" label="Decebalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q199499" start="7138" end="7144" title="Moesia" label="Moesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116320" start="7158" end="7171" title="War of Actium" label="War of Actium"/>
<link wikidata="Q241597" start="7178" end="7184" title="Cotiso" label="Cotiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="7338" end="7346" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="7404" end="7415" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q190368" start="7868" end="7874" title="Appian" label="Appian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="8062" end="8071" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="8138" end="8147" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q157512" start="8223" end="8232" title="betrothed" label="betrothed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259" start="8246" end="8251" title="Julia the Elder" label="Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="8367" end="8378" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="8591" end="8597" title="Roman Empire" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q734095" start="8734" end="8744" title="Res Gestae Divi Augusti" label="Res Gestae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234352" start="8967" end="8982" title="Marcus Vinicius (consul 19 BC)" label="Marcus Vinicius"/>
<link wikidata="Q131548" start="9192" end="9200" title="Jordanes" label="Jordanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155232" start="9225" end="9234" title="Comosicus" label="Comosicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12740540" start="9286" end="9293" title="Scorilo" label="Scorilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155232" start="9298" end="9307" title="Comosicus" label="Comosicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131548" start="9387" end="9395" title="Jordanes" label="Jordanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155232" start="9497" end="9506" title="Comosicus" label="Comosicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316259" start="9538" end="9543" title="Duras (Dacian king)" label="Duras"/>
<link wikidata="Q297377" start="10260" end="10269" title="Frontinus" label="Frontinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q199499" start="10532" end="10538" title="Moesia" label="Moesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="10553" end="10561" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="10566" end="10574" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="10961" end="10965" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q470596" start="11088" end="11109" title="Year of Four Emperors" label="Year of Four Emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q383325" start="11242" end="11250" title="Roxolani" label="Roxolani"/>
<link wikidata="Q521520" start="11280" end="11297" title="Licinius Mucianus" label="Licinius Mucianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="11314" end="11323" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417" start="11393" end="11402" title="Vitellius" label="Vitellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316259" start="11533" end="11538" title="Duras (Dacian king)" label="Duras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423" start="11598" end="11606" title="Domitian" label="Domitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="11617" end="11629" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q309869" start="11689" end="11698" title="Burebista" label="Burebista"/>
<link wikidata="Q28928" start="11736" end="11745" title="Decebalus" label="Decebalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="11936" end="11942" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q719001" start="12196" end="12210" title="Gaius Oppius Sabinus" label="Oppius Sabinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q32047" start="12614" end="12621" title="Illyria" label="Illyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q199499" start="12626" end="12632" title="Moesia" label="Moesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q733566" start="12723" end="12739" title="Cornelius Fuscus" label="Cornelius Fuscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28928" start="12987" end="12996" title="Decebalus" label="Decebalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28928" start="13232" end="13241" title="Decebalus" label="Decebalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q733566" start="13430" end="13446" title="Cornelius Fuscus" label="Cornelius Fuscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13403337" start="13659" end="13674" title="Battle of Tapae (88)" label="Battle of Tapae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231196" start="13756" end="13772" title="Tettius Julianus" label="Tettius Julianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423" start="13877" end="13885" title="Domitian" label="Domitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q209851" start="13893" end="13903" title="Marcomanni" label="Marcomanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="14323" end="14335" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q739802" start="14640" end="14654" title="Sarmizegethusa" label="Sarmizegethusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494883" start="14871" end="14894" title="siege of Sarmizegethusa" label="siege of Sarmizegethusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q28928" start="14950" end="14959" title="Decebalus" label="Decebalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671791" start="15065" end="15092" title="Ulpia Traiana Sarmizegetusa" label="Ulpia Traiana Sarmizegetusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="15128" end="15142" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q971609" start="15143" end="15156" title="Roman Dacia" label="Dacia Traiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651751" start="15178" end="15205" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Parthian War" label="invaded the Parthian empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151405" start="15312" end="15325" title="client states" label="client states"/>
<link wikidata="Q605140" start="15510" end="15514" title="falx" label="falx"/>
<link wikidata="Q192784" start="15696" end="15712" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Column" label="Column of Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="15716" end="15720" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="15844" end="15861" title="imperial province" label="imperial province"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="16196" end="16203" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q88205" start="16299" end="16313" title="Castra" label="military camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q756780" start="16361" end="16368" title="Colonia (Roman)" label="colonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671791" start="16376" end="16403" title="Ulpia Traiana Sarmizegetusa" label="Ulpia Traiana Sarmizegetusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q499165" start="16471" end="16502" title="Procurator (Roman fiscal)" label="imperial &amp;quot;procurator&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q174665" start="16541" end="16547" title="Alba Iulia" label="Apulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230666" start="16691" end="16720" title="Legio V Macedonica" label="Fifth (&amp;quot;Macedonia&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812766" start="16722" end="16749" title="Legio XI Claudia" label="Ninth (&amp;quot;Claudia&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q707649" start="16755" end="16786" title="Legio XIV Gemina" label="Fourteenth (&amp;quot;Gemina&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q200929" start="17337" end="17359" title="Marcus Statius Priscus" label="Marcus Statius Priscus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17404" end="17424" title="Peregrinus (Roman)#Local authorities" label="civitates peregrinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645483" start="18025" end="18032" title="Parthia" label="Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33490" start="18105" end="18115" title="Cappadocia (Roman province)" label="Cappadocia"/>
<link wikidata="Q642188" start="18171" end="18188" title="Pannonia Superior" label="Pannonia Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170496" start="18450" end="18454" title="sica" label="sica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754258" start="18500" end="18522" title="Roman military diploma" label="Roman military diploma"/>
<link wikidata="Q35976" start="19105" end="19113" title="Illyrian languages" label="Illyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="19133" end="19139" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36793" start="19157" end="19170" title="Thracian language" label="Thraco-Dacian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="19200" end="19207" title="Semitic languages" label="Semites"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="19429" end="19434" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="19452" end="19465" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19771" end="19788" title="List of ancient tribes in Illyria#Pirustae" label="Pirusti tribesmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062762" start="20293" end="20312" title="Origin of Romanians" label="Origin of Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434" start="20440" end="20448" title="Commodus" label="Commodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q237960" start="20450" end="20465" title="Clodius Albinus" label="Clodius Albinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q201053" start="20470" end="20486" title="Pescennius Niger" label="Pescennius Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q209102" start="20549" end="20559" title="Lactantius" label="Lactantius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1830" start="20579" end="20585" title="Decius" label="Decius"/>
<link wikidata="Q908469" start="20635" end="20648" title="Carpo-Dacians" label="Carpo-Dacians"/>
<link wikidata="Q226858" start="20652" end="20659" title="Zosimus (historian)" label="Zosimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="20839" end="20852" title="Gothic tribes" label="Gothic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="20972" end="20977" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q46780" start="21083" end="21091" title="Aurelian" label="Aurelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q971609" start="21140" end="21151" title="Roman Dacia" label="Roman Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q908469" start="21153" end="21158" title="Carpi (people)" label="Carpi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741654" start="21160" end="21172" title="Free Dacians" label="Free Dacians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="21411" end="21432" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q314694" start="21552" end="21561" title="Eutropius (historian)" label="Eutropius"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="21672" end="21682" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="21795" end="21801" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="21866" end="21887" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063225" start="21904" end="21938" title="Constantine&amp;#x27;s Bridge (Danube)" label="Constantine&amp;#x27;s Bridge (Danube)"/>
<link wikidata="Q971609" start="22004" end="22009" title="Roman Dacia" label="Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q162858" start="22121" end="22130" title="Sarmatian" label="Sarmatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="22144" end="22149" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643972" start="22837" end="22853" title="Brazda lui Novac" label="Brazda lui Novac"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050734" start="22872" end="22888" title="Castra of Hinova" label="Castra of Hinova"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380905" start="22890" end="22898" title="Rusidava" label="Rusidava"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050741" start="22903" end="22924" title="Castra of Pietroasele" label="Castra of Pietroasele"/>
<link wikidata="Q146924" start="22930" end="22935" title="Limes (Roman Empire)" label="limes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050758" start="22959" end="22986" title="Castra of Tirighina-Bărboși" label="Castra of Tirighina-Bărboși"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166147" start="23000" end="23012" title="Sasyk Lagoon" label="Sasyk Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="23022" end="23030" title="Dniester" label="Dniester"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="23159" end="23168" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011319" start="23171" end="23180" title="Victohali" label="Victohali"/>
<link wikidata="Q524178" start="23182" end="23189" title="Taifals" label="Taifals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290818" start="23195" end="23207" title="Tervingi" label="Thervingians"/>
<link wikidata="Q201706" start="23314" end="23320" title="Gepids" label="Gepids"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="23336" end="23348" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q208629" start="23493" end="23500" title="Oltenia" label="Oltenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="23538" end="23542" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q36724" start="23575" end="23581" title="Attila" label="Attila"/>
<link wikidata="Q377507" start="23616" end="23623" title="Ardaric" label="Ardaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="23681" end="23689" title="Lombards" label="Lombards"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="23730" end="23735" title="Avar Khaganate" label="Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="23842" end="23853" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="23880" end="23893" title="Slavs" label="Slavic people"/>
<link wikidata="Q313504" start="24312" end="24333" title="Theophylact Simocatta" label="Theophylact Simocatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q297584" start="24338" end="24362" title="Theophanes the Confessor" label="Theophanes the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q563574" start="24556" end="24563" title="Gardizi" label="Gardizi"/>
<link wikidata="Q133255" start="24900" end="24910" title="Bulgarians" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="25000" end="25013" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="25099" end="25104" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12767" start="25208" end="25228" title="Tabula Peutingeriana" label="Tabula Peutingeriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="25243" end="25252" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137656" start="25272" end="25280" title="ethnonym" label="ethnonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q746583" start="25312" end="25321" title="Histories (Herodotus)" label="Histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="25368" end="25381" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="25383" end="25389" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="25395" end="25410" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="25671" end="25677" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q649179" start="26015" end="26025" title="Pannonians" label="Pannonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q690653" start="26107" end="26118" title="Geographica" label="Geographica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="26343" end="26349" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="26385" end="26391" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="26541" end="26547" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="26549" end="26560" title="Dio Cassius" label="Dio Cassius"/>
<link wikidata="Q297776" start="26566" end="26577" title="Dioscorides" label="Dioscorides"/>
<link wikidata="Q380881" start="26676" end="26696" title="Stephan of Byzantium" label="Stephan of Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q852554" start="26900" end="26905" title="Dahae" label="Dahae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="27073" end="27084" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174571" start="27220" end="27238" title="David Gordon White" label="David Gordon White"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="27483" end="27489" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="27494" end="27509" title="Germanic tribes" label="Germanic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q162858" start="27545" end="27554" title="Sarmatian" label="Sarmatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q226858" start="28776" end="28783" title="Zosimus (historian)" label="Zosimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q908469" start="28801" end="28814" title="Carpo-Dacians" label="Carpo-Dacians"/>
<link wikidata="Q226858" start="29128" end="29135" title="Zosimus (historian)" label="Zosimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q869369" start="29651" end="29660" title="Costoboci" label="Costoboci"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="30653" end="30664" title="Dio Cassius" label="Dio Cassius"/>
<link wikidata="Q611361" start="32164" end="32172" title="chthonic" label="chthonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q145218" start="32244" end="32252" title="Zalmoxis" label="Zalmoxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="32351" end="32357" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15091905" start="32652" end="32660" title="Deceneus" label="Deceneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="32708" end="32713" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q131548" start="32933" end="32941" title="Jordanes" label="Jordanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250583" start="32955" end="32961" title="Getica" label="Getica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250583" start="32975" end="33008" title="The origin and deeds of the Goths" label="The origin and deeds of the Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822211" start="33271" end="33284" title="Zibelthiurdos" label="Zibelthiurdos"/>
<link wikidata="Q792732" start="33314" end="33320" title="Bendis" label="Bendis"/>
<link wikidata="Q382317" start="33375" end="33391" title="Dodona" label="oracle of Dodona"/>
<link wikidata="Q122443" start="33489" end="33495" title="Attica, Greece" label="Attica"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="33908" end="33913" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="33985" end="33989" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q201706" start="34022" end="34028" title="Gepids" label="Gepids"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="34034" end="34039" title="Avars (Carpathians)" label="Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q110117" start="34045" end="34052" title="Bulgars" label="Bulgars"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="34085" end="34097" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="34140" end="34149" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="34154" end="34162" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="34193" end="34215" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="First Bulgarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="34275" end="34284" title="Hungary" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q191484" start="34371" end="34385" title="Great Bulgaria" label="Great Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q312477" start="34401" end="34407" title="Kubrat" label="Kubrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q110117" start="34446" end="34453" title="Bulgars" label="Bulgars"/>
<link wikidata="Q189450" start="34463" end="34471" title="Asparukh of Bulgaria" label="Asparukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12289242" start="34584" end="34589" title="Ongal" label="Ongal"/>
<link wikidata="Q184429" start="34610" end="34622" title="Danube delta" label="Danube delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="34683" end="34688" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="34711" end="34720" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41605" start="34777" end="34791" title="Constantine IV" label="Constantine IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q903378" start="34854" end="34869" title="battle of Ongal" label="battle of Ongal"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="34952" end="34974" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="First Bulgarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="35047" end="35067" title="Carpathian mountains" label="Carpathian mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q207376" start="35077" end="35087" title="Iron Gates" label="Iron Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="35104" end="35110" title="Dneper" label="Dneper"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="35138" end="35146" title="Dniester" label="Dniester"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="35221" end="35226" title="Avars (Carpathians)" label="Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q173282" start="35247" end="35254" title="Khazars" label="Khazars"/>
<link wikidata="Q366466" start="35388" end="35393" title="Batbayan of Bulgaria" label="Bayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q753919" start="35612" end="35617" title="Timok (river)" label="Timok"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="35631" end="35640" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q192104" start="35651" end="35667" title="Krum of Bulgaria" label="Krum of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q172717" start="35770" end="35775" title="Avars (Caucasus)" label="Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="35826" end="35832" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="35839" end="35850" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="36104" end="36110" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="36139" end="36147" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="36155" end="36162" title="Dnester" label="Dnester"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="36189" end="36201" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="36240" end="36245" title="Odrin" label="Odrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q171323" start="36273" end="36287" title="Eastern Thrace" label="Eastern Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q12289452" start="36339" end="36365" title="Bulgarian lands across the Danube" label="Bulgaria across the Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="36409" end="36420" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="36425" end="36441" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="Bulgarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="36490" end="36496" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="36623" end="36632" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12289452" start="36644" end="36670" title="Bulgarian lands across the Danube" label="Bulgaria across the Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q12290854" start="36944" end="36957" title="Balkan–Danubian culture" label="Dridu culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="37060" end="37074" title="Early Middle Ages" label="early medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q465299" start="37075" end="37097" title="archaeological culture" label="archaeological culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="37133" end="37145" title="Lower Danube" label="Lower Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q12290854" start="37188" end="37210" title="Pliska-Preslav culture" label="Pliska-Preslav culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q181752" start="37217" end="37226" title="Pechenegs" label="Pechenegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035516" start="37232" end="37238" title="Cumans" label="Cumans"/>
<link wikidata="Q494462" start="37243" end="37247" title="Oghuz Turks" label="Uzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="37371" end="37380" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q324748" start="37397" end="37406" title="Basarab I" label="Basarab I"/>
<link wikidata="Q212685" start="37426" end="37442" title="High Middle Ages" label="High Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="37448" end="37456" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q654356" start="37473" end="37479" title="Dragoș" label="Dragoș"/>
<link wikidata="Q181752" start="37498" end="37507" title="Pechenegs" label="Pechenegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="37524" end="37537" title="Turkic people" label="Turkic people"/>
<link wikidata="Q77120" start="37545" end="37566" title="Central Asian steppes" label="Central Asian steppes"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="37602" end="37611" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229" start="37729" end="37732" title="Don River (Russia)" label="Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="37747" end="37753" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035516" start="37829" end="37835" title="Cumans" label="Cumans"/>
<link wikidata="Q682597" start="37840" end="37856" title="Kipchaks" label="Eastern Kipchaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="37971" end="37980" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217192" start="38086" end="38095" title="Dark Ages (historiography)" label="Dark Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="38130" end="38139" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q475021" start="38161" end="38167" title="Vlachs" label="Vlachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="38260" end="38276" title="Balkan Peninsula" label="Balkan Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q208083" start="38392" end="38408" title="Hungarian rulers" label="Kings of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="38471" end="38477" title="Saxons" label="Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q147540" start="38507" end="38515" title="Székelys" label="Székelys"/>
<link wikidata="Q794782" start="38681" end="38693" title="Bihar County" label="Bihar County"/>
<link wikidata="Q685869" start="38771" end="38778" title="Făgăraș" label="Făgăraș"/>
<link wikidata="Q53998" start="38856" end="38874" title="Louis I of Hungary" label="Louis I of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12720670" start="38886" end="38899" title="Andrew Lackfi" label="Andrew Lackfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176804" start="38901" end="38922" title="Count of the Székelys" label="Count of the Székelys"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="38950" end="38962" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="38986" end="38999" title="Tatars" label="Tatars&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="39033" end="39045" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q12720670" start="39047" end="39053" title="Andrew Lackfi" label="Lackfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q147540" start="39077" end="39084" title="Székelys" label="Székely"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="39124" end="39129" title="Tatars" label="Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="39193" end="39199" title="Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="39245" end="39257" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="39263" end="39275" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="39303" end="39317" title="Dniester" label="Dniester River"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="39334" end="39353" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q458368" start="39387" end="39406" title="Eastern Carpathians" label="Eastern Carpathians"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="39415" end="39424" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="39435" end="39443" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43715" start="39685" end="39705" title="Vlad III the Impaler" label="Vlad III the Impaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q115215358" start="39712" end="39718" title="List of rulers of Wallachia" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="39907" end="39920" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266236" start="39975" end="39989" title="Count Dracula" label="main character"/>
<link wikidata="Q36184" start="39993" end="40004" title="Bram Stoker" label="Bram Stoker"/>
<link wikidata="Q41542" start="40029" end="40036" title="Dracula" label="Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="40161" end="40173" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q218134" start="40205" end="40222" title="Stephen III of Moldavia" label="Stephen the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q915576" start="40252" end="40259" title="List of rulers of Moldavia" label="voivode"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="40263" end="40271" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q387687" start="40536" end="40562" title="Painted churches of northern Moldavia" label="unique architectural style"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="40581" end="40587" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="40603" end="40623" title="World Heritage Sites" label="World Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073358" start="40707" end="40723" title="Battle of Vaslui" label="Battle of Vaslui"/>
<link wikidata="Q384463" start="40749" end="40766" title="Voroneț Monastery" label="Voroneț Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q163514" start="40791" end="40800" title="Sixtus IV" label="Sixtus IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="40979" end="40993" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="41147" end="41156" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="41206" end="41222" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="Bulgarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q178510" start="41273" end="41289" title="Battle of Mohács" label="Battle of Mohács"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="41299" end="41311" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q625380" start="41328" end="41353" title="Eastern Hungarian Kingdom" label="Eastern Hungarian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q655621" start="41370" end="41398" title="Principality of Transylvania (1570–1711)" label="Principality of Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q836424" start="41422" end="41438" title="Treaty of Speyer (1570)" label="Treaty of Speyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="41461" end="41477" title="Balkan peninsula" label="Balkan peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q559336" start="41482" end="41523" title="Ottoman Hungary" label="the southern and central parts of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="41963" end="41972" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q220653" start="42016" end="42027" title="Vasile Lupu" label="Vasile Lupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q159933" start="42032" end="42049" title="Dimitrie Cantemir" label="Dimitrie Cantemir"/>
<link wikidata="Q719546" start="42063" end="42076" title="Matei Basarab" label="Matei Basarab"/>
<link wikidata="Q461926" start="42081" end="42103" title="Constantin Brâncoveanu" label="Constantin Brâncoveanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="42136" end="42150" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q313396" start="42248" end="42255" title="John II Sigismund Zápolya" label="John II"/>
<link wikidata="Q174665" start="42316" end="42326" title="Alba Iulia" label="Alba Iulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244362" start="42415" end="42437" title="Prince of Transylvania" label="Prince of Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q209809" start="42457" end="42462" title="Turda" label="Turda"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="42487" end="42504" title="freedom of religion" label="religious freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="42588" end="42597" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="42655" end="42668" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q118755" start="42696" end="42713" title="Michael the Brave" label="Michael the Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q115215358" start="42722" end="42741" title="Prince of Wallachia" label="Prince of Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="42921" end="42935" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q655621" start="43137" end="43165" title="Principality of Transylvania (1571–1711)" label="Principality of Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184037" start="43199" end="43209" title="Absolutism (European history)" label="absolutist"/>
<link wikidata="Q313494" start="43218" end="43231" title="Gábor Bethlen" label="Gábor Bethlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="43264" end="43281" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="43303" end="43315" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q51081" start="43328" end="43343" title="Holy Crown of Hungary" label="Hungarian crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q595545" start="43363" end="43397" title="Rákóczi&amp;#x27;s War of Independence" label="Rákóczi&amp;#x27;s War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="43426" end="43438" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812715" start="43471" end="43492" title="List of princes of Transylvania" label="Transylvanian princes"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="43584" end="43601" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q208629" start="43702" end="43709" title="Oltenia" label="Oltenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="43903" end="43911" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="43940" end="43955" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="44020" end="44030" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q570213" start="44250" end="44255" title="Turnu" label="Turnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q202351" start="44257" end="44264" title="Giurgiu" label="Giurgiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q188478" start="44269" end="44275" title="Braila" label="Braila"/>
<link wikidata="Q137847" start="44408" end="44428" title="Treaty of Adrianople (1829)" label="Treaty of Adrianople"/>
<link wikidata="Q203563" start="44591" end="44596" title="boyar" label="boyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q717801" start="44768" end="44782" title="Pavel Kiselyov" label="Pavel Kiselyov"/>
<link wikidata="Q15642627" start="44847" end="44868" title="Law of Romania" label="Romanian constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175943" start="44952" end="44962" title="Wallachian Revolution of 1848" label="revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q359108" start="45018" end="45036" title="Tudor Vladimirescu" label="Tudor Vladimirescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661754" start="45045" end="45052" title="Vladimirescu&amp;#x27;s Pandurs" label="Pandurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661754" start="45060" end="45087" title="Wallachian uprising of 1821" label="Wallachian uprising of 1821"/>
<link wikidata="Q840643" start="45502" end="45519" title="Ion Budai-Deleanu" label="Ion Budai-Deleanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q702073" start="45630" end="45642" title="Great Powers" label="Great Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="45816" end="45830" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="45852" end="45863" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q319260" start="45881" end="45896" title="Treaty of Paris (1856)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="45975" end="45986" title="Great Power" label="Great Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="45992" end="46035" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="46041" end="46061" title="Second French Empire" label="Second French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="46067" end="46095" title="Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia" label="Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="46101" end="46116" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="46118" end="46125" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974798" start="46195" end="46212" title="Partida Națională" label="unionist campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q3701689" start="46729" end="46742" title="Ad hoc Divans" label="ad-hoc divans"/>
<link wikidata="Q294832" start="46975" end="46994" title="Alexandru Ioan Cuza" label="Alexandru Ioan Cuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031312" start="47087" end="47114" title="Unification of Moldavia and Wallachia" label="uniting both principalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q199960" start="47766" end="47779" title="History of Hungary" label="Dual Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q294832" start="47985" end="47989" title="Alexandru Ioan Cuza" label="Cuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q157013" start="48034" end="48058" title="Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen" label="Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713794" start="48077" end="48085" title="Domnitor" label="Domnitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q57146" start="48143" end="48166" title="Charles I of Romania" label="Prince Carol of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q174205" start="48236" end="48265" title="Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)" label="Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048169" start="48336" end="48352" title="Treaty of Berlin, 1878" label="Treaty of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q702073" start="48419" end="48431" title="Great Powers" label="Great Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="48471" end="48481" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="48551" end="48558" title="Dobruja" label="Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q208500" start="48584" end="48596" title="principality" label="principality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="48628" end="48635" title="monarchy" label="kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q57146" start="48688" end="48695" title="Carol I" label="Carol I"/>
<link wikidata="Q184183" start="48800" end="48817" title="Second Balkan War" label="Second Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="48842" end="48848" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="48853" end="48863" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q500067" start="48889" end="48916" title="Treaty of Bucharest (1913)" label="Treaty of Bucharest of 1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q912868" start="48933" end="48949" title="Southern Dobruja" label="Southern Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316718" start="48970" end="48978" title="Durostor County" label="Durostor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494545" start="48983" end="48991" title="Caliacra County" label="Caliacra"/>
<link wikidata="Q473741" start="49133" end="49139" title="Alien (law)" label="aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="49261" end="49267" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="49399" end="49413" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q147909" start="49418" end="49437" title="Kingdom of Bulgaria" label="Kingdom of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q57146" start="49449" end="49472" title="King Carol I of Romania" label="King Carol I of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="49542" end="49549" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="49554" end="49569" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020887" start="49905" end="49919" title="casus foederis" label="casus foederis"/>
<link wikidata="Q57165" start="50219" end="50246" title="King Ferdinand I of Romania" label="King Ferdinand I of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="50368" end="50375" title="Allies of World War I" label="Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="50561" end="50573" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="50579" end="50586" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="50652" end="50662" title="Allies of World War I" label="The Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="50753" end="50759" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="50805" end="50812" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="50825" end="50831" title="French Third Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q16664759" start="50839" end="50864" title="French military mission to Romania (1916–1918)" label="military training mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="51271" end="51279" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="51281" end="51293" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q134350" start="51300" end="51305" title="Tisza" label="Tisza"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="51323" end="51328" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q18541072" start="51405" end="51417" title="Hypothesis Z" label="Hypothesis Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q193055" start="51512" end="51519" title="Giurgiu County" label="Giurgiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667" start="51643" end="51662" title="Paul von Hindenburg" label="Paul von Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633083" start="52439" end="52457" title="Battle of Transylvania" label="launched an attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="52803" end="52810" title="Dobruja" label="Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="52924" end="52933" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628859" start="52954" end="52973" title="Battle of Bucharest" label="Battle of Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="53340" end="53354" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722729" start="53398" end="53405" title="Răcoasa" label="Mărăști"/>
<link wikidata="Q576804" start="53407" end="53416" title="Mărășești" label="Mărășești"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027663" start="53422" end="53427" title="Oituz" label="Oituz"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="53475" end="53489" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332155" start="53665" end="53684" title="Ecaterina Teodoroiu" label="Ecaterina Teodoroiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733709" start="53704" end="53722" title="Karl von Wenninger" label="Karl von Wenninger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889252" start="53753" end="53772" title="Battle of Mărășești" label="Battle of Mărășești"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="53825" end="53843" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="53854" end="53868" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q165755" start="54035" end="54054" title="Treaty of Bucharest (1918)" label="Treaty of Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q165755" start="54764" end="54783" title="Treaty of Bucharest (1918)" label="Treaty of Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="54955" end="54969" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="55007" end="55017" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57165" start="55204" end="55218" title="Ferdinand I of Romania" label="King Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q253224" start="55380" end="55396" title="Armistice of 11 November 1918" label="German armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262377" start="55468" end="55484" title="Macedonian front" label="Macedonian front"/>
<link wikidata="Q180871" start="55600" end="55609" title="Compiègne" label="Compiègne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362584" start="56785" end="56819" title="Romanian Volunteer Corps in Russia" label="Romanian Volunteer Corps in Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="56988" end="56998" title="Bolsheviks" label="Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q605324" start="57023" end="57042" title="Czechoslovak Legion" label="Czechoslovak Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q104309" start="57051" end="57065" title="White movement" label="White movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="57077" end="57094" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q659745" start="57336" end="57349" title="Italian Front (World War I)" label="Italian front"/>
<link wikidata="Q252298" start="57407" end="57429" title="Hungarian-Romanian War" label="Hungarian-Romanian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q191115" start="57810" end="57824" title="Albano Laziale" label="Albano Laziale"/>
<link wikidata="Q47125" start="57851" end="57859" title="Avezzano" label="Avezzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q118755" start="58300" end="58317" title="Michael the Brave" label="Michael the Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="58385" end="58394" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q655621" start="58396" end="58408" title="Principality of Transylvania (1570–1711)" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="58413" end="58421" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="58508" end="58515" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q513394" start="58567" end="58583" title="Nicolae Bălcescu" label="Nicolae Bălcescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q263985" start="58629" end="58641" title="Romantic nationalism" label="nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="58854" end="58862" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q192924" start="58891" end="58914" title="Treaty of Saint Germain" label="Treaty of Saint Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="58965" end="58975" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722786" start="59011" end="59026" title="Treaty of Paris (1920)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989779" start="59175" end="59196" title="Union of Transylvania with Romania" label="Proclamation of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q174665" start="59206" end="59216" title="Alba Iulia" label="Alba Iulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360641" start="59256" end="59271" title="Great Union Day" label="Great Union Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q581325" start="59326" end="59350" title="Greater Romania" label="&amp;quot;România Mare&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="59414" end="59429" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q444912" start="59653" end="59675" title="Old Kingdom of Romania" label="Old Kingdom of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q181902" start="59711" end="59728" title="Treaty of Trianon" label="Treaty of Trianon"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="59799" end="59807" title="Bucovina" label="Bucovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="59864" end="59884" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q912868" start="59908" end="59924" title="Southern Dobruja" label="Southern Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q184183" start="60026" end="60043" title="Second Balkan War" label="Second Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="60073" end="60087" title="Paris Peace Conference, 1919" label="peace treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995243" start="60261" end="60289" title="1923 Constitution of Romania" label="1923 Constitution of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813360" start="60316" end="60326" title="Romanian Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q12734854" start="60466" end="60503" title="Great National Assembly of Alba Iulia" label="Great National Assembly of Alba Iulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255954" start="60560" end="60580" title="1930 Romanian Census" label="1930 Romanian Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="60622" end="60631" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989342" start="60697" end="60714" title="Minorities in Romania" label="ethnic minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q252298" start="60781" end="60803" title="Hungarian–Romanian War" label="Hungarian–Romanian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372646" start="60812" end="60832" title="Tatarbunary Uprising" label="Tatarbunary Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="60877" end="60887" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="60892" end="60906" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q733951" start="60923" end="60937" title="Little Entente" label="Little Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916505" start="60993" end="61011" title="Polish–Romanian alliance" label="defensive alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230371" start="61291" end="61313" title="National Liberal Party (Romania, 1875)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543464" start="61388" end="61399" title="clientelism" label="clientelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="61404" end="61415" title="nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855102" start="61460" end="61489" title="National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party" label="National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q153448" start="61650" end="61660" title="Iron Guard" label="Iron Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q57165" start="61752" end="61761" title="Ferdinand of Romania" label="Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="61780" end="61792" title="Carol II of Romania" label="Prince Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q930013" start="62024" end="62031" title="Michael I of Romania" label="Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q462164" start="62171" end="62182" title="Iuliu Maniu" label="Iuliu Maniu"/>
<link wikidata="Q434493" start="62321" end="62334" title="Magda Lupescu" label="Magda Lupescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q162177" start="62471" end="62476" title="Helen of Greece and Denmark" label="Elena"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="62901" end="62948" title="Great Depression" label="worldwide Great Depression that started in 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q106092830" start="62953" end="62980" title="Great Depression in Romania" label="was also present in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654852" start="63210" end="63222" title="Valea Jiului" label="Valea Jiului"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688281" start="63245" end="63252" title="Grivița" label="Grivița"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="63658" end="63665" title="fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="63922" end="63933" title="antisemitic" label="antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230371" start="64001" end="64023" title="National Liberal Party (Romania, 1875)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362550" start="64241" end="64255" title="Romanian Front" label="Romanian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273663" start="64270" end="64303" title="National-Christian Defense League" label="National-Christian Defense League"/>
<link wikidata="Q153448" start="64319" end="64329" title="Iron Guard" label="Iron Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970219" start="64361" end="64384" title="National Agrarian Party (Romania)" label="National Agrarian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270876" start="64397" end="64421" title="National Christian Party" label="National Christian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="64627" end="64630" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377596" start="64834" end="64842" title="Ion Duca" label="Ion Duca"/>
<link wikidata="Q223414" start="65038" end="65051" title="Octavian Goga" label="Octavian Goga"/>
<link wikidata="Q12714608" start="65094" end="65112" title="Kingdom of Romania under Fascism" label="Fascist government"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="65147" end="65159" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q192886" start="65604" end="65615" title="corporatist" label="corporatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q318105" start="65965" end="65988" title="Corneliu Zelea Codreanu" label="Corneliu Zelea Codreanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q439903" start="66270" end="66286" title="Armand Călinescu" label="Armand Călinescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="66603" end="66615" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="66691" end="66699" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="66756" end="66768" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="66780" end="66803" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q152030" start="67009" end="67022" title="Ion Antonescu" label="Ion Antonescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="67193" end="67215" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Second Polish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916505" start="67298" end="67322" title="Polish-Romanian Alliance" label="Polish-Romanian Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q114342" start="67354" end="67373" title="Romanian Bridgehead" label="Romanian Bridgehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q168844" start="67578" end="67601" title="National Bank of Poland" label="National Bank of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q119879" start="67717" end="67748" title="Polish Armed Forces in the West" label="Polish Armed Forces in the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="67767" end="67781" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q210846" start="68069" end="68095" title="Polish government-in-exile" label="Polish government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q439903" start="68139" end="68155" title="Armand Călinescu" label="Armand Călinescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="68267" end="68288" title="Third French Republic" label="Third French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="68482" end="68493" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266004" start="68568" end="68608" title="Soviet occupation of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina" label="give up Bessarabia and northern Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q147741" start="68647" end="68653" title="Hertsa" label="Hertsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143148" start="68741" end="68771" title="Moldavian ASSR" label="small part of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q170895" start="68784" end="68819" title="Moldavian SSR" label="Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332001" start="68871" end="68883" title="Hotin county" label="Hotin county"/>
<link wikidata="Q214662" start="68888" end="68894" title="Budjak" label="Budjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="68919" end="68954" title="Ukrainian SSR" label="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q243618" start="69001" end="69020" title="Second Vienna Award" label="Second Vienna Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="69034" end="69039" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q600018" start="69086" end="69104" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1920–1946)" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q917134" start="69153" end="69174" title="Northern Transylvania" label="Northern Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="69265" end="69277" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="69284" end="69295" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q181902" start="69303" end="69320" title="Treaty of Trianon" label="Treaty of Trianon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292449" start="69348" end="69365" title="Treaty of Craiova" label="Treaty of Craiova"/>
<link wikidata="Q912868" start="69367" end="69383" title="Southern Dobruja" label="Southern Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q184183" start="69448" end="69465" title="Second Balkan War" label="Second Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q921959" start="69873" end="69884" title="Ion Gigurtu" label="Ion Gigurtu"/>
<link wikidata="Q442004" start="69960" end="69970" title="Horia Sima" label="Horia Sima"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="70005" end="70015" title="Antisemitism" label="antisemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q318105" start="70085" end="70102" title="Corneliu Codreanu" label="Corneliu Codreanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q152030" start="70377" end="70390" title="Ion Antonescu" label="Ion Antonescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507497" start="70416" end="70440" title="National Legionary State" label="National Legionary State"/>
<link wikidata="Q930013" start="70520" end="70527" title="Michael of Romania" label="Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q434493" start="70552" end="70565" title="Magda Lupescu" label="Magda Lupescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="70687" end="70691" title="Axis powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q153448" start="71211" end="71221" title="Iron Guard" label="Iron Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654950" start="71225" end="71231" title="Jilava" label="Jilava"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070808" start="71271" end="71286" title="Jilava Massacre" label="Jilava Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q313581" start="71347" end="71360" title="Nicolae Iorga" label="Nicolae Iorga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933788" start="71375" end="71390" title="Virgil Madgearu" label="Virgil Madgearu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18545517" start="71566" end="71611" title="Legionnaires&amp;#x27; rebellion and Bucharest pogrom" label="coup, combined with a pogrom against the Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="71615" end="71624" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960162" start="72605" end="72622" title="Operation München" label="Operation München"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="72687" end="72693" title="Odessa" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525" start="72695" end="72705" title="Sevastopol" label="Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q914" start="72707" end="72717" title="Stalingrad" label="Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="72726" end="72734" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q223129" start="72802" end="72821" title="Third Army (Romania)" label="Romanian Third Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613020" start="72830" end="72850" title="Fourth Army (Romania)" label="Romanian Fourth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823132" start="73163" end="73176" title="Library of Congress Country Studies" label="Country Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="73395" end="73405" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="73414" end="73431" title="Northern Bukovina" label="Northern Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266004" start="73507" end="73542" title="Soviet occupation of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina" label="occupied by the USSR a year earlier"/>
<link wikidata="Q243618" start="73633" end="73652" title="Second Vienna Award" label="Second Vienna Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="73724" end="73736" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="73759" end="73767" title="Dniester" label="Dniester"/>
<link wikidata="Q188940" start="73776" end="73788" title="Southern Bug" label="Southern Bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="73815" end="73821" title="Odessa" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q682409" start="73841" end="73861" title="Battle of Odessa (1941)" label="fall in October 1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q167641" start="73931" end="73955" title="Transnistria Governorate" label="Transnistria Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="74234" end="74254" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Battle of Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q372473" start="74281" end="74297" title="Petre Dumitrescu" label="Petre Dumitrescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q161213" start="74415" end="74432" title="6th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="German Sixth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q155008" start="74562" end="74578" title="Operation Uranus" label="Operation Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q311765" start="74883" end="74907" title="Second Jassy–Kishinev Offensive" label="Jassy–Kishinev Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q930013" start="74914" end="74934" title="Michael I of Romania" label="Michael I of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q256121" start="75037" end="75046" title="Romanian Communist Party" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q215904" start="75274" end="75295" title="Manfred von Killinger" label="Manfred von Killinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452312" start="75431" end="75436" title="First Army (Romania)" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443031" start="75438" end="75454" title="Second Army (Romania)" label="Second (forming)"/>
<link wikidata="Q223129" start="75488" end="75493" title="Third Army (Romania)" label="Third"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613020" start="75502" end="75515" title="Fourth Army (Romania)" label="Fourth Armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="75732" end="75738" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="76126" end="76130" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="76186" end="76194" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555004" start="77042" end="77059" title="Moscow Conference (1944)" label="Moscow Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="77076" end="77093" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="77095" end="77131" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q714457" start="77145" end="77154" title="Percentages agreement" label="agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="77158" end="77171" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="77172" end="77185" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="77205" end="77219" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77930" end="77955" title="Allied Control Commission#Romania" label="Allied Control Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="77979" end="77988" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362569" start="78046" end="78078" title="Romanian People&amp;#x27;s Tribunals" label="Romanian People&amp;#x27;s Tribunals"/>
<link wikidata="Q182445" start="78587" end="78597" title="Prut River" label="Prut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q179585" start="78746" end="78754" title="Ploiești" label="Ploiești"/>
<link wikidata="Q82174" start="79014" end="79020" title="Brașov" label="Brașov"/>
<link wikidata="Q83324" start="79025" end="79030" title="Sibiu" label="Sibiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q207493" start="79058" end="79069" title="Mureș River" label="Mureș River"/>
<link wikidata="Q100188" start="79096" end="79100" title="Cluj" label="Cluj"/>
<link wikidata="Q209512" start="79188" end="79209" title="Second Army (Hungary)" label="Second Hungarian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q671863" start="79259" end="79277" title="8th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="Eighth German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322868" start="79345" end="79360" title="Battle of Turda" label="Battle of Turda"/>
<link wikidata="Q179559" start="79556" end="79567" title="Arad County" label="Arad County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471839" start="79703" end="79719" title="Battle of Păuliș" label="Battle of Păuliș"/>
<link wikidata="Q173591" start="79829" end="79833" title="Arad, Romania" label="Arad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558747" start="79863" end="79876" title="Romanian Army" label="Romanian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="79912" end="79921" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="79971" end="79981" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152750" start="79999" end="80034" title="Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia" label="Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q700924" start="80063" end="80087" title="End of World War II in Europe" label="end of the war in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452312" start="80106" end="80111" title="Romanian First Army" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613020" start="80116" end="80122" title="Romanian Fourth Army" label="Fourth"/>
<link wikidata="Q157445" start="80147" end="80163" title="Prague Offensive" label="Prague Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q322943" start="80368" end="80388" title="Paris Peace Treaties, 1947" label="1947 Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136785" start="81052" end="81065" title="Tătaru Mare Island" label="one exception"/>
<link wikidata="Q5409928" start="81082" end="81113" title="History of the Soviet Union (1985–1991)" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="81178" end="81197" title="Moldova" label="Republic of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296124" start="81256" end="81273" title="Soviet occupation of Romania" label="Soviet occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q256121" start="81325" end="81340" title="Communist Party of Romania" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="81466" end="81488" title="Socialist Republic of Romania" label="people&amp;#x27;s republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q465613" start="81524" end="81546" title="people&amp;#x27;s republic" label="people&amp;#x27;s republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q658030" start="81709" end="81715" title="SovRom" label="SovRom"/>
<link wikidata="Q294072" start="81893" end="81915" title="Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej" label="Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501749" start="81921" end="81936" title="General Secretary" label="First Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q256121" start="81944" end="81972" title="Romanian Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Romanian Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566241" start="82019" end="82048" title="1948 Constitution of Romania" label="constitution of 13 April 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="82103" end="82115" title="Nationalization" label="nationalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q256121" start="82149" end="82173" title="Romanian Communist Party" label="Romanian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="83020" end="83037" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="83171" end="83188" title="Nicolae Ceaușescu" label="Nicolae Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208596" start="83243" end="83255" title="Ceaușescu&amp;#x27;s speech of 21 August 1968" label="condemnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773668" start="83263" end="83287" title="Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia" label="Soviet-led 1968 invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q853348" start="83291" end="83305" title="Socialist Republic of Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="83329" end="83340" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q6087784" start="83402" end="83422" title="Israel-Romania relations" label="diplomatic relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="83445" end="83456" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="83591" end="83603" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="83636" end="83650" title="Arab world" label="Arab countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="83659" end="83692" title="Palestine Liberation Organisation" label="Palestine Liberation Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q42013" start="83827" end="83832" title="Anwar Sadat" label="Sadat"/>
<link wikidata="Q461319" start="83883" end="83895" title="foreign debt" label="foreign debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="84012" end="84015" title="IMF" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="84024" end="84034" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q309070" start="84075" end="84084" title="Autarky" label="autarchic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579553" start="84579" end="84597" title="1980s austerity policy in Romania" label="austerity policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q208980" start="84779" end="84789" title="Securitate" label="Securitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q192914" start="84826" end="84845" title="cult of personality" label="cult of personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="84970" end="84989" title="Romanian Revolution" label="Romanian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="84993" end="85006" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="December 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="85036" end="85055" title="Romanian Revolution" label="Romanian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q83404" start="85094" end="85103" title="Timișoara" label="Timișoara"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="85108" end="85117" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="85240" end="85250" title="Ceaușescu&amp;#x27;s last speech" label="mass rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397233" start="85437" end="85456" title="Trial of Nicolae and Elena Ceaușescu" label="tried and convicted"/>
<link wikidata="Q375727" start="85462" end="85476" title="kangaroo court" label="kangaroo court"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="85481" end="85489" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q189575" start="85549" end="85560" title="Ion Iliescu" label="Ion Iliescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455738" start="85708" end="85732" title="National Salvation Front (Romania)" label="National Salvation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455738" start="86223" end="86247" title="National Salvation Front (Romania)" label="National Salvation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q189575" start="86261" end="86272" title="Ion Iliescu" label="Ion Iliescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q316823" start="86406" end="86417" title="Petre Roman" label="Petre Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q259887" start="86630" end="86678" title="Christian Democratic National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party" label="National Christian Democrat Peasant&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q686228" start="86693" end="86715" title="National Liberal Party (Romania)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917689" start="86731" end="86763" title="Romanian Social Democratic Party (1990–2001)" label="Romanian Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850614" start="86932" end="86960" title="University Square, Bucharest" label="University Square, Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368744" start="87063" end="87071" title="Golaniad" label="Golaniad"/>
<link wikidata="Q208980" start="87161" end="87171" title="Securitate" label="Securitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189575" start="87883" end="87894" title="Ion Iliescu" label="Ion Iliescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q530577" start="88141" end="88151" title="Jiu River" label="Jiu Valley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88292" end="88337" title="June 1990 Mineriad#Inquiry into potential involvement of the Romanian Intelligence Service" label="violence was perpetrated by government agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q190044" start="88951" end="88961" title="technocrat" label="technocrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q126660" start="88963" end="88979" title="Theodor Stolojan" label="Theodor Stolojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676846" start="89017" end="89023" title="acting (law)" label="acting"/>
<link wikidata="Q752435" start="89444" end="89469" title="Social Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Democratic National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q13359938" start="89505" end="89521" title="Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304761" start="89667" end="89693" title="Red Quadrilateral" label="With parliamentary support"/>
<link wikidata="Q835213" start="89715" end="89744" title="Romanian National Unity Party" label="Romanian National Unity Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q828039" start="89753" end="89774" title="Greater Romania Party" label="Greater Romania Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q126671" start="89906" end="89922" title="Nicolae Văcăroiu" label="Nicolae Văcăroiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q752435" start="89953" end="89989" title="Party of Social Democracy in Romania" label="Party of Social Democracy in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q752435" start="90144" end="90167" title="Social Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q13359938" start="90179" end="90195" title="Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90215" end="90235" title="List of political parties in Romania#Post−1989 parties" label="Alliance for Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q299152" start="90370" end="90389" title="Emil Constantinescu" label="Emil Constantinescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420523" start="90397" end="90418" title="Romanian Democratic Convention" label="Democratic Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q266582" start="90694" end="90738" title="Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania" label="Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q370856" start="90938" end="90952" title="Victor Ciorbea" label="Victor Ciorbea"/>
<link wikidata="Q357004" start="90995" end="91006" title="Radu Vasile" label="Radu Vasile"/>
<link wikidata="Q255022" start="91087" end="91101" title="Mugur Isărescu" label="Mugur Isărescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q357004" start="91123" end="91134" title="Radu Vasile" label="Radu Vasile"/>
<link wikidata="Q12720209" start="91167" end="91180" title="2000 Romanian general election" label="2000 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q752435" start="91219" end="91242" title="Social Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q271966" start="91354" end="91368" title="Adrian Năstase" label="Adrian Năstase"/>
<link wikidata="Q57279" start="91437" end="91451" title="Traian Băsescu" label="Traian Băsescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q664647" start="91509" end="91535" title="Justice and Truth Alliance" label="Justice and Truth Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q783621" start="91614" end="91632" title="Conservative Party (Romania)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q266582" start="91646" end="91690" title="Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania" label="Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="91766" end="91774" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="91845" end="91849" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q57279" start="92177" end="92191" title="Traian Băsescu" label="Traian Băsescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q207473" start="92338" end="92361" title="Călin Popescu-Tăriceanu" label="Călin Popescu-Tăriceanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q783621" start="92498" end="92521" title="Romanian Humanist Party" label="Romanian Humanist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q783621" start="92559" end="92586" title="Romanian Conservative Party" label="Romanian Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="92707" end="92721" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92741" end="92767" title="Associated State of the EU" label="Associated State of the EU"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92780" end="92796" title="Acceding Country" label="Acceding Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091237" start="93007" end="93034" title="Romanian diaspora" label="increasingly large diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q57279" start="93168" end="93182" title="Traian Băsescu" label="Traian Basescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q590949" start="93187" end="93197" title="2009 Romanian presidential election" label="re-elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q948130" start="93282" end="93299" title="2012 Romanian protests" label="national protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q701484" start="93523" end="93537" title="Klaus Iohannis" label="Klaus Iohannis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362659" start="93542" end="93549" title="2014 Romanian presidential election" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q839139" start="93557" end="93577" title="President of Romania" label="President of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q39088259" start="93590" end="93600" title="2019 Romanian presidential election" label="re-elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230383" start="93652" end="93678" title="2020 Romanian legislative election" label="the parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q752435" start="93712" end="93728" title="Social Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q671955" start="93772" end="93785" title="Ludovic Orban" label="Ludovic Orban"/>
<link wikidata="Q686228" start="93824" end="93846" title="National Liberal Party (Romania)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q28035183" start="93863" end="93874" title="Florin Cîțu" label="Florin Cîțu"/>
<link wikidata="Q63991888" start="94026" end="94034" title="USR PLUS" label="USR PLUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q266582" start="94044" end="94088" title="Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania" label="Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q28950289" start="94122" end="94135" title="Nicolae Ciucă" label="Nicolae Ciucă"/>
<link wikidata="Q21179176" start="94353" end="94367" title="Marcel Ciolacu" label="Marcel Ciolacu"/>
<link wikidata="Q115215358" start="94533" end="94558" title="List of Wallachian rulers" label="List of Wallachian rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q915576" start="94574" end="94598" title="List of Moldavian rulers" label="List of Moldavian rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q371859" start="94614" end="94642" title="List of Transylvanian rulers" label="List of Transylvanian rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713794" start="94658" end="94678" title="Domnitor" label="Domnitori of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="94693" end="94709" title="Kings of Romania" label="Kings of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q839139" start="94724" end="94745" title="Presidents of Romania" label="Presidents of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710461" start="94761" end="94787" title="List of heads of government of Romania" label="Prime ministers of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q12290854" start="94819" end="94842" title="Balkan–Danubian culture" label="Balkan–Danubian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12289452" start="94845" end="94878" title="Bulgarian lands across the Danube" label="Bulgarian lands across the Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q934951" start="94881" end="94910" title="Historical regions of Romania" label="Historical regions of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788734" start="94913" end="94928" title="King of Romania" label="King of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096491" start="94931" end="94951" title="List of Dacian kings" label="List of Dacian kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710461" start="94954" end="94992" title="List of heads of government of Romania" label="List of heads of government of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933215" start="94995" end="95024" title="List of presidents of Romania" label="List of presidents of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716395" start="95027" end="95057" title="List of wars involving Romania" label="List of wars involving Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656140" start="95060" end="95087" title="Military history of Romania" label="Military history of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154091" start="95090" end="95109" title="Politics of Romania" label="Politics of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q96106371" start="95112" end="95144" title="Territorial evolution of Romania" label="Territorial evolution of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q156591" start="99615" end="99625" title="Yad Vashem" label="Yad Vashem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25637" wikidata="Q240722" url="?curid=25637" title="Geography of Romania">
<text>With an area of , Romania is the twelfth-largest country in Europe. It is a country located at the crossroads of Eastern and Southeast Europe. It is bordered on the Black Sea, the country is halfway between the equator and the North Pole and equidistant from the westernmost part of Europe—the Atlantic Coast—and the most easterly—the Ural Mountains. Romania has of border. Moldova and Ukraine lie to the east, Bulgaria to the south, and Serbia and Hungary to the west by the Pannonian Plain. In the southeast, of sea coastline provide an important outlet to the Black Sea and the Atlantic Ocean.

==History==
Traditionally Romania is divided into several historic regions that no longer perform any administrative function:
Dobruja is the easternmost region, extending from the northward course of the Danube to the shores of the Black Sea.

Moldavia stretches from the Eastern Carpathians to the Prut River on the Moldovan and Ukrainian border.

Wallachia reaches south from the Transylvanian Alps to the Bulgarian border and is divided by the Olt River into Oltenia on the west and Muntenia on the east. The Danube forms a natural border between Muntenia and Dobruja.

The west-central region, known as Transylvania, is delimited by the arc of the Carpathians, which separates it from the Maramureș region in the northwest; by the Crișana area, which borders Hungary in the west; and by the Banat region of the southwest, which adjoins both Hungary and Serbia. It is these areas west of the Carpathians that contain the highest concentrations of the nation&#x27;s largest ethnic minorities—Hungarians, Germans, and Serbs.

Romania&#x27;s exterior boundaries are a result of relatively recent events. At the outbreak of World War I, the country&#x27;s territory included only the provinces of Walachia, Moldavia, and Dobruja. This area, known as the Regat or the Old Kingdom, came into being with the disintegration of the Ottoman Empire in the mid-nineteenth century. At the end of World War I, Romania acquired Transylvania and the Banat. Some of this territory was lost during World War II, but negotiations returned it to Romania. Although this acquisition united some 85 percent of the Romanian-speaking population of Eastern Europe into one nation, it left a considerable number of ethnic Hungarians under Romanian rule. Disputes between Hungary and Romania regarding this territory would surface regularly, as both considered the region part of their national heritage. Questions were also periodically raised as to the historical validity of the Soviet-Romanian border. Bukovina and Bessarabia, former Romanian provinces where significant percentages of the population are Romanian-speaking, were part of the Soviet Union from the end of World War II to its dissolution, and subsequently part of the (formerly Soviet) states of Ukraine and Moldova. Despite ongoing and potential disputes, however, since 1989 Romania has no territorial claims to make.

Romania&#x27;s current administrative divisions include 41 counties and one city - Bucharest - with special status, see Administrative divisions of Romania.

==Topography==


Romania&#x27;s natural landscape is almost evenly divided among mountains (23 percent), plains (39 percent), and hills (35 percent). These varied relief forms spread rather symmetrically from the Carpathian Mountains, which reach elevations of more than 2,500 meters, to the Danube Delta, which is just a few meters above sea level.
The arc of the Carpathians extends over 1,000 kilometers through the center of the country, covering an area of 71,000 square kilometers. These mountains are of low to medium altitude and are no wider than 100 kilometers. They are deeply fragmented by longitudinal and transverse valleys and crossed by several major rivers. These features and the fact that there are many summit passes—some at altitudes up to 2,256 meters—have made the Carpathians less of a barrier to movement than other European ranges. Another distinguishing feature is the many eroded platforms that provide tableland at relatively high altitudes. There are permanent settlements here at above 1,200 meters.

Romania&#x27;s Carpathians are differentiated into three ranges: the Eastern Carpathians, the Southern Carpathians or Transylvanian Alps, and the Western Romanian Carpathians. Each of these ranges has important distinguishing features. The Eastern Carpathians are composed of three parallel ridges that run from northwest to southeast. The westernmost ridge is an extinct volcanic range with many preserved cones and craters. The range has many large depressions, in the largest of which the city of Brașov is situated. Important mining and industrial centers as well as agricultural areas are found within these depressions. The Eastern Carpathians are covered with forests—some 32 percent of the country&#x27;s woodlands are there. They also contain important ore deposits, including gold and silver, and their mineral water springs feed numerous health resorts.

The Southern Carpathians offer the highest peaks at Moldoveanu Peak (2,544 m) and Negoiu (2,535 m) and more than 150 glacial lakes. They have large grassland areas and some woodlands but few large depressions and subsoil resources. At higher elevations, the wind and rain have turned the rocks into spectacular figures such as the Sphinx and &quot;Babele&quot;.

The region was crisscrossed by an ancient network of trans-Carpathian roads, and vestiges of the old Roman Way are still visible. Numerous passes and the valleys of the Olt, Jiu, and Danube rivers provide routes for roads and railways through the mountains.

The Western Romanian Carpathians are the lowest of the three ranges and are fragmented by many deep structural depressions. They have historically functioned as &quot;gates,&quot; which allow easy passage but can be readily defended. The most famous of these is the Iron Gate on the Danube. The Western Romanian Carpathians are the most densely settled, and it is in the northernmost area of this range, the Apuseni Mountains, that permanent settlements can be found at the highest altitudes.

Enclosed within the great arc of the Carpathians lie the undulating plains and low hills of the Transylvanian Plateau—the largest tableland in the country and the center of Romania. This important agricultural region also contains large deposits of methane gas and salt. To the south and east of the Carpathians, the Sub-Carpathians form a fringe of rolling terrain ranging from 396 to 1,006 meters in elevation. This terrain is matched in the west by the slightly lower Western Hills. The symmetry of Romania&#x27;s relief continues with the Getic Tableland to the south of the Sub-Carpathians, the Moldavian Tableland in the east between the Sub-Carpathians and the Prut River, and the Dobrujan Tableland in the southeast between the Danube and the Black Sea. The Sub-Carpathians and the tableland areas provide good conditions for human settlement and are important areas for fruit growing, viticulture, and other agricultural activity. They also contain large deposits of brown coal and natural gas.

Beyond the Carpathian foothills and tablelands, the plains spread south and west. In the southern parts of the country, the lower Danube Plain is divided by the Olt River; east of the river lies the Wallachian Plain (including the strategically important Focșani Gate), and to the west is the Oltenian or Western Plain. The land here is rich with chernozemic soils and forms Romania&#x27;s most important farming region. Irrigation is widely used, and marshlands in the Danube&#x27;s floodplain have been diked and drained to provide additional tillable land.

Romania&#x27;s lowest land is found on the northern edge of the Dobruja region in the Danube Delta. The delta is a triangular swampy area of marshes, floating reed islands, and sandbanks, where the Danube ends its trek of almost 3,000 kilometers and divides into three frayed branches before emptying into the Black Sea. The Danube Delta provides a large part of the country&#x27;s fish production, and its reeds are used to manufacture cellulose. The region also serves as a nature preserve for rare species of plant and animal life including migratory birds.

==Hydrography==
===Rivers===
After entering the country in the southwest at Bazias, the Danube travels some 1,075 kilometers (almost 40% of its entire length) through or along Romanian territory, forming the southern frontier with Serbia and Bulgaria. Virtually all of the country&#x27;s rivers are tributaries of the Danube, either directly or indirectly, and by the time the Danube&#x27;s course ends in the Black Sea, they account for nearly 40 percent of the total discharge. The most important of these rivers are the Mureș River, the Olt River, the Prut, the Siret River, the Ialomița River, the Someș River, and the Argeș River. The Olt River is the longest river that is fully within Romania&#x27;s national borders.

Romania&#x27;s rivers primarily flow east, west, and south from the central crown of the Carpathians. They are fed by rainfall and melting snow, which causes considerable fluctuation in discharge and occasionally catastrophic flooding. In the east, river waters are collected by the Siret and the Prut. In the south, the rivers flow directly into the Danube, and in the west, waters are collected by the Tisza on Hungarian territory.

The Danube is by far Romania&#x27;s most important river, not only for transportation, but also for the production of hydroelectric power. One of Europe&#x27;s largest hydroelectric stations is located at the Iron Gates, where the Danube surges through the Carpathian gorges. The Danube is an important water route for domestic shipping, as well as international trade. It is navigable for river vessels along its entire Romanian course and for seagoing ships as far as the port of Brăila. A problem with the use of the Danube for inland transportation is its remoteness from most of the major industrial centers. Moreover, marshy banks and perennial flooding impede navigation in some areas.

===Lakes===
There are over 3,500 lakes in Romania. Lake Razelm is the largest, with an area of .

==Climate==
Because of its position on the southeastern portion of the European continent, Romania has a climate that is generally continental. Climatic conditions are somewhat modified by the country&#x27;s varied relief. The Carpathians serve as a barrier to Atlantic air masses, restricting their oceanic influences to the west and center of the country, where they make for milder winters and heavier rainfall. The mountains also block the continental influences of the vast plain to the north in Ukraine, which bring frosty winters and less rain to the south and southeast. In the extreme southeast, Mediterranean influences offer a milder, maritime climate. The average annual temperature is in the south and in the north. In Bucharest, the temperature ranges from in January to in July, with average temperatures of in January and in July. Rainfall, although adequate throughout the country, decreases from west to east and from mountains to plains. Some mountainous areas receive more than of precipitation each year. Annual precipitation averages about in central Transylvania, at Iași in Moldavia, and only at Constanța on the Black Sea.

Temperate; cold, cloudy winters with frequent snow and fog; sunny summers with frequent showers and thunderstorms. Winters generally are from November to March. The springs are short, occasionally turning right into summer. Summer lasts from May to August. They have a prolonged Autumn, from September to November. The average January temperature is and the average July temperature is .
Facts: Record High Temperature: - August 10, 1951 South-Eastern Romania; Record Low Temperature: - January 24, 1942 (Central Romania)

==Location==
Southeastern Europe, bordering the Black Sea and Danube, with the Carpathian mountains in its center. Controls most easily traversable land route between the Balkans, Moldova and Ukraine

Geographic coordinates:
Extreme points of Romania:
*Northernmost point: , a village in Botoșani County, on the border with Ukraine, 
*Southernmost point: Zimnicea, a town in Teleorman County, on the border with Bulgaria, 
*Westernmost point: Beba Veche, a village in Timiș County, on the border with Hungary and Serbia, 
*Easternmost point: Sulina, a town in Tulcea County, on the Danube Delta, 

==Area==
Total: 

* &quot;Land:&quot; 
* &quot;Water:&quot; 

==Land boundaries==
*Total&quot;:&quot; 
** border countries: Bulgaria , Hungary , Moldova , Serbia , and Ukraine to the north and east for .

==Coastline==

*Length: 
*&quot;Maritime claims:&quot; Snake Island
*contiguous zone: 
*continental shelf: 200 m depth or to the depth of exploitation
*exclusive economic zone: with 
*territorial sea: 

==Terrain==
Central Transylvanian Basin is separated from the Plain of Moldavia on the east by the Carpathian Mountains and separated from the Wallachian Plain on the south by the Transylvanian Alps.

Elevation extremes:
*lowest point: Black Sea 0 m
*highest point: Moldoveanu Peak 2,544 m, Negoiu Peak 2,535 m

Natural resources
*petroleum (reserves steady to declining), timber, natural gas, coal, iron ore, salt, arable land, hydro power

Land use:
*arable land: 41%
*permanent crops: 3%
*permanent pastures: 21%
*forests and woodland: 29%
*other: 6% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land:
*31,020 km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards&quot;:&quot; earthquakes are most severe in south and southwest; geologic structure and climate promote landslides

==Environment==

* Current issues: soil erosion and degradation; water pollution; air pollution in south from industrial effluents; contamination of Danube delta wetlands
* Environment: international agreements:
** party to: Air Pollution, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
** signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

==See also==
* Administrative divisions of Romania
* List of cities in Romania
* Reservoirs and dams in Romania
* List of mountain peaks in Romania
* List of fish of the Black Sea

==References==
== External links ==
* 2004 Romanian Statistical Yearbook - Geography, Meteorology and Environment</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="18" end="25" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="60" end="66" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="113" end="120" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="125" end="134" title="Southeast Europe" label="Southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="165" end="174" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q934" start="227" end="237" title="North Pole" label="North Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="294" end="308" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="335" end="349" title="Ural Mountains" label="Ural Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="374" end="381" title="Republic of Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="386" end="393" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="411" end="419" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="438" end="444" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="449" end="456" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="476" end="491" title="Pannonian Plain" label="Pannonian Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="725" end="732" title="Dobruja" label="Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="843" end="851" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q458368" start="871" end="890" title="Eastern Carpathians" label="Eastern Carpathians"/>
<link wikidata="Q182445" start="898" end="908" title="Prut River" label="Prut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="948" end="957" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217202" start="981" end="999" title="Transylvanian Alps" label="Transylvanian Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q126822" start="1046" end="1055" title="Olt River" label="Olt River"/>
<link wikidata="Q208629" start="1061" end="1068" title="Oltenia" label="Oltenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207388" start="1085" end="1093" title="Muntenia" label="Muntenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="1206" end="1218" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975458" start="1292" end="1308" title="Maramureș region" label="Maramureș region"/>
<link wikidata="Q268034" start="1334" end="1341" title="Crișana" label="Crișana"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="1394" end="1399" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="1444" end="1451" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="1456" end="1462" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q518365" start="1593" end="1603" title="Hungarians in Romania" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q170352" start="1605" end="1612" title="Transylvanian Saxons" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="1618" end="1623" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1722" end="1733" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="1819" end="1826" title="Dobruja" label="Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q444912" start="1865" end="1876" title="Romanian Old Kingdom" label="Old Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1925" end="1939" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2082" end="2094" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="2193" end="2210" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="2580" end="2588" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="2593" end="2603" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2719" end="2731" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="2850" end="2857" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q697379" start="3083" end="3118" title="Administrative divisions of Romania" label="Administrative divisions of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="3202" end="3210" title="mountain" label="mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q160091" start="3226" end="3231" title="plain" label="plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q54050" start="3251" end="3255" title="hill" label="hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="3460" end="3469" title="sea level" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q458368" start="4222" end="4241" title="Eastern Carpathians" label="Eastern Carpathians"/>
<link wikidata="Q217202" start="4247" end="4267" title="Southern Carpathians" label="Southern Carpathians"/>
<link wikidata="Q217202" start="4271" end="4289" title="Transylvanian Alps" label="Transylvanian Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q651349" start="4299" end="4327" title="Western Romanian Carpathians" label="Western Romanian Carpathians"/>
<link wikidata="Q82174" start="4653" end="4659" title="Brașov" label="Brașov"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099148" start="4683" end="4689" title="Mining industry of Romania" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q746524" start="5071" end="5086" title="Moldoveanu Peak" label="Moldoveanu Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090036" start="5101" end="5107" title="Negoiu" label="Negoiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q681004" start="5232" end="5239" title="subsoil" label="subsoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633778" start="5261" end="5270" title="elevation" label="elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="5307" end="5311" title="rock (geology)" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623938" start="5350" end="5356" title="Sphinx (Romania)" label="Sphinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q797624" start="5367" end="5373" title="Babele" label="Babele"/>
<link wikidata="Q207376" start="5907" end="5916" title="Iron Gate (Danube)" label="Iron Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q190200" start="6123" end="6131" title="altitude" label="altitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q990226" start="6231" end="6252" title="Transylvanian Plateau" label="Transylvanian Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q877899" start="6452" end="6467" title="Outer Subcarpathia" label="Sub-Carpathians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6606" end="6619" title="Western Hills (Romania)" label="Western Hills"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6735" end="6754" title="Moldavian Tableland" label="Moldavian Tableland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6823" end="6841" title="Dobrujan Tableland" label="Dobrujan Tableland"/>
<link wikidata="Q253140" start="7029" end="7040" title="viticulture" label="viticulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q156267" start="7111" end="7121" title="Lignite" label="brown coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="7126" end="7137" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q126822" start="7301" end="7310" title="Olt River" label="Olt River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854529" start="7339" end="7355" title="Wallachian Plain" label="Wallachian Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q111302658" start="7395" end="7407" title="Focșani Gate" label="Focșani Gate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7433" end="7458" title="Oltenian Plain" label="Oltenian or Western Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q193158" start="7487" end="7496" title="chernozem" label="chernozem"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="7765" end="7772" title="Dobruja" label="Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q184429" start="7787" end="7799" title="Danube Delta" label="Danube Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="8351" end="8357" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q207493" start="8786" end="8797" title="Mureș River" label="Mureș River"/>
<link wikidata="Q126822" start="8803" end="8812" title="Olt River" label="Olt River"/>
<link wikidata="Q182445" start="8818" end="8822" title="Prut" label="Prut"/>
<link wikidata="Q208302" start="8828" end="8839" title="Siret River" label="Siret River"/>
<link wikidata="Q726693" start="8845" end="8859" title="Ialomița River" label="Ialomița River"/>
<link wikidata="Q217401" start="8865" end="8876" title="Someș River" label="Someș River"/>
<link wikidata="Q214811" start="8886" end="8897" title="Argeș River" label="Argeș River"/>
<link wikidata="Q126822" start="8903" end="8912" title="Olt River" label="Olt River"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="9215" end="9220" title="flood" label="flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q134350" start="9393" end="9398" title="Tisza" label="Tisza"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="9542" end="9561" title="Hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectric power"/>
<link wikidata="Q207376" start="9633" end="9643" title="Iron Gates" label="Iron Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q651658" start="9752" end="9760" title="Freight transport" label="shipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q188478" start="9906" end="9912" title="Brăila" label="Brăila"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349738" start="10169" end="10180" title="Lake Razelm" label="Lake Razelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="10287" end="10293" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="10347" end="10358" title="Continental climate" label="continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q216823" start="10486" end="10494" title="air mass" label="air mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925" start="10621" end="10625" title="rain" label="rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="11249" end="11262" title="precipitation" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311" start="11389" end="11395" title="winter" label="winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312" start="11530" end="11537" title="Spring (season)" label="springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313" start="11589" end="11595" title="Summer" label="Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314" start="11644" end="11650" title="Autumn" label="Autumn"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="11914" end="11920" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="11936" end="11945" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="11950" end="11956" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="11967" end="11987" title="Carpathian Mountains" label="Carpathian mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="12059" end="12066" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="12068" end="12075" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="12080" end="12087" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244605" start="12113" end="12138" title="Extreme points of Romania" label="Extreme points of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q178861" start="12176" end="12191" title="Botoșani County" label="Botoșani County"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="12212" end="12219" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q203929" start="12243" end="12251" title="Zimnicea" label="Zimnicea"/>
<link wikidata="Q191653" start="12263" end="12279" title="Teleorman County" label="Teleorman County"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="12300" end="12308" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q813520" start="12331" end="12341" title="Beba Veche, Timiș" label="Beba Veche"/>
<link wikidata="Q185586" start="12356" end="12368" title="Timiș County" label="Timiș County"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="12389" end="12396" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="12401" end="12407" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q328647" start="12430" end="12436" title="Sulina" label="Sulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q191078" start="12448" end="12461" title="Tulcea County" label="Tulcea County"/>
<link wikidata="Q184429" start="12470" end="12482" title="Danube Delta" label="Danube Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="12610" end="12618" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="12621" end="12628" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="12631" end="12638" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="12641" end="12647" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="12654" end="12661" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q155868" start="12746" end="12758" title="Snake Island (Black Sea)" label="Snake Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="12843" end="12866" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q990226" start="12914" end="12933" title="transylvanian Plateau" label="Transylvanian Basin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12956" end="12973" title="Plain of Moldavia" label="Plain of Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="12993" end="13013" title="Carpathian Mountains" label="Carpathian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854529" start="13037" end="13053" title="Wallachian Plain" label="Wallachian Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q217202" start="13074" end="13092" title="Transylvanian Alps" label="Transylvanian Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="13130" end="13139" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q746524" start="13160" end="13175" title="Moldoveanu Peak" label="Moldoveanu Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090036" start="13185" end="13196" title="Negoiu Peak" label="Negoiu Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q15116900" start="13530" end="13541" title="List of earthquakes in Romania" label="earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="13921" end="13936" title="Desertification" label="Desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="14210" end="14224" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q697379" start="14241" end="14276" title="Administrative divisions of Romania" label="Administrative divisions of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q188448" start="14279" end="14304" title="List of cities in Romania" label="List of cities in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6615561" start="14307" end="14337" title="Reservoirs and dams in Romania" label="Reservoirs and dams in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q897448" start="14340" end="14373" title="List of mountain peaks in Romania" label="List of mountain peaks in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023680" start="14376" end="14405" title="List of fish of the Black Sea" label="List of fish of the Black Sea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25638" wikidata="Q3317516" url="?curid=25638" title="Demographics of Romania">
<text>Demographic features of the population of Romania include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations, and other aspects of the population.

About 89.3% of the people of Romania are ethnic Romanians (as per 2021 census), whose native language, Romanian, is an Eastern Romance language, descended from Latin (more specifically from Vulgar Latin) with some Slavic, French, Turkish, German, Hungarian, Greek and Italian borrowings.

Romanians are by far the most numerous group of speakers of an Eastern Romance language today. It has been said that they constitute &quot;an island of Latinity&quot; in Eastern Europe, surrounded on all sides either by Slavic peoples (namely South Slavic and East Slavic peoples) or by the Hungarians. The Hungarian minority in Romania constitutes the country&#x27;s largest minority, or as much as 6.0 per cent of the entire population. With a population of about 19,054,267 people in 2022, Romania received 989,357 Ukrainian refugees on 27 May 2022, according to the United Nations (UN).

The 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine that began on 24 February 2022 triggered a major refugee crisis in Europe. In connection with the Russian invasion of Ukraine on 24 February 2022, as part of the Russian-Ukrainian war, by 15 May 2022, more than 6,223,821 Ukrainian refugees left the territory of Ukraine, moving to the countries closest to the west of Ukraine, of which more than 919,574 people fled to neighbouring Romania.

== Population evolution ==

Romania&#x27;s population has declined steadily in recent decades, from a peak of 23.2 million in 1990 to 19.12 million in 2021. Among the causes of population decline are high mortality, a low fertility rate since 1990, and tremendous levels of emigration.

In 1990, Romania&#x27;s population was estimated to be 23.21 million inhabitants. For the entire period 1990–2006, the estimated population loss tops 1.5 million, but it is likely to be higher, given the explosion of migration for work after 2001 and the tendency of some migrants to settle permanently in the countries where they live.

Sources give varied estimates for Romania&#x27;s historical population. The National Institute for Research and Development in Informatics (NIRDI) gives the following numbers (the figure for 2020 was provided by the National Institute of Statistics – INS):



==Ethnic groups==



Slightly more than 10% of the population of Romania is formed of minorities in Romania. The principal minorities are Hungarians and Roma, although other smaller ethnic groups exist too. Before World War II, minorities represented more than 28% of the total population. During the war that percentage was halved, largely by the loss of the border areas of Bessarabia and northern Bukovina (to the former Soviet Union, now Moldova and Ukraine) and southern Dobrudja (to Bulgaria). Two-thirds of the ethnic German population either left or were deported after World War II, a period that was followed by decades of relatively regular (by communist standards) migration. During the interwar period in Romania, the total number of ethnic Germans amounted to as much as 786,000 (according to some sources and estimates dating to 1939), a figure which had subsequently fallen to circa 36,000 as of 2011 in contemporary Romania. One reason for the decline of Romanian Germans is that after the Romanian Revolution there has been a mass migration of Transylvania Saxons to Germany, in what was referred by British daily newspaper &quot;Guardian&quot; to as &#x27;the most astonishing, and little reported, ethnic migration in modern Europe&#x27;.

Of a total population of three quarter million Jews before World War II, about a third were killed during the Holocaust. Mass emigration, mostly to Israel and United States, has reduced the surviving Jewish community to less than 6,000 in 2002 (it is estimated that the real numbers could be 3–4 times higher).

Hungarians (Magyars; &quot;see Hungarians in Romania&quot;, especially in Harghita, Covasna, and Mureș counties) and Roma (&quot;see Romani people in Romania&quot;) are the principal minorities, with a declining German population (Banat Swabians in Timiș; Transylvanian Saxons in Sibiu, Brașov and elsewhere), and smaller numbers of Czechs, Slovaks, Serbs, Croats, and Banat Bulgarians (in Banat), Ukrainians (especially in Maramureș and Bukovina), Greeks of Romania (especially in Brăila and Constanța), Turks and Tatars (mainly in Constanța), Armenians, Russians (Lipovans, Old Believers in Tulcea), Jews and others. Since the Romanian Revolution of 1989, Bucharest and other cities have again become increasingly cosmopolitan, including identifiable presences from outside the EU (Chinese, Turks, Moldovans, Syrians, Iraqis, Africans) as well as from the EU (French, Italians, Germans, British, Greeks). In Romania, there are also guest workers from countries such as Vietnam and Nepal.

Minority populations are greatest in Transylvania and the Banat, areas in the north and west of the country, which were part of the Kingdom of Hungary (after 1867 the Austria-Hungary) until the end of World War I. Even before the union with Romania, ethnic Romanians comprised the overall majority in Transylvania. However, ethnic Hungarians and Germans were the dominant urban population until relatively recently, while Hungarians still constitute the majority in Harghita and Covasna counties.

The Roma constitute one of Romania&#x27;s largest minorities. According to the 2011 Romanian census, they number 621,573 people or 3.08% of the total population, being the second-largest ethnic minority in Romania after Hungarians, with significant populations in Mureș (8.9%) and Călărași (7,47%) counties. There are different estimates about the size of the total population of people with Roma ancestry in Romania because a lot of people of Roma descent do not declare themselves as Roma. The number of the Roma is usually underestimated in official statistics and may represent 5–11% of Romania&#x27;s population.

After Hungarians and the Roma, Ukrainians of Romania are the third-largest minority. According to the 2011 Romanian census they number 51,703 people, making up 0.3% of the total population. Ukrainians mainly live in northern Romania, in areas close to the Ukrainian border. Over 60% of all Romanian Ukrainians live in Maramureș County (where they make up 6.77% of the population).

==Censuses in Romania==





== Vital statistics==
===Total Fertility Rate from 1850 to 1899===
The total fertility rate is the number of children born per woman. It is based on fairly good data for the entire period. Sources: Our World In Data and Gapminder Foundation.



===Before WWI===


===Between WWI and WWII===


===After WWII===
Main sources:

Source: National Institute of Statistics

Note: The 2011 Romanian census gave a figure of 20,121,641.

The 2021 Romanian census gave a figure of 19,053,815.

=== Current vital statistics ===

The current vital statistics of Romania are as follows:



=== Life expectancy 1950–2020 ===
Average life expectancy at age 0 of the total population.

== Birth rates by counties ==
Romania has 41 counties and one city with a special status, namely Bucharest. Ilfov County has the highest crude birth rate (12.0‰), while Vâlcea County has the lowest crude birth rate (6.6‰). Birth rates are generally higher in rural areas compared to urban areas.

==Demographics statistics==

Demographic statistics according to the World Population Review in 2019.

*One birth every 3 minutes 
*One death every 2 minutes 
*Net loss of one person every 5 minutes
*One net migrant every 19 minutes 

The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.

=== Population ===

 19,000,000 (January 2023 est.)

===Median age===
:total: 41.6 years. Country comparison to the world: 38th
:male: 40.2 years 
:female: 43 years (2018 est.)

===Birth rate===
:8.7 births/1,000 population (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 211th

===Death rate===
:12 deaths/1,000 population (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 17th

===Total fertility rate===
:1.71 children born/woman (2017) Country comparison to the world: 154th

===Net migration rate===
:−0.2 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 113th
:−0.13 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2006 est.)

===Mother&#x27;s mean age at first birth===
:26.7 years (2014 est.)

===Population growth rate===
:−0.35% (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 219th
:−0.127% (2007 estimate).

===Urban–rural ratio===
Romania is one of the least urbanised countries in Europe. Just a slight majority, 56.4 percent, lives in urban areas (12,546,212 people in total). The remainder, 43.6 percent, lives in rural areas (9,695,506 people in total).

:urban population: 54% of total population (2018)
:rate of urbanization: −0.38% annual rate of change (2015–20 est.)

===Sex ratio===
;&quot;at birth:&quot;:1.06 male(s)/female
;&quot;under 15 years:&quot;:1.05 male(s)/female
;&quot;15–64 years:&quot;:0.99 male(s)/female
;&quot;65 years and over:&quot;:0.71 male(s)/female
;&quot;total population:&quot;:0.95 male(s)/female (2008 est.)

===Infant mortality rate===
9.2 deaths/1,000 live births (May 2010); down from 17.3 deaths/1,000 live births in 2002.

===Life expectancy at birth===
*total population: 75.6 years (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 106th
**male: 72.1 years (2018 est.)
**female: 79.2 years (2018 est.)
*&quot;Total population:&quot; 75 years
**&quot;male:&quot; 71.4 years
**&quot;female:&quot; 78.8 years (2015 est.)

===Literacy===
definition: age 15 and over can read and write (2015 est.)
:total population: 98.8% 
:male: 99.1% 
:female: 98.5% (2015 est.)

===School life expectancy (primary to tertiary education)===
:total: 14 years 
:male: 14 years 
:female: 15 years (2016)

===Unemployment, youth ages 15–24===
:total: 20.6%. Country comparison to the world: 62nd
:male: 19.9% 
:female: 21.8% (2016 est.)

===Nationality===
The noun form is Romanian(s), and the adjectival form is Romanian.

==Age structure==

:&quot;0–14 years:&quot; 14.31% (male 1,576,621 /female 1,493,082)
:&quot;15–24 years:&quot; 10.45% (male 1,151,312 /female 1,091,956)
:&quot;25–54 years:&quot; 46.11% (male 5,010,272 /female 4,883,090)
:&quot;55–64 years:&quot; 12.37% (male 1,244,669 /female 1,409,854)
:&quot;65 years and over:&quot; 16.76% (male 1,454,320 /female 2,141,940) (2018 est.)

The following demographic statistics are from National Institute of Statistic on 1 July 2016.

*&quot;0–14 years:&quot; 14.7% (male 1,678,542/female 1,586,709)
*&quot;15–64 years:&quot; 69.5% (male 7,744,863/female 7,687,078)
*&quot;65 years and over:&quot; 15.8% (male 1,420,144/female 2,097,659) (2016 est.)

As a consequence of the pro-natalist policies of the Nicolae Ceaușescu regime (see Decree 770), Romania has a higher proportion of people born in the late 1960s and 1970s its population than any other Western country except Slovenia. The generations born in 1967 and 1968 were the largest, although fertility remained relatively high until 1990. 8.55% of the Romanian population was born in the period from 1976 to 1980, compared with 6.82% of Americans and 6.33% of Britons.

===Age structure by ethnicity===
Population by ethnicity based on age groups, according to the 2011 census:

==Immigration==

Foreign-born population (according to Eurostat):
===Net migration data===


==Religion==

* Romanian Orthodox — 86.7%
* Roman Catholic — 4.7%
* Protestant Churches (Calvin, Lutheran, Unitarian, Pentecostal, Baptist, Adventist) — 5.3%
* Greek Catholic – Uniate — 0.9%
* Islam — 0.3%
* Atheist — ≈0.04% (9,271 people)
* No religion — 0.1%
* Other religions — 2.0%
* Refused to declare — 0.1%

Religious affiliation tends to follow ethnic lines, with most ethnic Romanians identifying with the Romanian Orthodox Church. The Greek Catholic or Uniate church, reunified with the Orthodox Church by fiat in 1948, was restored after the 1989 revolution. The 2002 census indicates that 0.9% of the population is Greek Catholic, as opposed to about 10% prior to 1948. Roman Catholics, largely ethnic Hungarians and Germans, constitute 4.7% of the population; Calvinists, Baptists (see Baptist Union of Romania and Convention of the Hungarian Baptist Churches of Romania), Pentecostals, and Lutherans make up another 5%. There are smaller numbers of Unitarians, Muslims, and other religions.

==See also==
* Ageing of Europe
* Population exchange between Bulgaria and Romania
* Immigration to Romania

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* United Nations Statistics – Romania
* Romanian National Statistic Institute (site is in Romanian, PDF files are in Romanian and English)
* Population density map</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="0" end="11" title="Demography" label="Demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="28" end="38" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="42" end="49" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="58" end="76" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="78" end="87" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="257" end="266" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q106566382" start="275" end="286" title="2021 Romanian census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="312" end="320" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q147576" start="328" end="352" title="Eastern Romance languages" label="Eastern Romance language"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="369" end="374" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37560" start="399" end="411" title="Vulgar Latin" label="Vulgar Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="423" end="429" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="431" end="437" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="439" end="446" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="448" end="454" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="456" end="465" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36510" start="467" end="472" title="Modern Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="477" end="484" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q147576" start="561" end="585" title="Eastern Romance languages" label="Eastern Romance language"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="668" end="682" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="718" end="732" title="Slavs" label="Slavic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q273824" start="741" end="753" title="South Slavs" label="South Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q211052" start="758" end="769" title="East Slavs" label="East Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="789" end="799" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q518365" start="805" end="834" title="Hungarians in Romania" label="Hungarian minority in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1068" end="1082" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="1094" end="1126" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q111030832" start="1176" end="1200" title="2022 Ukrainian refugee crisis" label="refugee crisis in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="1289" end="1310" title="Russo-Ukrainian War" label="Russian-Ukrainian war"/>
<link wikidata="Q284137" start="1696" end="1714" title="population decline" label="population decline"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="1724" end="1733" title="Mortality rate" label="mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="1741" end="1755" title="fertility rate" label="fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q187668" start="1793" end="1803" title="emigration" label="emigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989342" start="2490" end="2511" title="minorities in Romania" label="minorities in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2618" end="2630" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="2780" end="2790" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="2804" end="2812" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2828" end="2840" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="2846" end="2853" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="2858" end="2865" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="2880" end="2888" title="Dobrudja" label="Dobrudja"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="2893" end="2901" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536279" start="2954" end="2994" title="Flight and expulsion of Germans (1944–1950)" label="left or were deported after World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3099" end="3129" title="Kingdom of Romania#The interbellum years" label="the interwar period in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="3411" end="3430" title="Romanian Revolution" label="Romanian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q170352" start="3466" end="3485" title="Transylvania Saxons" label="Transylvania Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="3552" end="3560" title="The Guardian" label="Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q696662" start="3711" end="3715" title="History of the Jews in Romania" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="3774" end="3783" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="3812" end="3818" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3823" end="3836" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="3976" end="3986" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q518365" start="4007" end="4028" title="Hungarians in Romania" label="Hungarians in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q190702" start="4050" end="4058" title="Harghita County" label="Harghita"/>
<link wikidata="Q188959" start="4060" end="4067" title="Covasna County" label="Covasna"/>
<link wikidata="Q190711" start="4073" end="4087" title="Mureș County" label="Mureș counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="4093" end="4097" title="Romani people" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q923163" start="4109" end="4133" title="Romani people in Romania" label="Romani people in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="4188" end="4194" title="ethnic German" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q445618" start="4207" end="4221" title="Banat Swabians" label="Banat Swabians"/>
<link wikidata="Q185586" start="4225" end="4230" title="Timiș County" label="Timiș"/>
<link wikidata="Q170352" start="4232" end="4252" title="Transylvanian Saxons" label="Transylvanian Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q184797" start="4256" end="4261" title="Sibiu County" label="Sibiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q182614" start="4263" end="4269" title="Brașov County" label="Brașov"/>
<link wikidata="Q853303" start="4309" end="4315" title="Czechs of Romania" label="Czechs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989388" start="4317" end="4324" title="Slovaks of Romania" label="Slovaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064264" start="4326" end="4331" title="Serbs of Romania" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q39615" start="4333" end="4339" title="Croats of Romania" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076582" start="4345" end="4361" title="Banat Bulgarians" label="Banat Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="4366" end="4371" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="4374" end="4384" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975458" start="4400" end="4409" title="Maramureș" label="Maramureș"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="4414" end="4422" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315585" start="4425" end="4442" title="Greeks of Romania" label="Greeks of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q188503" start="4458" end="4464" title="Braila (county)" label="Brăila"/>
<link wikidata="Q188505" start="4469" end="4478" title="Constanța County" label="Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509562" start="4481" end="4486" title="Turks of Romania" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q117458" start="4491" end="4497" title="Crimean Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q188505" start="4509" end="4518" title="Constanța County" label="Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793348" start="4521" end="4530" title="Armenians of Romania" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="4532" end="4540" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q748548" start="4542" end="4550" title="Lipovans" label="Lipovans"/>
<link wikidata="Q223710" start="4552" end="4565" title="Old Believers" label="Old Believers"/>
<link wikidata="Q191078" start="4569" end="4575" title="Tulcea (county)" label="Tulcea"/>
<link wikidata="Q696662" start="4578" end="4582" title="History of the Jews in Romania" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="4605" end="4632" title="Romanian Revolution of 1989" label="Romanian Revolution of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065586" start="4760" end="4767" title="Chinese of Romania" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324310" start="4804" end="4812" title="Afro-Romanian" label="Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="5004" end="5016" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="5025" end="5030" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="5099" end="5117" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="5134" end="5149" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q181902" start="5168" end="5179" title="Treaty of Trianon" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12181933" start="5544" end="5564" title="2011 Romanian census" label="2011 Romanian census"/>
<link wikidata="Q190711" start="5729" end="5734" title="Mureș County" label="Mureș"/>
<link wikidata="Q188948" start="5746" end="5754" title="Călărași County" label="Călărași"/>
<link wikidata="Q369739" start="6115" end="6136" title="Ukrainians of Romania" label="Ukrainians of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q188813" start="6402" end="6418" title="Maramureș County" label="Maramureș County"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="6566" end="6586" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23680080" start="6693" end="6710" title="Our World In Data" label="Our World In Data"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790593" start="6715" end="6735" title="Gapminder Foundation" label="Gapminder Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="7113" end="7128" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="7261" end="7270" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q191670" start="7272" end="7284" title="Ilfov County" label="Ilfov County"/>
<link wikidata="Q186838" start="7333" end="7346" title="Vâlcea County" label="Vâlcea County"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="7746" end="7764" title="CIA World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="10884" end="10901" title="Nicolae Ceaușescu" label="Nicolae Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183732" start="10914" end="10924" title="Decree 770" label="Decree 770"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="11055" end="11063" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="11275" end="11283" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q842438" start="11298" end="11305" title="British people" label="Britons"/>
<link wikidata="Q217659" start="11472" end="11480" title="Eurostat" label="Eurostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q181901" start="11526" end="11543" title="Romanian Orthodox Church" label="Romanian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="11554" end="11568" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="11578" end="11588" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q856349" start="11670" end="11693" title="Romanian Church United with Rome, Greek-Catholic" label="Greek Catholic – Uniate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414351" start="11703" end="11708" title="Islam in Romania" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="11718" end="11725" title="Atheist" label="Atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q181901" start="11925" end="11949" title="Romanian Orthodox Church" label="Romanian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q49376" start="11973" end="11986" title="Eastern Rite Catholic Churches" label="Uniate church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546359" start="12137" end="12151" title="Greek Catholic" label="Greek Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q144306" start="12192" end="12206" title="Roman Catholic Church of Romania" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857695" start="12309" end="12333" title="Baptist Union of Romania" label="Baptist Union of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250877" start="12338" end="12393" title="Convention of the Hungarian Baptist Churches of Romania" label="Convention of the Hungarian Baptist Churches of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q680039" start="12531" end="12547" title="Ageing of Europe" label="Ageing of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q104856158" start="12550" end="12598" title="Population exchange between Bulgaria and Romania" label="Population exchange between Bulgaria and Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005167" start="12601" end="12623" title="Immigration to Romania" label="Immigration to Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="12760" end="12768" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25639" wikidata="Q1154091" url="?curid=25639" title="Politics of Romania">
<text>Romania&#x27;s political framework is a semi-presidential representative republic where the Prime Minister is the head of government while the President, according to the Constitution, has at least in theory a more symbolic role, is responsible for the foreign policy, signs certain decrees, approves laws promulgated by the parliament, and nominates the head of government (i.e. Prime Minister). Romania has multi-party system with a dominant two-party system, with legislative power vested in the government and the two chambers of the Parliament, more specifically the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature in theory. From 1948 until 1989, the communist rule political structure took place in the framework of a one-party socialist republic governed by the Romanian Communist Party (PCR) as its only legal party.

Romania&#x27;s 1991 constitution (amended in 2003) proclaims it a democratic and social republic, deriving its sovereignty from the people. According to the constitution, &quot;Human dignity, civic rights and freedoms, the unhindered development of human personality, justice, and political pluralism are supreme and guaranteed values.&quot;

The constitution provides for a President, a Parliament, a Constitutional Court, and a separate court system which includes the High Court of Cassation and Justice. The right to vote is granted to all citizens over 18 years of age.

The Economist Intelligence Unit rated Romania as a &quot;flawed democracy&quot; in 2023. As of 2025, it could be classified as a hybrid regime behind a constitutional facade. Romania was fully admitted to the Schengen area on January 1, 2025.

== Executive branch ==


|President
|Ilie Bolojan
|Independent
|12 February 2025
|Prime Minister
|Marcel Ciolacu
|Social Democratic Party (PSD)
|15 June 2023
|}

The president is elected by popular vote for a maximum of two five-year terms (four-year terms until 2004). The president is head of state (charged with safeguarding the constitution, foreign affairs, and the proper functioning of public authority), supreme commander of the armed forces, and chairperson of the Supreme Council of National Defense. According to the constitution, the president acts as a mediator among the state&#x27;s power centers and between the state and society. The president nominates the prime minister after consultation with the party holding an absolute majority in Parliament or, if there is no such majority, with all the parties in Parliament.

Ambiguity in the Constitution of Romania (Article 85 (1), Article 103 (1)) may lead to situations where a coalition of parties obtaining an absolute majority in Parliament, or a party holding a relative majority in Parliament, would be unable to nominate a prime minister because the president would refuse the nomination (with no party holding an absolute majority in Parliament). According to Article 103 (1), &quot;unless no such majority exists&quot;, is interpreted by the president as &quot;unless no such party exists&quot; (although an absolute majority may be formed by one party, a coalition of parties, or an alliance).

In the 2008 parliamentary elections, the Alliance PSD+PC won 33.09 percent of the seats in the Chamber of Deputies and 34.16 percent of the seats in the Senate. The PNL won 18.57 percent of the seats in the Chamber of Deputies and 18.74 percent of the seats in the Senate, giving both parties a majority in the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. However, the president nominated a member of the PDL (which won less than 32.36 percent of the seats in the Chamber of Deputies and 33.54 percent of the seats in the Senate. The nominated prime minister chooses the other members of the government, and the government and its program must be confirmed by a vote of confidence from Parliament.

== Legislative branch ==
|President of the Senate
|Mircea Abrudean
|National Liberal Party (PNL)
|12 February 2025
|President of the Chamber of Deputies
|Ciprian-Constantin Șerban
|Social Democratic Party (PSD)
|23 December 2024

The national legislature is a bicameral parliament (), consisting of the Chamber of Deputies () and the Senate (). Members are elected to four-year terms by universal suffrage in a party-list proportional representation electoral system. Beginning in 2008, members are elected by mixed-member proportional representation.

The number of senators and deputies has varied in each legislature, reflecting population changes. In 2008, there were 137 senatorial seats and 334 seats in the Chamber of Deputies; of the 334 deputy seats, 18 were held by ethnic minority representatives which would not meet the five-percent electoral threshold required for other parties and organizations.

== Classification of political parties ==

Romania has a multiparty political system, which makes a majority government virtually impossible (unless a very high score is achieved in the legislative election by one particular political party). Smaller parliamentary parties have sometimes merged with larger ones during previous legislatures before 2020 (or created/were part of several electoral alliances). Currently, there are five main parliamentary parties (excluding the 18 ethnic-minority parties which have one representative each) as follows:

The main four non-parliamentary parties (the first two around the five-percent threshold) with local representatives are as follows:


Unlike other former Soviet-bloc countries (such as, most notably, neighbouring Republic of Moldova), no political party claiming to be the successor of the Romanian Communist Party (PCR) has been or is currently a significant player on the political scene, although the main continuator of FSN, more specifically PSD, has many times raised suspicions and accusations from electoral contenders regarding the past political careers of many of its current and former members who were first tier, high-ranking members of the PCR before the 1989 Romanian Revolution. The PNL also has many former Securitate members, former PCR members, or their relatives, in part through the merger with the PDL in 2014 but not only.

==Latest elections==

=== Presidential election ===


=== European Parliament election ===


=== Legislative election ===

The latest legislative election was held on 1 December 2024. The two tables below are represented the results for both the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies:

==== Chamber of Deputies ====

==== Senate ====

=== Local election ===

The latest general local election was held on 27 September 2020.
|-
|- style=&quot;background-color:#C9C9C9&quot;
! style=&quot;background-color:#E9E9E9;text-align:center;&quot; colspan=2 rowspan=2 | Party
! style=&quot;background-color:#E9E9E9;text-align:center;&quot; colspan=3 | Mayor of Bucharest (PGMB)
! style=&quot;background-color:#E9E9E9;text-align:center;&quot; colspan=3 | Mayors (P)
! style=&quot;background-color:#E9E9E9;text-align:center;&quot; colspan=3 | Local Councilsseats (CL)
! style=&quot;background-color:#E9E9E9;text-align:center;&quot; colspan=3 | County Councilsseats (CJ)
|- style=&quot;background-color:#C9C9C9&quot;
! style=&quot;background-color:#E9E9E9;text-align:center;&quot; |Votes
! style=&quot;background-color:#E9E9E9;text-align:center;&quot; |%
! style=&quot;background-color:#E9E9E9;text-align:center;&quot; |Seats
! style=&quot;background-color:#E9E9E9;text-align:center;&quot; |Votes
! style=&quot;background-color:#E9E9E9;text-align:center;&quot; |%
! style=&quot;background-color:#E9E9E9;text-align:center;&quot; |Seats
! style=&quot;background-color:#E9E9E9;text-align:center;&quot; |Votes
! style=&quot;background-color:#E9E9E9;text-align:center;&quot; |%
! style=&quot;background-color:#E9E9E9;text-align:center;&quot; |Seats
! style=&quot;background-color:#E9E9E9;text-align:center;&quot; |Votes
! style=&quot;background-color:#E9E9E9;text-align:center;&quot; |%
! style=&quot;background-color:#E9E9E9;text-align:center;&quot; |Seats
| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot; | Social Democratic Party ( - PSD)
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |163,147
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |22.17%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |0
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |3,045,816 
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |34.74%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |1,677
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |2,830,129 
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |32.56%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |16,509
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |2,640,850
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |33.50%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |521
| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot; | National Liberal Party ( - PNL)
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |57,336
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |7.79%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |0
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |2,548,478
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |29.07%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |1,132
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |2,273,927
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |26.16%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |12,802
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |2,178,075
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |27.63%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |412
| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot; | Alliance for the Union of Romanians ( - AUR)
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |22,208
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |3.01%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |0
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |549,306
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |6.26%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |30
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |829,365
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |9.54%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |3,527
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |843,734
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |10.70%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |159
| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot; | United Right Alliance ( - ADU)
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |352,734
(with REPER)
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |47.94%
(with REPER)
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |1
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |550,850
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |6.28%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |28
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |583,042
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |6.70%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |961
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |653,476
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |8.29%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |75
| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot; | Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania ( - UDMR)
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |-
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |-
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |-
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |378,594
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |4.31%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |200
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |471,588
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |5.42%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |2,525
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |506,659
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |6.42%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |104
| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot; | PSD-PNL Alliance ( - PSD-PNL)
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |-
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |-
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |-
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |511,190
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |5.83%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |29
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |429,728
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |4.94%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |308
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |258,741
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |3.28%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |42
| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot; | S.O.S. Romania ( - SOS RO)
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |18,531
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |2.51%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |0
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |85,105
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |0.97%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |0
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |120,819
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |1.39%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |149
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |226,949
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |2.87%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |0
| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot; | Social Liberal Humanist Party ( - PUSL)
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |111.411
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |15.14%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |0
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |107,355
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |1.22%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |4
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |128,060
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |1.47%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |225
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |78,927
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |1.00%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |0
| 
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot; | Other political parties, independent contenders, and local alliances
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |10.394
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |1.40%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |0
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |990,104
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |11.32
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |76
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |1,022,962
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |11.82%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |3,045
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |494.716
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |6.31%
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |2
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot; colspan = 2 | Total:
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |735.761
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |100
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |1
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |8.766.798
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |100
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |3,176
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |8.689.620
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |100
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |39,900
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |7.882.129
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |100
| style=&quot;text-align:right;&quot; |1,340
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot; colspan=20 | &quot;Notes&quot;
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot; colspan=20 | Sources: Romanian Permanent Electoral Authority
|}

== Judicial branch ==
|President of the High Court of Cassation and Justice
|Cristina Tarcea
|None
|2016
|President of the Superior Council of Magistrates
|Lia Savonea
|None
|January 2019

The Romanian legal system, based on the Napoleonic Code, is inquisitorial. The judiciary is independent, and judges appointed by the president are not removable. The president and other judges of the Supreme Court are appointed for six-year terms and may serve consecutive terms. Proceedings are public, except in special circumstances provided for by law.

Judicial power is vested in a hierarchical system of courts, culminating with the supreme court: Înalta Curte de Justiție și Casație (High Court of Cassation and Justice), whose judges are appointed by the president on the recommendation of the Superior Council of Magistrates.

The Ministry of Justice represents the general interests of society and defends the rule of law and citizens&#x27; rights and freedoms. The ministry exercises its power through independent, impartial public prosecutors.

=== Constitutional issues ===
|President of the Constitutional Court
|Valer Dorneanu
|None
|June 2016

The (Constitutional Court) judges issues of constitutionality invoked in any court and judges the compliance of laws (or other state regulations) with the Romanian Constitution. The court, outside the judicial branch, follows the tradition of the French Constitutional Council with nine judges serving nine-year, non-renewable terms. Since the 2003 revision of the constitution, its decisions cannot be overturned by a parliamentary majority.

==Regional institutions==


For territorial and administrative purposes, Romania is divided into 41 counties (&quot;județe&quot;, singular &quot;județ&quot;) and the city of Bucharest. Each county is governed by an elected council. Local councils and elected mayors are the public authorities in villages and towns. The county council coordinates the activities of village and town councils.

The central government appoints a prefect for each county and Bucharest, who represents the government at the local level and directs the ministries and other central agencies at the county level. A prefect may block the action of a local authority if he deems it unlawful or unconstitutional, with the matter then adjudicated by an administrative court.

Under legislation enacted in January 1999, local councils control the spending of their allocations from the central government budget and have the authority to raise additional revenue locally. Although centrally-appointed prefects formerly had significant authority over the budget, this is now limited to a review of expenditures to determine their constitutionality.

== Since 1989 ==

Romania has made considerable progress in institutionalizing democratic principles, civil liberties, and respect for human rights since the Romanian Revolution in December 1989. Nevertheless, many present-day Romanian politicians are former members of the Romanian Communist Party (PCR) and have also had ties with the Romanian secret police (i.e. Securitatea). Since membership in the party was a requirement for advancement before 1989, many people joined to get ahead rather than because of ideological conviction; however, the communist past of some Romanian politicians remains highly controversial to the current day.

=== 1990–1992 ===


The Romanian Communist Party (PCR) officially ceased to exist after the December 1989 Romanian Revolution. An ad interim/acting government swiftly took office starting in late December 1989 which consisted of National Salvation Front (FSN) members and would eventually govern Romania well up until 1992. The FSN had initially not decided to run in the 1990 elections but subsequently retracted their initial position and opted to participate in the 1990 Romanian general election, having the full support of state-owned media and an overwhelming majority of the voters during the electoral campaign, thereby eventually securing a landslide win.

Prior to the 1990 Romanian general election, over 200 new political parties sprang up just after 1989, most of them gravitating towards their leaders rather than revolving around political programs or full-fledged geopolitical agendas. Nevertheless, all major political parties espoused democracy and free market reforms to varying degrees or extents. The largest political party by far, the governing National Salvation Front (FSN), proposed slow, cautious economic reforms, and an artificial, weak social safety net (mostly for the working class of the still operating factories of the heavy industries).

In stark contrast, the main opposition parties, more specifically the National Liberal Party (PNL) and the Christian Democratic National Peasants&#x27; Party (PNŢCD), favored rapid, sweeping economic reforms, immediate privatization (which would have caused a shock therapy) as well as a drastic reduction and even total exclusion of former Communist Party (PCR) members from public Romanian political life. Apart from PCR members, the early demands of the Romanian historical democratic parties were also the reduction of the undercover members of the former Securitate (which could have been PCR members as well) from all areas of public life (thereby endorsing the Proclamation of Timișoara and the lustration law against the former Romanian secret police).

In the 1990 presidential and legislative elections, the FSN and its presidential candidate, Ion Iliescu, won with a large majority of the votes (67.02 and 85.07 percent, respectively). The strongest opposition parties in the Senate were the Hungarian minority-oriented Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania (UDMR/RMDSZ) (with 7.20 percent) and the National Liberal Party (PNL) (with 7.06 percent), followed by the Christian Democratic National Peasants&#x27; Party (PNȚCD) with only 2.50 percent and the Romanian Ecologist Party (with only 1.38 percent) as well other minor centre-right parties (e.g. Liberal Union–Brătianu, National Reconstruction Party of Romania, and the Democratic Group of the Centre) with less than one percent.

After FSN Prime Minister Petre Roman&#x27;s dismissal a few months before the 1992 general elections (following a late 1991 Mineriad), the FSN split in two. President Iliescu&#x27;s supporters formed a new political party, namely the Democratic National Salvation Front (FDSN) which will later turn into PDSR and then PSD, while Roman&#x27;s supporters retained the FSN name (which will later turn into PD and then PDL respectively).

=== 1992–1996 ===

The 1992 local, legislative, and presidential elections indicated a major political rift between the urban centres and the countryside. Rural voters, grateful for the restoration of most agricultural land to farmers but fearful of change, strongly favored President Iliescu and the FDSN; the urban electorate favored the CDR (a coalition of several parties – the strongest of which were the PNŢCD and the PNL – and several other civic organizations as well) and quicker reform. Iliescu easily won re-election from a field of five other candidates, and the FDSN won a plurality/relative majority of seats in both chambers of the Romanian Parliament.

With the CDR, the second-largest parliamentary group, reluctant to participate in a national-unity coalition, the FDSN (now the PDSR) formed a government under prime minister and economist Nicolae Văcăroiu with parliamentary support on behalf of the nationalists Romanian National Unity Party (PUNR) and Greater Romania Party (PRM) as well as the extreme left-wing Socialist Party of Labour (PSM) led by former PCR Prime Minister Ilie Verdeț. The future coalition would be labeled by the press as the &quot;Red Quadrilateral&quot; (originally known in Romanian as &quot;Patrulaterul Roșu&quot;).

In January 1994, the governing coalition&#x27;s stability became problematic when the PUNR threatened to withdraw its support unless it received cabinet portfolios. After intense negotiations, two PUNR members received cabinet portfolios in the Văcăroiu government in August of the same year. The following month, the incumbent Justice Minister also joined the PUNR. Nevertheless, subsequently, the PRM and the PSM left the coalition in October and December 1995, respectively.

=== 1996–2000 ===

The 1996 local elections indicated a major shift in the political orientation of the Romanian electorate, with opposition parties sweeping Bucharest and most of the larger cities in Transylvania, Banat, Bukovina, and Dobruja. The trend continued in that year&#x27;s legislative and presidential elections when the opposition dominated the cities and made strong inroads into rural areas previously dominated by President Iliescu and the PDSR (which lost many voters in their traditional stronghold constituencies outside Transylvania).

The opposition campaign emphasized the need to squelch corruption and introduce economic reform favoring liberalization and the free market. This message resonated with voters, resulting in a historical victory for the CDR coalition and the election of Emil Constantinescu as president (partly due to Corneliu Coposu&#x27;s death as well). To secure its electoral majority, the CDR invited Petre Roman&#x27;s Democratic Party (the former FSN) and the UDMR/RMDSZ (representing the Hungarian minority) to join the government. Although over the next four years, Romania had three prime ministers (and despite internal frictions), the governing parties preserved their coalition and initiated a series of much-needed reforms.

=== 2000–2004 ===

Constantinescu stated in 2000 that he is no longer running for a second term, claiming that the system had defeated him. The CDR-led coalition with its new candidate Mugur Isărescu lost the first round of presidential elections held in November 2000 as a result of popular dissatisfaction with infighting among the constituent parties during the preceding four years and the economic hardship brought about by structural reforms. In the second round, Ion Iliescu, running again as the Social Democratic Party (PSD) candidate, won by a wide margin over extreme nationalist Greater Romania Party (PRM) candidate Corneliu Vadim Tudor. Iliescu subsequently appointed Adrian Năstase Prime Minister. In the Parliament, the PSD government (like its predecessor) relied on the support of the UDMR/RMDSZ, which did not join the cabinet but negotiated annual packages of legislation and other measures favoring Romania&#x27;s ethnic Hungarians (essentially through a confidence and supply agreement).

Năstase, in his four years as prime minister, continued the previous government&#x27;s pro-Western foreign policy. The period was characterized by political stability unprecedented in post-communist Romania and consistent economic growth. Romania joined NATO in the spring of 2004 and signed an accession treaty to join the EU in 2007. However, the PSD government was plagued by allegations of corruption which would be significant factors in its eventual defeat in local and national elections in 2004.

In September 2003, the Democratic Party (PD) and the National Liberal Party (PNL) formed an electoral alliance, more specifically the Justice and Truth (DA) Alliance, as a mainstream opposition bloc to the ruling PSD. The DA Alliance agreed, among other measures, to vote as a bloc in the parliament and local councils and run common candidates in national and local elections. In October 2003, the country held a referendum on several constitutional amendments deemed necessary for EU accession. The amendments included provisions to allow foreigners to own land in Romania and to change the president&#x27;s term from four to five years.

=== 2004–2008 ===

In 2004, Traian Băsescu, the then-leader of the Democratic Party (PD), won the presidential election by a narrow margin. Băsescu subsequently appointed former national liberal leader Călin Popescu-Tăriceanu as prime minister. Popescu-Tăriceanu headed a government composed of the PNL, PD, UDMR/RMDSZ, and PC (formerly known as the Romanian Humanist Party or PUR). In order to secure a parliamentary majority, the coalition government relied on the support of 18 parliamentary seats reserved for ethnic-minority representatives.

The government&#x27;s narrow majority in the Parliament led to calls for early elections. In July 2005, Prime Minister Popescu-Tăriceanu voiced plans to resign, prompting new elections; he then backtracked, noting his and the cabinet&#x27;s need to focus on relief efforts for summer floods. During its first year, the government was also tested by a successfully resolved hostage crisis involving three Romanian journalists kidnapped in Iraq and avian influenza in several parts of the country, transmitted by wild birds migrating from Asia.

The government&#x27;s overriding objective was the accession of Romania to the European Union (EU), and on 1 January 2007 Romania became the 26th member of the EU. The government also maintained good relations with the United States, signing an agreement in December 2005 which would allow American troops to train and serve at several Romanian military facilities. Băsescu and Popescu-Tăriceanu pledged to combat high-level corruption and implement broader reforms to modernize sectors such as the judicial system and healthcare.

On 19 April 2007, the Romanian Parliament suspended President Băsescu on charges of unconstitutional conduct. The suspension, passed by a 322–108 vote, opened the way for a national referendum on impeachment which failed by a large popular vote, and as such Băsescu was reinstated as President.

=== 2008–2012 ===

The November 2008 parliamentary elections were close, with the Social Democrats (PSD) winning 33.9 percent of the vote, President Traian Băsescu&#x27;s centre-right Liberal Democrats (PDL) taking 32.34 percent, and the ruling National Liberals (PNL) receiving 18.6 percent. The Liberal Democrats and Social Democrats formed a coalition after the election. Former prime minister Theodor Stolojan withdrew his candidacy for the premiership and President Băsescu nominated Emil Boc, president of the Liberal Democrats, as prime minister.

With the onset of the Great Recession, the Romanian political scene saw tensions between the president and the prime minister on the one hand as well as between the general population on the other hand. Tensions escalated with a 2012 political crisis and another attempt to impeach President Băsescu. In the referendum, more than 7.4 million people (nearly 90 percent) supported Băsescu&#x27;s removal from office. However, the Constitutional Court invalidated the referendum because the majority of the population did not vote (the voter turnout was 46%); Băsescu had called the referendum a &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot; and asked the public to boycott it. All these events have been heavily criticized by international political figures, most notably by German chancellor Angela Merkel.

=== 2012–2016 ===


The legislative elections of 9 December 2012 were seen by the public as an opportunity for change and to oust Băsescu. The Social Liberal Union (USL) received a large majority in the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate (60.07 and 58.61 percent of the vote, respectively) and a record 395 seats. The new prime minister, Victor Ponta, quickly formed a government but the failure to adopt reforms quickly triggered a wave of protests against a government seen as not fulfilling the promises of the 2012 electoral campaign. Two other projects of national interest (shale drilling and the Roșia Montană mining project) unleashed more protests. The demonstrations, initially ecological in focus, became anti-government protests.

In early 2014, the PNL broke away from the USL and entered opposition. Along with the PDL, the PNL formed the Christian Liberal Alliance (ACL) to support the candidature of Klaus Iohannis as President of Romania and later agreed on a future merger that would retain the name of the National Liberal Party (PNL). Iohannis won a surprise victory in front of the incumbent PM Victor Ponta in the second round of the 2014 presidential elections, by a margin of 54.43%. At that time, many voters abroad were rightfully angry because they were not all given the right to cast their ballots, which represented one of the key reasons for Ponta&#x27;s defeat.

In late 2015, another series of nationwide protests ultimately prompted Prime Minister Victor Ponta&#x27;s resignation. Shortly afterward, President Iohannis appointed then independent-technocrat Dacian Cioloș as Prime Minister, who led a likewise independent-technocratic government between late 2015 and early 2017.

=== 2016–2020 ===

The legislative elections of 11 December 2016 saw a predictable comeback of the PSD as the major party in the Romanian Parliament, as most opinion polls gave them an electoral score of at least 40%. Alongside ALDE (a main splinter group from the PNL), the PSD initially formed a governing coalition under Prime Minister Sorin Grindeanu.

In early 2017, a series of massive nationwide protests (the greatest in Romania&#x27;s history) requested Grindeanu&#x27;s resignation and early elections because of the government&#x27;s secret procedure of giving an ordinance modifying the Penal Code and Penal Procedure Code on the night of 31 January. The PM along with the entire government refused to step down but decided to withdraw the decrees that started the protests on 5 February at the protests&#x27; peak.

Approximately four months later, tensions arose between PM Sorin Grindeanu and PSD leader Liviu Dragnea, which ultimately resulted in the loss of political support for the government on behalf of the PSD-ALDE coalition. The PM refused to resign but was eventually dismissed by a motion of no confidence passed by the Parliament with 241 votes (233 minimum needed).

Quickly afterward, Mihai Tudose was proposed by the socialists for the position of prime minister and was subsequently accepted by president Iohannis. However, just after 6 months of governance, he resigned from this dignity. Consequently, the ruling coalition nominated a new Prime Minister candidate in the person of Viorica Dăncilă, a former socialist MEP in 2014–19 who was also accepted by the state president. She was also the first female Prime Minister of Romania. Subsequently, on 4 November 2019, after a motion of no confidence, the PSD minority government was replaced by a minority cabinet led by the National Liberal Party under Ludovic Orban. Furthermore, in November 2019, President Klaus Iohannis was re-elected by a landslide (with FDGR/DFDR, USR PLUS, and PMP support in the second round).

This period (i.e. the two years spanning between 2017 and 2019) was marked by governmental mayhem produced by the previous PSD-ALDE ruling coalition regarding their change of PMs as well as their intentions of changing both the Penal Code and the Penal Procedure Code, the Romanian society took to the streets of Bucharest and many other major cities of the country in huge numbers for more than 500 consecutive days in order to oppose the modification of these law packages, prompt early elections, as well as a referendum on the topic of justice.

=== 2020–2024===

The 2020 Romanian local elections which were held on 27 September were won by the PNL. Nonetheless, on 6 December, the PNL finished second in the 2020 Romanian legislative election. The election was won by the oppositional Social Democrats (PSD) who came in first. Shortly after the official results came out, Orban resigned from his position as PM and was replaced by Nicolae Ciucă as acting/ad interim PM.

In the meantime, the national liberals proceeded to negotiate the formation of a coalition government alongside USR PLUS and UDMR for a reportedly stable center-right governance for the next four years in Romania. The newly designated PM was therefore Florin Cîțu, a member of the National Liberal Party (PNL), who took office on 23 December 2020, after forming a three-party, center-right coalition consisting of the PNL, the USR PLUS, and the Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania (UDMR/RMDSZ).

Subsequently, in early September 2021, USR PLUS decided to exit the Cîțu Cabinet and so the three centre-right party alliance was officially disbanded, inadvertently leading to the major 2021 Romanian political crisis which lasted for nearly three months, until Nicolae Ciucă was invested PM along with the CNR cabinet in late November 2021. On 15 June 2023, Marcel Ciolacu (PSD) was sworn in as the new Romanian Prime Minister. Rotating premiership had been long agreed as part of a deal by the ruling coalition. Since the investment of the CNR cabinet, Romania has been experiencing a clear shift towards authoritarianism, illiberalism and has the characteristics of a hybrid regime behind a constitutional facade.

=== 2024–present===
In 2024, all 4 types of elections took place in Romania, a first in the post-December history of the country. European Parliament election and the local election took place simultaneously on June 9, the European Parliament election being won by the PSD-PNL Alliance, and the local ones by the Social Democratic Party (which ran separately from the liberals in most counties). The European Parliament and local elections also provided positive results for the nationalist parties such as the Alliance for the Union of Romanians (AUR) which sent 5 MEPs to the European Parliament and the more radical formation S.O.S. Romania which sent 2 MEPs. Also, in these elections, AUR strengthened its position in the territory by winning important seats in the county and local councils. Also, the simultaneous organization of the 2 elections on the same day was also met with problems and reports related to electoral fraud, the biggest scandals that came to the surface after the election were in sector 1 and sector 2 of Bucharest.

2024 presidential election took place on November 24. The 1st round of the elections provided results that overturned any prediction prior to the election: the independent and nationalist candidate Călin Georgescu won the first round of the elections, obtaining 22.94% of the votes validly cast, followed by Elena Lasconi who obtained 19.18% of the votes. The 1st round also offered another premiere in the post-1989 history of Romania: Social Democratic Party (PSD) failed to qualify his candidate, Marcel Ciolacu, in the 2nd round, thus losing the elections from the first round. Also, the national-liberals obtained their weakest result in post-1989 history, Nicolae Ciucă obtaining only 8.79% of the votes. A weak result was also recorded by the president of the Alliance for the Union of Romanians, after it was widely speculated that George Simion would reach the second round. After failing to qualify in the 2nd round, Marcel Ciolacu announced his resignation as leader of the Social Democratic Party on November 25. However, he chose to remain as prime minister until a new government was formed following legislative election on 1 December. Amid discussions about the role of social networks and the strong presence of Călin Georgescu, Ciolacu also called for Georgescu&#x27;s campaign funding on TikTok to be reviewed, while MEP and Renew Europe leader Valérie Hayer asked the TikTok CEO to answer questions about the platform&#x27;s role in the elections before the European Parliament, citing the [[Digital Services Act]. Klaus Iohannis, convened the meeting of the [[Supreme Council of National Defence (Romania)|Supreme Council of National Defense]], on the subject of possible risks to national security generated by the actions of some state and non-state cyber actors on some IT&amp;C infrastructures, during the presidential elections. The CSAT meeting took place at the Cotroceni Palace on November 28, 2024. [[Constitutional Court of Romania]] had a deadline for validating the first round of the presidential election on November 28, 2024. The electoral campaign for the second round of voting began on November 29 and ended on December 7, at 07:00. On November 28, 2024, the Court has decided recounting all votes of the 1st round of presidential election. Following the recount, the first round was validated. However, on December 4, 2024, President Iohannis declassified the CSAT documents that confirmed the involvement of a foreign state actor in the elections. The new evidence forced the Constitutional Court to make the decision to annul the first round and entirely restart the electoral process, unprecedented decision in Romania&#x27;s history. Following the annulment of the elections, the stock indices started to rise after a few days of decline.

[[2024 Romanian parliamentary election|2024 parliamentary election]] took place on December 1. They took place within a relatively tense context and [[Political polarization|polarization]] in society as a result of the events that followed the 1st round of the presidential elections on November 24 such as the [[2024 Romanian anti-extremism protests|anti-extremism demonstrations]] and the counter-demonstrations of Călin Georgescu&#x27;s supporters. The parliamentary election were won by the ruling [[Social Democratic Party (Romania)|social-democrats]], but with a lower score compared to the previous election in 2020. The official results indicated a hung parliament that requires the formation of a broad governing coalition for a stable majority. In the first days after the parliamentary election, there was discussion about the formation of a cordon sanitaire to isolate the so-called [[Sovereignism|sovereignist]] block (consisting of the parties AUR, [[S.O.S. Romania|SOS RO]] and [[Party of Young People|POT]]) and the formation of a stable pro-European coalition formed by PSD, PNL, [[Save Romania Union|USR]], [[Hungarian Democratic Union of Romania|UDMR]] and [[Romanian ethnic minority parties|ethnic minority parties]]. As a result of the annulment of the first round of presidential election, [[Renewing Romanian&#x27;s European Project|REPER]] requested the [[Permanent Electoral Authority (Romania)|Central Electoral Office]] to annul the [[2024 Romanian parliamentary election|parliamentary election]] emphasizing that the reasons that led to the decision of the CCR are also valid for the parliamentary election. [[Vlad Gheorghe]], the leader of the party [[Justice and Respect in Europe for All Party|DREPT]], also called for the annulment of the parliamentary elections citing (the same &quot;causes&quot;): &quot;Russian interference&quot;, &quot;manipulation and disinformation of the population”.

Meanwhile, the negotiations between PSD, PNL, USR and UDMR have reached an impasse, USR making several requests to the potential coalition partners such as tax cuts, the resignation of the president [[Klaus Iohannis]], the rapid adoption of the new budget, the start of the procedures for the initiation of the referendum &quot;no convicted criminals from holding public office&quot; and the resignation of the heads of the intelligence services. In the end, the USR stayed out of the negotiations on the future governing coalition thus the return of the old PSD-PNL-UDMR-minorities formula that was between 2021 and 2023 during the [[Ciucă Cabinet]] materialized. On December 23, 2024, the new government was invested with a fragile majority (a little over 50%), [[Second Ciolacu cabinet]]. The new government decided, in the meeting of December 28, that the date of the new presidential elections in 2025 would be March 23 for the 1st round and April 6 for the 2nd round. Later in January 2025 the government set the final calendar for the presidential elections: May 4th for the 1st round and May 18th for the 2nd round.

==Foreign relations==
On 1 January 2007, [[Romania]] became a [[member states of the European Union|member of the European Union]] (EU) in the fifth wave of [[EU enlargement]]. During the 2000s, Romania implemented a number of reforms to prepare for EU accession, including the consolidation of its democratic systems, the institution of the [[rule of law]], the acknowledgement of respect for [[Human rights in Romania|human rights]], the commitment to personal [[freedom of expression]], and the implementation of a functioning [[free-market economy]].

Romania joined the [[NATO|North Atlantic Treaty Organization]] (NATO) on March 29, 2004, following the decision taken at the [[2002 Prague summit|Prague Summit]], in November 2002. Romania was a partner to the allied forces during the [[Gulf War]], particularly during its service as president of the [[UN Security Council]]. Romania has been active in peacekeeping operations in [[UNAVEM (disambiguation)|UNAVEM]] in [[Angola]], [[IFOR]]/[[SFOR]] in [[Bosnia and Herzegovina|Bosnia]], [[Albania]], in [[Afghanistan]] and sent 860 troops to [[Iraq]] after the invasion led by the [[United States]].

Romania has developed strong [[Hungary–Romania relations|relations with Hungary]], with the latter playing a key role in supporting Romania&#x27;s bid to join the EU. Romania&#x27;s [[Democratic Union of Hungarians in Romania|ethnic Hungarian party]] also participated in all the government coalitions between 1996 and 2008 and from 2009. In 1996, Romania signed and ratified a basic bilateral treaty with Hungary that settled outstanding disagreements, laying the foundation for closer, more cooperative relations.

Bulgarian relations with Romania feature regular official visits by the two presidents. In the first half of the 20th century, Romania and Bulgaria had a serious conflict over the [[Dobruja]] region. This dispute, while now largely forgotten, escalated into all out war in 1913. The territorial dispute between the two countries ended with the [[Treaty of Craiova]].

==See also==
* [[Human rights in Romania]]
* [[Romanian Armed Forces|Military of Romania]]
* [[Moldova–Romania relations|Relations of Romania with Moldova]]
* [[Unification of Moldova and Romania|Movement for unification of Romania and Moldova]]

== Notes ==
==References==
==External links==
*List of Romanian Embassies
*World Statesmen: Romania, including a comprehensive list of princes, monarchs, prime ministers, etc.
*Erik Herron&#x27;s Guide to Politics of East Central Europe and Eurasia

==Further reading==
* John Hickman and Chris Little, &quot;Seat/Vote Proportionality in Romanian and Spanish Parliamentary Elections&quot;, &quot;Journal of Southern Europe and the Balkans&quot; Volume 2, Number 2, November 2000.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="40" end="57" title="Semi-presidential republic" label="semi-presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="73" end="81" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304810" start="92" end="106" title="Prime Minister of Romania" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="114" end="132" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q839139" start="143" end="152" title="President of Romania" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q181648" start="253" end="267" title="foreign policy" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="355" end="373" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304810" start="380" end="394" title="Prime Minister of Romania" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="409" end="427" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q233008" start="444" end="460" title="two-party system" label="two-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="467" end="484" title="Legislature" label="legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="518" end="530" title="Bicameralism" label="two chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813360" start="538" end="548" title="Parliament of Romania" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q320306" start="572" end="591" title="Chamber of Deputies (Romania)" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466018" start="600" end="606" title="Senate of Romania" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="612" end="621" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059233" start="625" end="636" title="Judicial independence" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="711" end="725" title="Socialist Republic of Romania" label="communist rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q256121" start="824" end="848" title="Romanian Communist Party" label="Romanian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291330" start="896" end="913" title="Constitution of Romania" label="1991 constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="992" end="1003" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743625" start="1283" end="1303" title="Constitutional Court of Romania" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755230" start="1352" end="1387" title="High Court of Cassation and Justice" label="High Court of Cassation and Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063288" start="1461" end="1488" title="Economist Intelligence Unit" label="Economist Intelligence Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182575" start="1514" end="1530" title="Defective democracy" label="flawed democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q66424254" start="1586" end="1599" title="hybrid regime" label="hybrid regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="1666" end="1679" title="Schengen area" label="Schengen area"/>
<link wikidata="Q839139" start="1727" end="1736" title="President of Romania" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q18538164" start="1738" end="1750" title="Ilie Bolojan" label="Ilie Bolojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304810" start="1783" end="1797" title="Prime Minister of Romania" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q21179176" start="1799" end="1813" title="Marcel Ciolacu" label="Marcel Ciolacu"/>
<link wikidata="Q752435" start="1815" end="1838" title="Social Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q835412" start="2138" end="2150" title="Romanian Armed Forces" label="armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011175" start="2175" end="2210" title="Supreme Council of National Defence (Romania)" label="Supreme Council of National Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304810" start="2376" end="2390" title="Prime Minister of Romania" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813360" start="2457" end="2467" title="Parliament of Romania" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291330" start="2556" end="2579" title="Constitution of Romania" label="Constitution of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799148" start="2733" end="2750" title="Plurality (voting)" label="relative majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q12720441" start="3212" end="3227" title="Alliance PSD+PC" label="Alliance PSD+PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q686228" start="3336" end="3339" title="National Liberal Party (Romania)" label="PNL"/>
<link wikidata="Q852402" start="3567" end="3570" title="Democratic Liberal Party (Romania)" label="PDL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241368" start="3887" end="3910" title="President of the Senate of Romania" label="President of the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q113874052" start="3912" end="3927" title="Mircea Abrudean" label="Mircea Abrudean"/>
<link wikidata="Q686228" start="3929" end="3951" title="National Liberal Party (Romania)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241307" start="3977" end="4013" title="President of the Chamber of Deputies of Romania" label="President of the Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q28113991" start="4015" end="4040" title="Ciprian-Constantin Șerban" label="Ciprian-Constantin Șerban"/>
<link wikidata="Q752435" start="4042" end="4065" title="Social Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="4121" end="4130" title="Bicameralism" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813360" start="4131" end="4141" title="Parliament of Romania" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q320306" start="4164" end="4183" title="Chamber of Deputies (Romania)" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466018" start="4195" end="4201" title="Senate of Romania" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="4283" end="4310" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q182985" start="4311" end="4327" title="electoral system" label="electoral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084932" start="4342" end="4346" title="2008 Romanian legislative election" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q133" start="4371" end="4411" title="mixed-member proportional representation" label="mixed-member proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q217032" start="4707" end="4726" title="electoral threshold" label="electoral threshold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904908" start="5253" end="5276" title="Romanian ethnic minority parties" label="ethnic-minority parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="5540" end="5559" title="Moldova" label="Republic of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q256121" start="5617" end="5641" title="Romanian Communist Party" label="Romanian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q104033187" start="6302" end="6329" title="2024 Romanian legislative election" label="latest legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797678" start="6813" end="6831" title="Mayor of Bucharest" label="Mayor of Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q752435" start="8053" end="8076" title="Social Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q686228" start="8683" end="8705" title="National Liberal Party (Romania)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q97193048" start="9308" end="9343" title="Alliance for the Union of Romanians" label="Alliance for the Union of Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q124096751" start="9934" end="9955" title="United Right Alliance" label="United Right Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q112266111" start="10018" end="10023" title="Renewing Romania&amp;#x27;s European Project" label="REPER"/>
<link wikidata="Q112266111" start="10077" end="10082" title="Renewing Romania&amp;#x27;s European Project" label="REPER"/>
<link wikidata="Q266582" start="10570" end="10614" title="Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania" label="Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q110007527" start="11197" end="11213" title="National Coalition for Romania" label="PSD-PNL Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q113470144" start="11795" end="11809" title="S.O.S. Romania" label="S.O.S. Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q28836808" start="12396" end="12425" title="Social Liberal Humanist Party" label="Social Liberal Humanist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047716" start="13012" end="13080" title="List of political parties in Romania" label="Other political parties, independent contenders, and local alliances"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755230" start="14414" end="14466" title="High Court of Cassation and Justice" label="President of the High Court of Cassation and Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q151060" start="14620" end="14635" title="Napoleonic Code" label="Napoleonic Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q25669" start="14640" end="14653" title="inquisitorial system" label="inquisitorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755230" start="15072" end="15107" title="High Court of Cassation and Justice" label="High Court of Cassation and Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="15301" end="15312" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743625" start="15469" end="15506" title="Constitutional Court of Romania" label="President of the Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q12743047" start="15508" end="15522" title="Valer Dorneanu" label="Valer Dorneanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291330" start="15696" end="15717" title="Romanian Constitution" label="Romanian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127218" start="15788" end="15817" title="Constitutional Council (France)" label="French Constitutional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453413" start="16085" end="16093" title="Counties of Romania" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="16159" end="16168" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q371909" start="16412" end="16419" title="prefect" label="prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="17185" end="17206" title="Democracy" label="democratic principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="17208" end="17223" title="civil liberties" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="17241" end="17253" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="17264" end="17283" title="Romanian Revolution" label="Romanian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="17287" end="17300" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="December 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q256121" start="17380" end="17404" title="Romanian Communist Party" label="Romanian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q208980" start="17472" end="17483" title="Securitate" label="Securitatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430278" start="17879" end="17889" title="ad interim" label="ad interim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676846" start="17890" end="17896" title="acting (law)" label="acting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455738" start="17978" end="18002" title="National Salvation Front (Romania)" label="National Salvation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702253" start="18218" end="18248" title="1990 Romanian general election" label="1990 Romanian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q159385" start="18629" end="18641" title="Geopolitics" label="geopolitical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455738" start="18817" end="18841" title="National Salvation Front (Romania)" label="National Salvation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551358" start="18915" end="18932" title="social safety net" label="social safety net"/>
<link wikidata="Q622662" start="19003" end="19019" title="Heavy industry" label="heavy industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q686228" start="19093" end="19115" title="National Liberal Party (Romania)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q259887" start="19130" end="19180" title="Christian Democratic National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party" label="Christian Democratic National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="19242" end="19255" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648240" start="19283" end="19296" title="shock therapy (economics)" label="shock therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q208980" start="19583" end="19593" title="Securitate" label="Securitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q865222" start="19691" end="19716" title="Proclamation of Timișoara" label="Proclamation of Timișoara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702253" start="19792" end="19835" title="1990 Romanian general election" label="1990 presidential and legislative elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q189575" start="19877" end="19888" title="Ion Iliescu" label="Ion Iliescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466018" start="20010" end="20016" title="Senate of Romania" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q518365" start="20026" end="20053" title="Hungarians in Romania" label="Hungarian minority-oriented"/>
<link wikidata="Q266582" start="20054" end="20098" title="Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania" label="Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q686228" start="20140" end="20162" title="National Liberal Party (Romania)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q259887" start="20206" end="20256" title="Christian Democratic National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party" label="Christian Democratic National Peasants&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733751" start="20296" end="20320" title="Ecologist Party of Romania" label="Romanian Ecologist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673498" start="20393" end="20415" title="Liberal Union–Brătianu" label="Liberal Union–Brătianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673505" start="20417" end="20457" title="National Reconstruction Party of Romania" label="National Reconstruction Party of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q20747595" start="20467" end="20497" title="Democratic Group of the Centre" label="Democratic Group of the Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q316823" start="20553" end="20564" title="Petre Roman" label="Petre Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q853284" start="20652" end="20660" title="Mineriad" label="Mineriad"/>
<link wikidata="Q752435" start="20762" end="20797" title="Social Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Democratic National Salvation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q12720208" start="20998" end="21009" title="1992 Romanian general election" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q12720208" start="21015" end="21027" title="1992 Romanian general election" label="presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q188448" start="21083" end="21096" title="List of cities and towns in Romania" label="urban centres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420523" start="21303" end="21306" title="Romanian Democratic Convention" label="CDR"/>
<link wikidata="Q752435" start="21760" end="21764" title="Social Democratic Party (Romania)" label="PDSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q126671" start="21821" end="21837" title="Nicolae Văcăroiu" label="Nicolae Văcăroiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q835213" start="21895" end="21924" title="Romanian National Unity Party" label="Romanian National Unity Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q828039" start="21936" end="21957" title="Greater Romania Party" label="Greater Romania Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827065" start="21997" end="22022" title="Socialist Party of Labour" label="Socialist Party of Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q322985" start="22062" end="22073" title="Ilie Verdeț" label="Ilie Verdeț"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304761" start="22139" end="22156" title="Red Quadrilateral" label="Red Quadrilateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q12720221" start="22731" end="22751" title="1996 Romanian local elections" label="1996 local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="22909" end="22921" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="22923" end="22928" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="22930" end="22938" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="22944" end="22951" title="Dobruja" label="Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q12720207" start="22993" end="23004" title="1996 Romanian general election" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q12720207" start="23009" end="23021" title="1996 Romanian general election" label="presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q299152" start="23517" end="23536" title="Emil Constantinescu" label="Emil Constantinescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q869137" start="23565" end="23580" title="Corneliu Coposu" label="Corneliu Coposu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13359938" start="23673" end="23689" title="Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q255022" start="24172" end="24186" title="Mugur Isărescu" label="Mugur Isărescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q752435" start="24491" end="24514" title="Social Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q828039" start="24578" end="24599" title="Greater Romania Party" label="Greater Romania Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133702" start="24616" end="24636" title="Corneliu Vadim Tudor" label="Corneliu Vadim Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q271966" start="24669" end="24683" title="Adrian Năstase" label="Adrian Năstase"/>
<link wikidata="Q266582" start="24790" end="24800" title="Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania" label="UDMR/RMDSZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q21406588" start="24963" end="24994" title="Confidence and supply" label="confidence and supply agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="25252" end="25256" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q40286045" start="25474" end="25500" title="2004 Romanian general election" label="national elections in 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q13359938" start="25526" end="25542" title="Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q686228" start="25556" end="25578" title="National Liberal Party (Romania)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q664647" start="25637" end="25654" title="Justice and Truth Alliance" label="Justice and Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q57279" start="26172" end="26186" title="Traian Băsescu" label="Traian Băsescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13359938" start="26211" end="26227" title="Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q40286045" start="26242" end="26263" title="2004 Romanian general election" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q207473" start="26346" end="26369" title="Călin Popescu-Tăriceanu" label="Călin Popescu-Tăriceanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q686228" start="26443" end="26446" title="National Liberal Party (Romania)" label="PNL"/>
<link wikidata="Q13359938" start="26448" end="26450" title="Democratic Party (Romania)" label="PD"/>
<link wikidata="Q266582" start="26452" end="26462" title="Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania" label="UDMR/RMDSZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q783621" start="26468" end="26470" title="Conservative Party (Romania)" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="27130" end="27134" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q43987" start="27139" end="27154" title="avian influenza" label="avian influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q23609046" start="27287" end="27329" title="2007 enlargement of the European Union" label="accession of Romania to the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q835412" start="27572" end="27589" title="Romanian Armed Forces" label="Romanian military"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721619" start="27941" end="27975" title="2007 Romanian presidential impeachment referendum" label="national referendum on impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q752435" start="28146" end="28162" title="Social Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q852402" start="28248" end="28265" title="Democratic Liberal Party (Romania)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q686228" start="28309" end="28326" title="National Liberal Party (Romania)" label="National Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q267857" start="28553" end="28561" title="Emil Boc" label="Emil Boc"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="28641" end="28656" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325053" start="28848" end="28869" title="2012 Romanian constitutional crisis" label="2012 political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617106" start="28927" end="28937" title="2012 Romanian presidential impeachment referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="29218" end="29234" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q567" start="29393" end="29406" title="Angela Merkel" label="Angela Merkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q276732" start="29433" end="29473" title="2012 Romanian legislative election" label="legislative elections of 9 December 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q797760" start="29552" end="29572" title="Social Liberal Union" label="Social Liberal Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q57692" start="29747" end="29759" title="Victor Ponta" label="Victor Ponta"/>
<link wikidata="Q14945817" start="29850" end="29858" title="2012–2015 unrest in Romania" label="protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q12148992" start="30012" end="30025" title="Roșia Montană" label="Roșia Montană"/>
<link wikidata="Q14921663" start="30052" end="30065" title="Roșia Montană protests" label="more protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q18486136" start="30262" end="30288" title="Christian Liberal Alliance" label="Christian Liberal Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q701484" start="30325" end="30339" title="Klaus Iohannis" label="Klaus Iohannis"/>
<link wikidata="Q839139" start="30343" end="30363" title="President of Romania" label="President of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362659" start="30565" end="30592" title="2014 Romanian presidential election" label="2014 presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091237" start="30636" end="30649" title="Romanian diaspora" label="voters abroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q21400552" start="30818" end="30855" title="2015 Romanian protests" label="another series of nationwide protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="30977" end="30988" title="independent politician" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q190044" start="30989" end="30999" title="technocracy" label="technocrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q929248" start="31000" end="31013" title="Dacian Cioloș" label="Dacian Cioloș"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304810" start="31017" end="31031" title="Prime Minister of Romania" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362626" start="31146" end="31187" title="2016 Romanian legislative election" label="legislative elections of 11 December 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q26934816" start="31351" end="31355" title="Alliance of Liberals and Democrats (Romania)" label="ALDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q19003460" start="31462" end="31477" title="Sorin Grindeanu" label="Sorin Grindeanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q28482411" start="31495" end="31534" title="2017 Romanian protests" label="a series of massive nationwide protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659788" start="32042" end="32055" title="Liviu Dragnea" label="Liviu Dragnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12735517" start="32337" end="32349" title="Mihai Tudose" label="Mihai Tudose"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368300" start="32637" end="32652" title="Viorica Dăncilă" label="Viorica Dăncilă"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="32673" end="32676" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="MEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958970" start="32680" end="32687" title="List of members of the European Parliament (2014–2019)" label="2014–19"/>
<link wikidata="Q671955" start="32961" end="32974" title="Ludovic Orban" label="Ludovic Orban"/>
<link wikidata="Q39088259" start="33036" end="33046" title="2019 Romanian presidential election" label="re-elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q698997" start="33068" end="33077" title="Democratic Forum of Germans in Romania" label="FDGR/DFDR"/>
<link wikidata="Q63991888" start="33079" end="33087" title="USR PLUS" label="USR PLUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q15732550" start="33093" end="33096" title="People&amp;#x27;s Movement Party" label="PMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q96251607" start="33700" end="33729" title="2020 Romanian local elections" label="2020 Romanian local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230383" start="33842" end="33876" title="2020 Romanian legislative election" label="2020 Romanian legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q752435" start="33919" end="33935" title="Social Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q28950289" start="34065" end="34078" title="Nicolae Ciucă" label="Nicolae Ciucă"/>
<link wikidata="Q28035183" start="34357" end="34368" title="Florin Cîțu" label="Florin Cîțu"/>
<link wikidata="Q686228" start="34386" end="34408" title="National Liberal Party (Romania)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q63991888" start="34532" end="34540" title="USR PLUS" label="USR PLUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q266582" start="34550" end="34594" title="Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania" label="Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q104440634" start="34678" end="34690" title="Cîțu Cabinet" label="Cîțu Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q108513833" start="34797" end="34827" title="2021 Romanian political crisis" label="2021 Romanian political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28950289" start="34872" end="34885" title="Nicolae Ciucă" label="Nicolae Ciucă"/>
<link wikidata="Q109680585" start="34917" end="34928" title="Ciucă Cabinet" label="CNR cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q21179176" start="34969" end="34983" title="Marcel Ciolacu" label="Marcel Ciolacu"/>
<link wikidata="Q110007527" start="35152" end="35155" title="National Coalition for Romania" label="CNR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="35217" end="35233" title="authoritarianism" label="authoritarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q605479" start="35235" end="35247" title="illiberalism" label="illiberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q66424254" start="35281" end="35294" title="hybrid regime" label="hybrid regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q123190889" start="35458" end="35486" title="2024 European Parliament election in Romania" label="European Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q105494567" start="35491" end="35509" title="2024 Romanian local elections" label="the local election"/>
<link wikidata="Q110007527" start="35597" end="35613" title="National Coalition for Romania" label="PSD-PNL Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q752435" start="35641" end="35664" title="Social Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q686228" start="35696" end="35704" title="National Liberal Party (Romania)" label="liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q17025987" start="35807" end="35818" title="Romanian nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q97193048" start="35839" end="35874" title="Alliance for the Union of Romanians" label="Alliance for the Union of Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="35906" end="35925" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q113470144" start="35957" end="35971" title="S.O.S. Romania" label="S.O.S. Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="36361" end="36370" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q84029141" start="36373" end="36399" title="2024 Romanian presidential election" label="2024 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="36533" end="36544" title="Independent politician" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="36549" end="36560" title="Nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021363" start="36571" end="36586" title="Călin Georgescu" label="Călin Georgescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q25952127" start="36681" end="36694" title="Elena Lasconi" label="Elena Lasconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q752435" start="36810" end="36833" title="Social Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q21179176" start="36873" end="36887" title="Marcel Ciolacu" label="Marcel Ciolacu"/>
<link wikidata="Q686228" start="36965" end="36982" title="National Liberal Party (Romania)" label="national-liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q28950289" start="37035" end="37048" title="Nicolae Ciucă" label="Nicolae Ciucă"/>
<link wikidata="Q97193048" start="37140" end="37175" title="Alliance for the Union of Romanians" label="Alliance for the Union of Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q20058774" start="37213" end="37226" title="George Simion" label="George Simion"/>
<link wikidata="Q48938223" start="37680" end="37686" title="TikTok" label="TikTok"/>
<link wikidata="Q64590185" start="37717" end="37729" title="Renew Europe" label="Renew Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q63764512" start="37737" end="37750" title="Valérie Hayer" label="Valérie Hayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="37851" end="37870" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25640" wikidata="Q280832" url="?curid=25640" title="Economy of Romania">
<text>The economy of Romania is a developing mixed economy, with a high degree of complexity. It ranks 12th in the European Union by total nominal GDP and 7th largest when adjusted by purchasing power (PPP). The World Bank notes that Romania&#x27;s efforts are focused on accelerating structural reforms and strengthening institutions in order to further converge with the European Union. The country&#x27;s economic growth has been one of the highest in the EU since 2010, with 2022 seeing a better-than-expected 4.8% increase.

In recent years, it witnessed growth rates such as: 4.8% in 2016, 7.1% in 2017, 4.4% in 2018 and 4.1% in 2019. In 2020, its GDP per capita in purchasing power standards reached 72% of the European Union average, up from 44% in 2007, the highest growth rate in the EU27. Romania&#x27;s economy ranks 35th in the world by its total GDP (PPP), with a Int$784 billion annual output (2023 est.). 

The country is a leading destination in Central and Eastern Europe for foreign direct investment: the cumulative FDI since 1989 totals more than $170 billion. Romania is the largest electronics producer in the region. In the past 20 years Romania has also grown into a major center for mobile technology, information security, and related hardware research. The country is a regional leader in fields such as IT and motor vehicle production. Bucharest, the capital city, is one of the leading financial and industrial centres in Eastern Europe.

==History==
===Before World War II===
The economy of Romania entered modernity with the Treaty of Adrianople in 1829, ending centuries of Turkish control. Economic growth was stimulated by several milestones: the discovery and industrial exploitation of oil in 1857, the political union between Wallachia and Moldavia in 1859, land reforms, adoption of a local currency, the leu (1867), the state independence (1877), as well as the building of an extensive rail-road system under king Carol I.

After the dissolution of neighbouring Russian and Austro-Hungarian empires following World War I, several Romanian-speaking provinces (Transylvania, Bessarabia, Banat, Bukovina) united with the Kingdom of Romania, forming the Romanian state in its modern form. The application of radical agricultural reforms and the passing of a new constitution created a democratic framework and allowed for quick economic growth (industrial production doubled between 1923 and 1938, despite the effects of the Great Depression in Romania).

Until World War II, Romania was Europe&#x27;s second-largest oil and food producer.

=== Communist period ===
After 1945, Soviet-occupied Romania became a member of the Eastern Bloc and switched to a Soviet-style command economy. During this period the country experienced rapid industrialisation in an attempt to create a &quot;multilaterally developed socialist society&quot;. Economic growth was further fuelled by foreign credits in the 1970s, eventually leading to a growing foreign debt, which peaked at $11–12 billion.

Romania&#x27;s debt was completely paid off during the 1980s by implementing severe austerity measures which deprived Romanians of basic consumer goods. In 1989, before the Romanian Revolution, Romania had a GDP of about 800 billion lei, or $53.6 billion. Around 58% of the country&#x27;s gross national income came from industry, and another 15% came from agriculture. The minimum wage was 2,000 lei, or approx. $57.

=== Free market transition ===
The end of the communist period marked the beginning of a sharp economic downturn. Romania&#x27;s weight in the global economy dropped to 0.3% in 1993, down from 0.8% in 1983.

Privatisation of industry started with the 1992 transfer of 30% of the shares of some 6,000 state-owned enterprises to five private ownership funds, in which each adult citizen received certificates of ownership. The remaining 70% ownership of the enterprises was transferred to a state ownership fund, with a mandate to sell off its shares at the rate of at least 10% per year. The privatisation law also called for direct sale of some 30 specially selected enterprises and the sale of &quot;assets&quot; (i.e., commercially viable component units) of larger enterprises.

As of 2008, inflation stood at 7.8%, up from 4.8% in 2007 estimated by the BNR at coming within 6% for the year 2006 (the year-on-year CPI, published in March 2007, is 3.66%). Also, since 2001, the economy has grown steadily at around 6–8%. Therefore, the PPP per capita GDP of Romania in 2008 was estimated to be between $12,200 and $14,064.

Romania was the largest U.S. trading partner in Central-Eastern Europe until Nicolae Ceaușescu&#x27;s 1988 renunciation of Most Favored Nation (non-discriminatory) trading status, which resulted in higher U.S. tariffs on Romanian products. Congress approved restoration of the MFN status effective 8 November 1993, as part of a new bilateral trade agreement. Tariffs on most Romanian products dropped to zero in February 1994 with the inclusion of Romania in the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP). Major Romanian exports to the U.S. include shoes and clothing, steel, and chemicals.

Romania signed an Association Agreement with the EU in 1992 and a free trade agreement with the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) in 1993, codifying Romania&#x27;s access to European markets and creating the basic framework for further economic integration. Romania formally joined the EU in 2007.

During the later part of the Ceaușescu period, Romania had earned significant contracts from several developing countries, notably Iraq, for oil-related projects. In August 2005 Romania agreed to forgive 43% of the US$1.7 billion debt owed by an Iraq still largely occupied by the military forces of the U.S.-led &quot;Coalition of the Willing&quot;, making Romania the first country outside of the Paris Club of wealthy creditor nations to forgive Iraqi debts.

Growth in 2000–07 was supported by exports to the EU, primarily to Italy and Germany, and a strong recovery of foreign and domestic investment. Domestic demand is playing an ever more important role in underpinning growth as interest rates drop and the availability of credit cards and mortgages increases. Current account deficits of around 2% of GDP are beginning to decline as demand for Romanian products in the European Union increases. Accession to the EU gives further impetus and direction to structural reform.

In early 2004 the government passed increases in the value-added tax (VAT) and tightened eligibility for social benefits with the intention to bring the public finance gap down to 4% of GDP by 2006, but more difficult pension and healthcare reforms will have to wait until after the next elections. Privatisation of the state-owned bank Banca Comercială Română took place in 2005. Intensified restructuring among large enterprises, improvements in the financial sector, and effective use of available EU funds is expected to accelerate economic growth. However, the Romanian economy was affected by the financial crisis of 2007–08 and contracted in 2009.

After communism, Romania needed capital infusion, entrepreneurial and managerial skills, the fastest way to obtain that was through foreign direct investment (FDI). As of 2018, total FDI in Romania was 81 billion EUR, 63% of total (51 billion) are greenfield investments. Top ten FDI stock by country of origin in 2018 were: Netherlands (23.9%), Germany (12.7%), Austria (12.2%), Italy (9.5%), Cyprus (6.2%), France (6%), Switzerland (4.5%), Luxembourg (4.2%), Belgium (2.2%) and United Kingdom (2.1%).

===Investments in Romania===
The level of investment remains above EU average. Investment accounts for almost 25% of GDP in Romania as opposed to 19% of GDP in the EU, in 2016.

Locally, UniCredit, one of the region&#x27;s leading banking firms, announced in October 2023 that it will merge its Romanian affiliate with the recently purchased Alpha bank in Romania (for €300 million), creating Romania&#x27;s third-largest lender.

Romania&#x27;s Recovery and Resilience Plan dedicates over €6 billion to digitalisation efforts, encompassing public administration, connectivity, cybersecurity, digital skills, and the development of an integrated e-health and telemedicine system. The European Investment Bank Project Advisory Support programme aids Romania in advancing digitalisation through collaborations with the National Agency for Public Procurement and the Ministry of Research, Innovation, and Digitalisation

This assistance includes evaluating ICT projects and supporting the rollout of a €600 million government cloud initiative, aimed at enhancing interoperability, reducing bureaucracy, and bolstering cybersecurity.

===EU membership (2007)===
On 1 January 2007 Romania and Bulgaria entered the EU, giving the Union access to the Black Sea. This led to some immediate international trade liberalisation. Romania is part of the European single market which represents more than 447 million consumers. Several domestic commercial policies are determined by agreements among European Union members and by EU legislation. This is to be contrasted with enormous current account deficits. Low interest rates guarantee availability of funds for investment and consumption. For example, a boom in the real estate market started around 2000 and has not subsided yet. At the same time annual inflation in the economy is variable and during the mid-2000s (2003–2008) has seen a low of 2.3% and high of 7.8%.

Romania adopted 1 January 2005 a flat tax of 16% to improve tax collection rates. Romania subsequently enjoyed the lowest fiscal burden in the European Union, until Bulgaria also switched to a flat tax of 10% in 2007. Since 2018 the flat rate was lowered to 10%.

Romania posted 6% economic growth in 2016, the highest among European Union member states. According to Bloomberg, the country&#x27;s economic growth advanced at the fastest pace since 2008. It is now considered the next tech-startup hub country in EU. Nowadays, that Romania&#x27;s digital infrastructure ranks higher than other eastern and central European countries makes it an attractive place to start a tech business. 

== Economy ==
===GDP===
IMF for 2022 (October) published the following data:

In the Romanian press the economy has been referred to as the &quot;Tiger of the East&quot; during the 2000s. Romania is a country of considerable economic potential: over 10 million hectares of agricultural land, diverse energy sources (coal, oil, natural gas, hydro, nuclear, and wind), a substantial, if aging, manufacturing base and opportunities for expanded development in tourism on the Black Sea and in the mountains.

===Investments===
Net investments in Romania&#x27;s economy totaled RON 33.6 billion (EUR 7.2 billion) in the first half of 2018, up by 5.8% compared to the same period of 2017, according to the National Statistics Institute (INS).

In the same year (2018) foreign direct investment (FDI) was 81 billion, 63% (51 billion) being &quot;green field&quot;

=== Data ===
The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2022 (with IMF staff estimates in 2023–2028). Inflation under 5% is in green.
===National budget===
The planned national budget for 2017 is 422 billion lei ($103 billion), with an estimated budget deficit to GDP of 1.1%.

===Growing middle class===
Romania has a growing middle and upper classes with relatively high per-capita income. World Bank estimated that in 2002 99% of the urban and 94% of the rural population had access to electricity. In 2004, 91% of the urban and only 16% of the rural population had access to improved water supply and 94% of the urban population had access to improved sanitation. In 2017 there were about 22.5 million mobile phone users in Romania and about 18 million with internet access.

In February 2024, the gross average monthly wage was RON 8,871 (€1910), and the net average monthly wage was RON 5,556 (€1180).

===Neighbours===
Countries tend to benefit from sharing borders with developed markets as this facilitates trade and development. Below is a table of Romania&#x27;s neighbouring countries, their GDP per capita, and trade values between the pairs. In 2017, 11.58% of Romanian exports went to its neighbours; while 12.95% of imports came from these five countries. For comparison, Germany alone accounted for 23% of Romania&#x27;s exports and 20.1% of its imports.

==Labour==

In 2022, the economically active population was of 8270.8 thousand persons, of which 94.4% were employed persons and 5.6% unemployed.

The employment rate of working age population (15-64 years) was 63.1%, having higher values for men (71.5%, as against 54.4% for women) and urban area (68.6% in urban area, as against 56.3% in rural area). 19.7% of young people (aged 15-24 years) and 46.7% of elderly people (aged 55-64 years) were employed. The employment rate for persons aged 15-64 was higher for those with superior level of education (89.5%) than for those with medium level (64.6%) and those with low education (36.6%). The employment rate for the population aged 20-64 years was 68.5%. Employment rate had higher values for men (77.7% as against only 59.1% for women) and for persons in urban area (74.0% as against 61.8% for persons in rural area).

The unemployment rate was 5.6%. By gender, the gap between the two rates was 1.0 percentage point (6.0% for men as against 5.0% for women), while by residential area it was 5.7 percentage points (8.9% for rural area as compared to 3.2% for urban area). The unemployment rate had the highest level (22.8%) among young people (aged 15-24 years). The unemployment affects to a greater extent the graduates of medium and low level of education, for which the unemployment rate was 5.2%, respectively 14.2% higher as compared with the rate registered for unemployed with superior level of education (1.7%).















According to the latest monthly report of the National Institute of Statistics in Romania, the average monthly salary in November 2023 was 7,766 lei (1,562 euros) gross or 4,765 lei (958 euros) net.















===Minimum wage in Romania===
The minimum gross wage in the Romanian economy amounts to RON 3700 (≈EUR 745) from 1 July 2024. The same minimum wage applies to employees with a seniority of over 15 years.

===Wealth per adult===
In 2021, the median wealth per adult in Romania was estimated by Credit Suisse at USD 20,389. Average wealth per adult was USD 42,351.

35% of the 15.1 million Romanian adults had a wealth of less than USD 10,000. This is an improvement from 40% in 2018.

==Tourism==
Romania is a popular tourist destination, with more than 15.7 million domestic and foreign tourists in 2018.

Romania&#x27;s tourism took a great hit during the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic, with a drop of as much as 68.7% of foreign visitors in 2020, but it&#x27;s beginning to recover in 2022.

Romania has cities of great cultural interest (Sibiu, Bucharest, Constanța, Brașov, Iași, Timișoara, Cluj-Napoca or Alba Iulia), beaches and seaside resorts, ski resorts, and well-preserved rural regions appreciated for their beauty and tranquillity. Romania is the destination of many religious pilgrimages, hosting several thousands visitors each year.

==Currency==
The leu (pronounced ), plural: lei (); (ISO 4217 code RON; numeric code 946), &quot;leo&quot; (lion) in English is the currency of Romania. It is subdivided into 100 &quot;bani&quot; (singular: &quot;ban&quot;). On 1 July 2005, Romania underwent a currency reform, switching from the previous leu (ROL) to a new leu (RON). 1 RON is equal to 10,000 ROL. Romania joined the European Union on 1 January 2007 and initially hoped to adopt the euro in 2014, but with the deepening of the Euro crisis and with its own problems, such as a low workforce productivity, postponed its adoption plans indefinitely.

As of February 2021, 1 RON is worth about 0.2045 EUR and US$0.2483. Romania is expected to adopt the euro in 2026.

===Fulfillment of the Maastricht criteria===
Romania, as a member state of the European Union, is required to adopt the common European currency, the Euro. For this reason Romania must fulfil the five Maastricht criteria, of which it met none as of June 2020.


==Natural resources==

Romania is an oil and gas producer. The pipeline network in Romania included 2,427 km for crude oil, 3,850 km for petroleum products, and 3,508 km for natural gas in 2006. Several major new pipelines are planned, especially the Nabucco Pipeline for Caspian oilfields, the longest one in the world. Romania could cash in four billion dollars from the Constanta-Trieste pipeline.

Romania has considerable natural resources for a country of its size, including coal, iron ore, copper, chromium, uranium, antimony, mercury, gold, barite, borate, celestine (strontium), emery, feldspar, limestone, magnesite, marble, perlite, pumice, pyrites (sulfur), clay, arable land and hydropower.

Energy needs are also met by importing bituminous and anthracite coal and crude petroleum. In 2019 over 21 million metric tonnes of coal, an estimated 1300 tonnes of zinc, 460,000 tonnes of alumina and 3.4 million tonnes of crude steel were mined. Lesser amounts of copper, lead, gold, silver and kaolin were also mined.

===Energy===
The energy sector is dominated by state-owned companies such as Termoelectrica, Hidroelectrica and Nuclearelectrica. Fossil fuels are the country&#x27;s primary source of energy, followed by hydroelectric power.

====Nuclear energy in Romania====
Due to dependency on oil and gas imports from Russia, the country has placed an increasingly heavy emphasis on nuclear energy since the 1980s. The Cernavodă Nuclear Power Plant is the only one of its kind in Romania, although there are plans to build a second one in Transylvania, possibly after 2020.

For domestic heating and cooking 48% of rural and small-town households use directly burned solid fuel (almost exclusively domestically produced wood) as the main energy source.

Wind power had an installed capacity of 76 MW in 2008, and 3028 MW in 2016. The country has the largest wind power potential in Southeast Europe, with Dobruja listed as the second-best place in Europe to construct wind farms. As a result, there are currently investor connection requests for over 12,000 MW. There are also plans to build a number of solar power stations, such as the Covaci Solar Park, which will be one of the largest in the world.

==Physical infrastructure==
The volume of traffic in Romania, especially goods transportation, has increased in recent years due to its strategic location in South-East Europe. In the past few decades, much of the freight traffic shifted from rail to road. A further strong increase of traffic is expected in the future.

As of December 2023, of motorways are in use with a small portion of Lugoj-Deva (between Margina and Holdea) to be finished while Sibiu-Pitești is still tendering. The railway network, which was significantly expanded during the Communist years, is the fourth largest in Europe.

Bucharest is the only city in Romania which has an underground railway system, comprising both the Bucharest Metro and the light rail system managed by Regia Autonomă de Transport București. Although construction was planned to begin in 1941, due to geo-political factors, the Bucharest Metro was only opened in 1979. Now it is one of the most accessed systems of the Bucharest public transport network with an average ridership of 800,000 passengers during the workweek. In total, the network is 71 km long and has 53 stations.

==Sectors of the economy==
In 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in Romania is Services with 351,621 companies followed by Retail Trade with 239,404 companies.

===Gas and natural resources===
Romania has become a natural gas exporter. Romanian Scientist, Lazar Edeleanu, had managed, for the first time in the world, to refine oil based products with sulphur dioxide, in other words separation from the oil of some hydrocarbon groups, without their chemical alteration.

===Agriculture===

Agriculture employs about 26% of the population (one of the highest rates in Europe) and contributes about 4.3% of GDP. The Bărăgan is characterized by large wheat farms. Dairy products, pork, poultry, and apple production are concentrated in the western region.

Beef production is located in central Romania, while the production of fruits, vegetables, and wine ranges from central to southern Romania. Romania is a large producer of many agricultural products and is currently expanding its forestry and fishery industries. The implementation of the reforms and the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) have resulted in reforms in the agricultural sector of the economy.

====Fishing====
Fishing is an economic mainstay in parts of eastern Romania and along the Black Sea coast, with important fish markets in places such as Constanta, Galați and Tulcea. Fish such as European anchovy, sprat, pontic shad, mullet, goby, whiting, garfish, Black-Sea Turbot or horse mackerel are landed at ports such as Constanta.

There has been a large scale decrease in employment in the fishing industry within Romania due to the EU&#x27;s Common Fisheries Policy, which places restrictions on the total tonnage of catch that can be landed, caused by overfishing in the Black Sea. Along with the decline of sea-fishing, commercial fish farms – especially in salmon, have increased in prominence in the rivers and lochs of the east of Romania. Inland waters are rich in fresh water fish such as salmon, trout, and in particular, carp which traditionally has been the most popular fish, including its eggs (&quot;icre&quot;), fresh or canned.

===Industry===

====Car industry====

====IT and other Industry====
Romania has been successful in developing its industrial sector in recent years. Industry and construction accounted for 32% of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2003, a comparatively large share even without taking into account related services. The sector employed 26.4% of the workforce. Romania excels in the production of automobiles, machine tools, and chemicals. In 2013, some 410,997 automobiles were produced in Romania, up from 78,165 in 2000. As of 2018, the turnover generated by Romania&#x27;s automobile industry was estimated at 28 billion Euros, with 230,000 Romanians employed in the sector.

In 2004 Romania enjoyed one of the largest world market share in machine tools (5.3%). Romanian-based companies such as Dacia, Petrom, Rompetrol, Bitdefender, Romstal and Mobexpert have expanded operations throughout the region. However, small- to medium-sized manufacturing firms form the bulk of Romania&#x27;s industrial sector.

Industrial output growth was 6.9% year-on-year in December 2009, making it the highest in the EU-27 zone which averaged −1.9%.

Romania has the third-highest percentage of women working in information and communications technologies (ICT) in Europe. 29% of their workforce is made up of women.

===Services===

In 2003 the service sector constituted 55% of gross domestic product (GDP), and employed 51.3% of the workforce. The subcomponents of services are financial, renting, and business activities (20.5%); trade, hotels and restaurants, and transport (18%); and other service activities (21.7%). The service sector in Romania has expanded in recent years, employing some 47% of Romanians and accounting for slightly more than half of GDP.

The largest employer is the retail sector, employing almost 12% of Romanians. The retail industry is mainly concentrated in a relatively small number of chain stores clustered together in shopping malls. In recent years the rise of big-box stores, such as Cora (hypermarket) (of France) and Carrefour (a French subsidiary), have led to fewer workers in this sector and a migration of retail jobs to the suburbs.

==Biotechnology industry==
Romania is aggressively promoting and developing its biotechnology industry. Hundred of millions of dollars were invested into the sector to build up infrastructure, fund research and development and to recruit top international scientists to Romania. Romania features one of the world&#x27;s newest competitive bio-industries, in key areas as pharmacogenomics, protein engineering, glyco-engineering, tissue engineering, bio-informatics, genome medicine and preventive medicine. Romania is devoting substantial resources to developing universities and R&amp;D facilities, increasing bioventure startups, growing bio-clusters (communities of biotechnology companies and institutions) and developing human resources, all with the goal of making it one of the world&#x27;s most advanced biotechnology regions.

==Regional variation==

The strength of the Romanian economy varies from region to region. PPP, and GDP per capita is the highest in Bucharest. The following table shows the highest GDP per capita of the other 4 counties, with data supplied by CNP. 

The highest GDP per capita is found in Bucharest and surrounding Ilfov County. Values well above the national average are found in Timiș, Argeș, Brașov, Cluj, Constanța, Arad, Sibiu and Prahova. Values well below the national average are found in: Vaslui, Botoșani, Călărași, Neamț, Vrancea, Suceava, Giurgiu, Mehedinți, Olt and Teleorman.

==Foreign trade==

In 2017, Romania&#x27;s largest trading partner was Germany, followed by Italy. Romania&#x27;s main imports and exports are electrical machinery, motor vehicles &amp; parts and industrial machinery. While Romania imports substantial quantities of grain, it is largely self-sufficient in other agricultural products and food stuffs, due to the fact that food must be regulated for sale in the Romania retail market, and hence imports almost no food products from other countries.

Romania imported in 2006 food products of 2.4 billion euros, up almost 20% versus 2005, when the imports were worth slightly more than 2 billion euros. The EU is Romania&#x27;s main partner in the trade with agri-food products. The exports to this destination represent 64%, and the imports from the EU countries represent 54%. Other important partners are the CEFTA countries, Turkey, Republic of Moldova and the USA. Despite a decline of the arms industry in the post-communist era, Romania is a significant exporter of military equipment, accounting for 3–4% of the world total in 2007. EU members are represented by a single official at the World Trade Organization.

During the first trimester of 2010, Romanian exports increased by 21%, one of the largest rates in the European Union. The trade deficit stood at roughly 2 billion EUR, the eighth largest in the EU. The annual trade deficit has widened every year since 2014, standing at about EUR 18.77B in 2020.

==Miscellaneous data==
Households with access to fixed and mobile telephone access
* &quot;landline telephone&quot; – 76% (2017)
* &quot;mobile telephone&quot; – 115% (2017)

Broadband penetration rate
* 79% (2019)

Individuals using computer and internet
* &quot;computer&quot; – 74% (2017)
* &quot;internet&quot; – 87% (2017)

== See also ==
* List of companies of Romania

General:
* Economy of Europe

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q280832" start="4" end="22" title="Economy of Romania" label="economy of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="28" end="38" title="developing country" label="developing"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="39" end="52" title="mixed economy" label="mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163517" start="76" end="86" title="List of countries by economic complexity" label="complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="109" end="123" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="133" end="144" title="nominal GDP" label="nominal GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="178" end="200" title="Purchasing power parity" label="purchasing power (PPP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="206" end="216" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="228" end="235" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839494" start="279" end="297" title="Microeconomic reform" label="structural reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="367" end="381" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="402" end="417" title="economic growth" label="economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="453" end="455" title="EU" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139973" start="554" end="566" title="Growth rate (group theory)" label="growth rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q207987" start="648" end="662" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita" label="GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q271969" start="666" end="682" title="purchasing power" label="purchasing power"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="712" end="726" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="788" end="792" title="Member state of the European Union" label="EU27"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="794" end="801" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="823" end="840" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="35th in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="859" end="862" title="Purchasing power parity" label="PPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q550207" start="872" end="876" title="Int$" label="Int$"/>
<link wikidata="Q900636" start="957" end="983" title="Central and Eastern Europe" label="Central and Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="988" end="1013" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="1030" end="1033" title="foreign direct investment" label="FDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q900636" start="1127" end="1133" title="Central and Eastern Europe" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887246" start="1203" end="1220" title="mobile technology" label="mobile technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q189900" start="1222" end="1242" title="information security" label="information security"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="1326" end="1328" title="Information technology" label="IT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483418" start="1333" end="1357" title="list of countries by motor vehicle production" label="motor vehicle production"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="1359" end="1368" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="1446" end="1460" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q137847" start="1551" end="1571" title="Treaty of Adrianople (1829)" label="Treaty of Adrianople"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="1758" end="1767" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="1772" end="1780" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131645" start="1838" end="1841" title="Romanian leu" label="leu"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="1997" end="2004" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="2009" end="2025" title="Austro-Hungarian Empire" label="Austro-Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="2094" end="2106" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="2108" end="2118" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="2120" end="2125" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="2127" end="2135" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q106092830" start="2456" end="2483" title="Great Depression in Romania" label="Great Depression in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="2656" end="2668" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751101" start="2687" end="2699" title="Soviet-type economic planning" label="Soviet-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="2700" end="2715" title="command economy" label="command economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="2766" end="2783" title="industrialisation" label="industrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579553" start="3091" end="3116" title="Austerity in Romania" label="severe austerity measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="3187" end="3206" title="Romanian Revolution" label="Romanian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="3641" end="3654" title="Privatisation" label="Privatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q967861" start="4290" end="4293" title="National Bank of Romania" label="BNR"/>
<link wikidata="Q180687" start="4350" end="4353" title="consumer price index" label="CPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="4636" end="4653" title="Nicolae Ceaușescu" label="Nicolae Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q827518" start="4682" end="4701" title="Most Favored Nation" label="Most Favored Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4426710" start="5167" end="5188" title="Association Agreement" label="Association Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="5245" end="5276" title="European Free Trade Association" label="European Free Trade Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q115959594" start="5772" end="5796" title="Coalition of the Willing" label="Coalition of the Willing"/>
<link wikidata="Q461736" start="5852" end="5862" title="Paris Club" label="Paris Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q128635" start="6490" end="6505" title="value-added tax" label="value-added tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q806149" start="6774" end="6797" title="Banca Comercială Română" label="Banca Comercială Română"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="7040" end="7067" title="financial crisis of 2007–08" label="financial crisis of 2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="7125" end="7132" title="Capital (economics)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="7143" end="7158" title="Entrepreneurship" label="entrepreneurial"/>
<link wikidata="Q833406" start="7341" end="7363" title="Greenfield project" label="greenfield investments"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="8841" end="8850" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095372" start="9168" end="9192" title="List of countries by current account balance" label="current account deficits"/>
<link wikidata="Q179179" start="9198" end="9211" title="interest rate" label="interest rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359520" start="9304" end="9322" title="real estate market" label="real estate market"/>
<link wikidata="Q825846" start="9542" end="9550" title="flat tax" label="flat tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="10539" end="10544" title="hydroelectricity" label="hydro"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="10546" end="10553" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302" start="10559" end="10563" title="wind power" label="wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q271855" start="11245" end="11260" title="Government budget" label="national budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107550" start="14401" end="14417" title="List of countries by wealth per adult" label="wealth per adult"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="14815" end="14832" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83324" start="14987" end="14992" title="Sibiu" label="Sibiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="14994" end="15003" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q79808" start="15005" end="15014" title="Constanța" label="Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q82174" start="15016" end="15022" title="Brașov" label="Brașov"/>
<link wikidata="Q46852" start="15024" end="15028" title="Iași" label="Iași"/>
<link wikidata="Q83404" start="15030" end="15039" title="Timișoara" label="Timișoara"/>
<link wikidata="Q100188" start="15041" end="15052" title="Cluj-Napoca" label="Cluj-Napoca"/>
<link wikidata="Q174665" start="15056" end="15066" title="Alba Iulia" label="Alba Iulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37431" start="15349" end="15357" title="ISO 4217" label="ISO 4217"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="15747" end="15751" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q217197" start="15791" end="15802" title="European sovereign-debt crisis" label="Euro crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q628895" start="15844" end="15866" title="workforce productivity" label="workforce productivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="16178" end="16182" title="Euro" label="Euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q744775" start="16229" end="16248" title="Maastricht criteria" label="Maastricht criteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="16403" end="16412" title="crude oil" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059843" start="16427" end="16444" title="petroleum product" label="petroleum product"/>
<link wikidata="Q498908" start="16541" end="16557" title="Nabucco Pipeline" label="Nabucco Pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="16562" end="16569" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304260" start="16663" end="16689" title="Pan-European Pipeline" label="Constanta-Trieste pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="16772" end="16776" title="Carbon" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="16796" end="16804" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="16806" end="16813" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="16815" end="16823" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="16825" end="16832" title="Mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q184196" start="16840" end="16846" title="barite" label="barite"/>
<link wikidata="Q421726" start="16848" end="16854" title="borate" label="borate"/>
<link wikidata="Q407221" start="16856" end="16865" title="Celestine (mineral)" label="celestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q938" start="16867" end="16876" title="strontium" label="strontium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136648" start="16879" end="16884" title="emery (mineral)" label="emery"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="16886" end="16894" title="feldspar" label="feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="16896" end="16905" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q425450" start="16907" end="16916" title="magnesite" label="magnesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="16918" end="16924" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q655819" start="16926" end="16933" title="perlite" label="perlite"/>
<link wikidata="Q180044" start="16935" end="16941" title="pumice" label="pumice"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="16943" end="16950" title="pyrites" label="pyrites"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="16952" end="16958" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="16961" end="16965" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="16967" end="16978" title="arable land" label="arable land"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="16983" end="16993" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q732607" start="17035" end="17045" title="bituminous coal" label="bituminous"/>
<link wikidata="Q182458" start="17050" end="17065" title="anthracite" label="anthracite coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="17162" end="17166" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q177342" start="17186" end="17193" title="alumina" label="alumina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="17220" end="17231" title="crude steel" label="crude steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q223197" start="17293" end="17299" title="kaolin" label="kaolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="17365" end="17376" title="state-owned" label="state-owned"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702902" start="17395" end="17409" title="Termoelectrica" label="Termoelectrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5752917" start="17411" end="17425" title="Hidroelectrica" label="Hidroelectrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068211" start="17430" end="17446" title="Nuclearelectrica" label="Nuclearelectrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="17448" end="17460" title="Fossil fuels" label="Fossil fuels"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="17522" end="17541" title="hydroelectric power" label="hydroelectric power"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="17689" end="17703" title="Nuclear power" label="nuclear energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248956" start="17725" end="17754" title="Cernavodă Nuclear Power Plant" label="Cernavodă Nuclear Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="18211" end="18218" title="Dobruja" label="Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q194356" start="18274" end="18284" title="wind farms" label="wind farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003207" start="18410" end="18430" title="Photovoltaic power station" label="solar power stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q795231" start="19001" end="19016" title="Caile Ferate Romane" label="railway network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="19164" end="19175" title="rapid transit" label="underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q622884" start="19212" end="19227" title="Bucharest Metro" label="Bucharest Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="19236" end="19246" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280353" start="19265" end="19302" title="Regia Autonomă de Transport București" label="Regia Autonomă de Transport București"/>
<link wikidata="Q12071401" start="19481" end="19515" title="Transport in Bucharest" label="Bucharest public transport network"/>
<link wikidata="Q30722989" start="19575" end="19583" title="workweek" label="workweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q775944" start="20288" end="20295" title="Bărăgan Plain" label="Bărăgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136965" start="20733" end="20746" title="Uruguay Round" label="Uruguay Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q194284" start="20754" end="20792" title="General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade" label="General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q79808" start="21022" end="21031" title="Constanta" label="Constanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q170996" start="21033" end="21039" title="Galați" label="Galați"/>
<link wikidata="Q11585" start="21044" end="21050" title="Tulcea" label="Tulcea"/>
<link wikidata="Q188387" start="21065" end="21081" title="European anchovy" label="European anchovy"/>
<link wikidata="Q747783" start="21090" end="21101" title="pontic shad" label="pontic shad"/>
<link wikidata="Q42237" start="21103" end="21109" title="Mullet (fish)" label="mullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q643373" start="21126" end="21133" title="garfish" label="garfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153031" start="21135" end="21151" title="Black-Sea Turbot" label="Black-Sea Turbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905623" start="21155" end="21169" title="horse mackerel" label="horse mackerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q79808" start="21198" end="21207" title="Constanta" label="Constanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q391962" start="21322" end="21345" title="Common Fisheries Policy" label="Common Fisheries Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="21452" end="21461" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q209894" start="21513" end="21523" title="fish farming" label="fish farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="21540" end="21546" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172903" start="21595" end="21600" title="lochs" label="lochs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258881" start="21684" end="21689" title="trout" label="trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="22217" end="22228" title="automobiles" label="automobiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q19768" start="22230" end="22243" title="machine tools" label="machine tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483418" start="22282" end="22293" title="List of countries by motor vehicle production" label="automobiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q27460" start="22620" end="22625" title="Automobile Dacia" label="Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755034" start="22627" end="22633" title="Petrom" label="Petrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788862" start="22635" end="22644" title="Rompetrol" label="Rompetrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q854605" start="22646" end="22657" title="Bitdefender" label="Bitdefender"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363328" start="22659" end="22666" title="Romstal" label="Romstal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886685" start="22671" end="22680" title="Mobexpert" label="Mobexpert"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="23156" end="23170" title="service sector" label="service sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q16766413" start="23810" end="23823" title="big-box store" label="big-box store"/>
<link wikidata="Q686643" start="23834" end="23852" title="Cora (hypermarket)" label="Cora (hypermarket)"/>
<link wikidata="Q217599" start="23869" end="23878" title="Carrefour" label="Carrefour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137011" start="25071" end="25074" title="Council for National Policy" label="CNP"/>
<link wikidata="Q191670" start="25143" end="25155" title="Ilfov County" label="Ilfov County"/>
<link wikidata="Q185586" start="25209" end="25214" title="Timiș County" label="Timiș"/>
<link wikidata="Q179567" start="25216" end="25221" title="Argeș County" label="Argeș"/>
<link wikidata="Q182614" start="25223" end="25229" title="Brașov County" label="Brașov"/>
<link wikidata="Q182624" start="25231" end="25235" title="Cluj County" label="Cluj"/>
<link wikidata="Q188505" start="25237" end="25246" title="Constanța County" label="Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q179559" start="25248" end="25252" title="Arad County" label="Arad"/>
<link wikidata="Q184797" start="25254" end="25259" title="Sibiu County" label="Sibiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q188665" start="25264" end="25271" title="Prahova County" label="Prahova"/>
<link wikidata="Q167199" start="25326" end="25332" title="Vaslui County" label="Vaslui"/>
<link wikidata="Q178861" start="25334" end="25342" title="Botoșani County" label="Botoșani"/>
<link wikidata="Q188948" start="25344" end="25352" title="Călărași County" label="Călărași"/>
<link wikidata="Q188661" start="25354" end="25359" title="Neamț County" label="Neamț"/>
<link wikidata="Q182778" start="25361" end="25368" title="Vrancea County" label="Vrancea"/>
<link wikidata="Q181209" start="25370" end="25377" title="Suceava County" label="Suceava"/>
<link wikidata="Q193055" start="25379" end="25386" title="Giurgiu County" label="Giurgiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q191717" start="25388" end="25397" title="Mehedinți County" label="Mehedinți"/>
<link wikidata="Q188945" start="25399" end="25402" title="Olt County" label="Olt"/>
<link wikidata="Q191653" start="25407" end="25416" title="Teleorman County" label="Teleorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q319014" start="26279" end="26284" title="CEFTA" label="CEFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="26563" end="26587" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860755" start="27234" end="27262" title="List of companies of Romania" label="List of companies of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226947" start="27275" end="27292" title="Economy of Europe" label="Economy of Europe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25641" wikidata="Q5154223" url="?curid=25641" title="Mass media in Romania">
<text>The mass media in Romania refers to mass media outlets based in Romania. Television, magazines, and newspapers are all operated by both state-owned and for-profit corporations which depend on advertising, subscription, and other sales-related revenues. The Constitution of Romania guarantees freedom of speech. As a country in transition, the Romanian media system is under transformation.

Reporters Without Borders ranks Romania 42nd in its Worldwide Press Freedom Index, from 2013. Freedom House ranked it as &quot;partly free&quot; in 2014.

== History ==
Romania&#x27;s newspaper market thrived after the 1989 revolution, but many newspapers subsequently closed because of rising costs. Most households in Bucharest have cable TV. There are hundreds of cable distributors offering access to Romanian, European and other stations.

According to europaworld.com, in 2004 there were:
*radio users: 5,369,000
*television users: 5,822,000
*telephones (main lines in use): 4,390,800 (2005)
*mobile cellular phones (subscribers): 22,000,000 (2008)
*personal computers: 2,450,000
*internet users: 4,500,000
*book production (inclusively pamphlets): 13,288,000 titles and 9,288,000 copies
*daily newspapers: 84
*other periodicals: 2,036

==Legislative framework==

The 2003 Constitution of Romania upholds freedom of expression and prohibits censorship. The Constitution also states that &quot;Freedom of the press also involves the free setting up of publications,&quot; and that &quot;No publication shall be suppressed, establishes free access to information and the autonomy of the public radio and TV.

No specific Press Law is in force in Romania. Hate speech is forbidden when it insults state symbols or religion, and when it promotes fascist or racist ideologies. Small fines are imposed: in 2014, the president Traian Basescu was fined for an anti-Roma comment, and a Facebook user was also fined after he had posted a Nazi slogan that was then quoted by a local newspaper.

In 2007 the media rights body Reporters Without Borders praised reforms to the criminal code; journalists can no longer be jailed on defamation charges. Defamation was decriminalised in 2010 by a Supreme Court ruling, but this was later overturned by a 2013 Constitutional Court decision. Civil defamation lawsuits often target journalists.

Freedom of access to information is guaranteed by the Constitution and by a specific law (Law on Free Access to Information of Public Interest, adopted in 2001). Public bodies are required to release information to the public, and journalists are afforded special privileges to obtain them faster. Yet, access to public information is less and less used by journalists, who do not have resources to invest in investigative reporting while faced with severe economic conditions in the media sector in the country. Cases of officials obstructing access to information have been reported.

On 25 June 2008 the Senate adopted a draft amendment that would have obliged television and radio broadcasters to have a 50% of &quot;good&quot; or &quot;positive&quot; news. The Constitutional Court, however, ruled the bill unconstitutional before promulgation, so it never became law.

===Status and self-regulation of journalists===
Journalists have opposed initiatives for a Law on the Press, fearing that it would impose restrictions rather than granting freedoms. A 2009 study by CIJ, ActiveWatch and IMAS (The Institute for Marketing and Polls) reports that most journalists say that professional norms are not respected, mostly due to political and business pressures.

The Romanian Press Club has an Ethics Code and a Council of Honour to inquire journalists and media outlets found in breach of professional norms – although its decisions have often been criticised as arbitrary. The Convention of Media Organisations (COM) also adopted a deontological code; COM-member organisations have developed self-regulation guidelines for an increased accountability in the Romanian media. A &quot;Unique Code&quot; was issued in October 2009 by COM, MediaSind trade union and the Association of Journalists in Romania, to be adopted for the whole profession.

Among the broadcast media, regulation is managed by the National Broadcasting Council (&quot;Consiliul National al Audiovizualului&quot;), issuing warnings and fines for non lack of fairness and accuracy, as well as forcing media to display public acknowledgements for promoting indecent language and behaviour.

Journalists in Romania have to deal with job insecurity due to low and delayed salaries, as well as commercial and political pressures from media owners and advertisers. Collective labour contracts for the mass media sector expired in early 2014. Reporters in Romania also often face verbal abuse, intimidation, and occasionally even physical aggressions.

==Media outlets==
Romania has one of the most dynamic media markets in southeastern Europe. TV is the medium of choice for most Romanians. State-owned TVR and the private stations Pro TV and Antena 1 command the lion&#x27;s share of viewing, however there is a large number of smaller, private stations, some of them part of local networks. The state broadcaster, TVR, operates a second national network, TVR 2, and a pan-European satellite channel. Pay TV channels have a smaller but significant audience.

The public television company Televiziunea Română and the public radio Societatea Română de Radiodifuziune cover all the country and have also international programs. The state also owns a public news agency ROMPRES. The private media is grouped in media companies such as Intact Media Group, Media Pro, Realitatea-Caţavencu, Ringier, SBS Broadcasting Group, Centrul Național Media and other smaller independent companies. Cable television is widely available in almost all localities, and some have even adopted digital television. It offers besides the national channels a great number of international and specialized channels. FM stations cover most cities and most of them belong to national radio networks. Overall readership of most newspapers is slowly declining due to increasing competition from television and the Internet. Tabloids and sport newspapers are among the most read national newspapers. In every large city there is at least one local newspaper, which usually covers the rest of the county. An Audit Bureau of Circulations was established in 1998 and today represents a large number of publications.

The parliamentary majority controls appointments in the leadership of the public broadcaster Televiziunea Română, thus ensuring a constant pro-governmental bias. In the private sector, owners&#x27; interests in other economic sectors usually define the editorial line of the media.
*In July 2014, reporter Cristi Citre was fired from Digi TV (of the RCS-RDS media group) after he had harshly criticised PM Victor Ponta on his personal Facebook account.
* The state anticorruption prosecutor was repeatedly attacked in 2014 on the media controlled by the jailed political and media moghul Dan Voiculescu.
* TV and radio host Robert Turcescu admitted in September 2014 to having been an undercover agent, thus raising concerns about the penetration of the security services in the media sector of Romania.

The print sector has suffered heavily from the economic crisis, and the TV sector is also facing contraction. Few media are profitable, and they increasingly depend on advertising. The distribution of public advertising funds is politicised, and that of advertising funds from the European Union (the biggest advertisement buyer) has not been transparent in the wake of the 2014 Romanian presidential election. Ownership structure of Romanian media is often obfuscated through intermediaries. Foreign media have a presence in the country but have recently scaled it down

===Print media===


The Romanian print press market is rich and diversified. 
The National Institute of Statistics (NIS) counted up to 300 newspaper publishers in 2007, of which 159 dailies, and over 350 magazine publishers. 300 of them are audited by the Romanian Audit Bureau of Circulation (BRAT), hence gaining in credibility and advertising revenues.

The quality segment includes title such as Adevărul, Gândul (MediaPro), Evenimentul zilei (Ringier), România liberă (WAZ/Dan Adamescu), Jurnalul Național (Intact). Their circulation numbers remain low in relation to popular tabloids such as &quot;Click&quot; (Adevarul Holding), that in 2009 distributed 236,000 copies (more than all the quality press combined), &quot;Can Can&quot; or &quot;Libertatea&quot; (Ringier). Sport newspapers include Gazeta Sporturilor, owned by Intact, and ProSport, belonging to MediaPro. Business dailies include Ziarul Financiar, published by MediaPro, &quot;Business Standard&quot; (Realitatea-Catavencu) and Financiarul (Intact).

Local newspapers are usually not backed by big investors, and thus remain vulnerable to political and commercial pressures. The main ones include Gazeta de Sud in Craiova, Tribuna in Sibiu, Ziarul in Iași, Viața liberă in Galați and Transilvania Expres in Brasov. Readership has been in decline, among lacking professionalisation and poor distribution.

Magazines are a thriving segment. Some are spin-offs of popular newspapers, such as Libertatea or Click. Women&#x27;s weeklies, TV guides and business weeklies (Business Magazin, Money Express, Saptamana financiara, Capital) also make good revenues. Glossy magazines and international franchises complete the scene. Academia Catavencu is a cult satirical weekly.

===Publishing===
===Radio broadcasting===

The first private radio stations appeared in 1990; there are now more than 100 of them. State-run Radio Romania operates four national networks and regional and local stations. BBC World Service is available on 88 FM in the capital, and is relayed in Timișoara (93.9), Sibiu (88.4) and Constanta (96.9).

Private FM stations dominate the market in Romania, with more than 700 licenses from the National Broadcasting Council by 2009. Two networks achieved national coverage: Europa FM (owned by the French group Lagardere) and Info Pro (CME). 
The most popular private networks are Radio Zu (Intact), Radio 21 (Lagardere), ProFM (CME), Kiss FM (ProSiebenSat1), relying mostly on advertisement revenues, and broadcasting musical hits, entertainment, and short news bulletins.

The public company Radio România manages five national stations: Radio România Actualităţi (news), Radio România Cultural (culture and arts), Radio România Muzical (music), Radio Antena Satelor (farming and rural communities), and Radio 3Net – &quot;Florian Pittiş&quot; (a youth station broadcasting online). It also holds an international station (Radio Romania International) and a regional network of 12 stations (Radio România Regional), including Radio Iași and Radio Cluj. Radio România also includes the news agency &quot;Rador&quot;, a publishing house, a radio theatre production department, several orchestras and choirs.

===Television broadcasting===

Television is the most popular entertainment media in Romania, and it gathers two thirds of all advertising funds (337 million euro in 2008). The National Study of TV Audience has registered almost 50 TV stations distributed nationwide, including general audience and specialised channels.

Romanian television is dominated by a small number of corporations, owning multiple TV channels as well as radio stations, newspapers and media agencies. Their television business is structured around a flagship channel and a number of smaller specialized, niche channels. The biggest corporations of this kind are: 
*Intact Media Group (with Antena 1-Antena 5),
*Central European Media Enterprises (with Pro TV, Acasă, Pro Cinema, Pro TV Internaţional and Sport.ro)
*Realitatea-Catavencu (with Realitatea TV, Romantica and The Money Channel)
*Centrul Național Media (with Național TV, N24 and Favorit TV)
*SBS Broadcasting Group (with Prima TV and Kiss TV).
There are many localized or franchised international channels (such as HBO, MTV, Cinemax, AXN, Cartoon Network). Furthermore, there are a few independent and local broadcasters.

The TV public service broadcaster is Televiziunea Română, with five channels (TVR 1, TVR 2, TVR 3 with a regional focus, TVR Cultural and TVR Info). TVRi is the international channel. TVR also hosts regional stations based in Timișoara, Cluj, Targu Mures, Craiova and Iasi. TVR usually is slammed for being politicised (its president and board are nominated by the parliamentary majority) and for being based on a hybrid financing system, drawing from the state budget, a special TV tax, and advertising too. Civil society pressures to achieve depoliticisation of TVR have not yet been fruitful

Two private stations, Pro TV (owned by the Bermuda-based Central European Media Enterprises) and Antena 1 (owned by Dan Voiculescu&#x27;s daughter), are market leaders, sharing about 32% of the market, with public television in the third place. A feature of Romanian Television after 2000 was the boom of specialized channels.

Television broadcasts and cable television, frequency allocations, content monitoring and license allocation are done by the National Audiovisual Council (Consiliul Național al Audiovizualului, CNA).

Romania has very high penetration rates for cable television in Europe, with over 79% of all households watching television through a CATV network in 2007. The market is extremely dynamic, and dominated by two giant companies – Romanian based RCS&amp;RDS and United States based UPC-Astral. Broadcast television is very limited because of the high penetration of cable. In the early 1990s, only two state owned TV channels were available, one only in about 20% of the country. Private TV channels were slow to appear, because of lack of experience and high start-up costs. In this environment, cable TV companies appeared and thrived, providing 15-20 foreign channels for a very low price. Many small, startup firms gradually grew, and coverage increased (coverage wars were frequent in the early period). However, this period soon ended, with consolidation around 1995–1996 with gentlemen agreements between larger companies over areas of control and pricing, with claims of monopoly abounding. This process of consolidation was completed around 2005–2006, when only two big suppliers of cable remained: UPC-Astral and RDS. Cable TV is now available in most of the country, including most rural areas. Satellite digital TV appeared in 2004.

===Cinema===

Cinema is one of the least popular forms of entertainment in Romania, and over 100 cinema theatres have closed down since 1989. Romania has the lowest number of cinema goers in Europe. 75 active cinemas were counted in 2008 (down from 155 in 2004), more than half being outdated theatres owned by the public company Romaniafilm. New multiplex cinemas have been opening in shopping malls, including Hollywood Multiplex, Movieplex Cinema, and Cinema City Romania. Over 85% of tickets are for US blockbusters, with only 3.6% in 2008 for domestic Romanian film productions.

===Telecommunications===

Romania has rapidly improving domestic and international services, especially in wireless telephony.
The domestic network offers good, modern services in urban areas; 98% of telephone network is automatic while 71% is digitized; trunk network is mostly fiber-optic cable and radio relay; about 80% of exchange capacity is digital. Roughly 3,300 villages have outdated or no service.

International service data:
*satellite country code: 40;
*satellite earth station: 10 (Intelsat 4);
*digital, international, direct-dial exchanges operate in Bucharest.
The combined (fixed+mobile) telephone penetration rate is 108.3%.

====Land lines====
There are 4,106,000 main lines in use (June 2007).
Romtelecom (owned by the Greek company OTE and the Romanian state) is the dominant fixed line provider (around 80% of the market share) and the only POTS provider. Other providers are RCS&amp;RDS and UPC Romania.

====Mobile====
The penetration rate of mobile telephony exceeded 100 percent in 2007 and reached 126 percent in 2008.

There were 22.600.000 SIM cards active by December 2013. There are three GSM cellular networks (Orange, Vodafone and Cosmote) covering more than 85% of the territory (about 98% of the population), one UMTS only (Digi.Mobil) as well as one CDMA2000 only network (Romtelecom). Five networks, meaning Vodafone, Orange, Digi.Mobil, Cosmote and Zapp also provide UMTS (3G) services. Vodafone, Orange, Digi.Mobil provides voice and data services over their UMTS (3G) networks, as long as Zapp provives only data services Cosmote provides voice and data services via Zapp UMTS network. Mobile telephony had a 108% penetration rate in March 2008.

===Internet===

In November 2008, the number of registered .ro domains was over 340,000, of which 315,000 were active. This represents an increase of 50% in a single year.

Over 50% of the Romanian population used internet in 2014.

Newspapers&#x27; websites are the main sources of information online. Online-only news outlets (such as HotNews.ro, ziare.com, ziare.ro, news.ro, liberalist.ro, corectnews.com, psnews.ro, activenews.ro, stiripesurse.ro) are more and more common, but they usually do not have the resources to produce original and quality journalistic contents.
===Media agencies===
* Mediafax, a private news agency founded in 1991 and part of MediaPro group, dominates the news agency market, producing 600 news items per day, and expanding abroad in the Czech market too.
* Agerpres is the state news agency (from 1990 to 2010 known as &quot;Rompres&quot;). It was first founded in 1889 as &quot;Agentia Telegrafica a Romaniei&quot;, or &quot;Agentia Romana&quot;, as part of the Foreign Ministry, but discontinued in 1916 and re-established in 1921 as Orient-Radio Agency, later RADOR, turned by the communist regime in Agerpres in 1949. RADOR survives as the brand of the news service of the national public radio. Agerpres produces around 300 news items daily and takes part in the European Alliance of News Agencies.
* NewsIn is the newest national agency, launched in 2006 by the Realitatea-Catavencu group. It produces around 300 news items daily and focuses on business and technology, targeting companies directly rather than journalism outlets.
* Smaller agencies include AM Press and Amos News.
* International agencies with bureaus in Bucarest include Reuters, AP and France Presse, while others such as Bloomberg have permanent correspondents.

===Trade unions===
The largest federation of Romanian trade unions in the media sector is MediaSind, claiming around 9,000 members, of which 7,500 journalists. Most of Romania&#x27;s 30,000 journalist remain unaffiliated. 
MediaSind has negotiated with the employers&#x27; organisations the collective contract, binding for the entire profession, although this is often not respected in practice. It also supported journalists in legal cases against arbitrary dismissals and mistreatment. 
Several journalists&#x27; associations exist, including The Association of Journalists in Romania, formed by 70 prominent Bucarest-based journalists.

The Romanian Press Club gathers the owners and managers of media outlets, pushing the interests of the media organisations. Local publishers are grouped into the Ownership Association of Local Publishers (APEL).

NGOs dealing with the media sector take part in the umbrella organisation called the Convention of Media Organisations (Conventia Organizatiilor de Media – COM). Its most active members are the Center for Independent Journalism, and ActiveWatch—The Media Monitoring Agency, both dealing with training and advocacy to improve the quality of journalism in Romania.

===Regulatory authorities===
Print and online media have no particular regulatory authority. The Culture and Mass Media Committees of the two chambers of Parliament are competent on the issue but do not exercise monitoring and control.

Television broadcasts and cable television, frequency allocations, content monitoring and license allocation are done by the National Audiovisual Council (Consiliul Național al Audiovizualului, CNA). The CNA is the main regulatory authority for the broadcast media in Romania, being the guardian of public interest. It is tasked with the implementation of the Audiovisual Law and of all by-laws, including the Code of Regulations for the Broadcasting Content, and it issues recommendations and instructions. The CNA is composed of 11 members, appointed for six years: three by each Chamber of Parliament, two by the President of Romania, and three by the government; all have to be confirmed by the Parliament. The appointments to its board are politicised, and the body thus often acts in a biased and ineffective way.

The National Authority for Communications (ANCOM) is the regulatory body for the TLC market, setting and enforcing market rules.

The National Cinematography Centre (&quot;Centrul National al Cinematografiei&quot; – CNC), part of the Ministry of Culture, supervises the cinema industry and organises competitions to finance film projects.

==Media ownership==
===Transparency===

Even though the Romanian legislation in the field of media ownership transparency is fully aligned with the European standards, in practice sufficient information to assess who effectively owns and ultimately controls the media is not always available.

===Concentration and pluralism===
There are many media outlets in the Romanian market, but few media conglomerates control most of the audience, leaving pluralism only on the surface. Media ownership is highly concentrated and state advertising also poses a risk.

====Legal framework====
Audiovisual Law

The Audiovisual Law (RP 2002) applies to television and radio: (1) Article 44 establishes that concentration of media ownership and increase in audience shares must not generate dominant positions in the formation of public opinion. A media company is considered in a dominant position if its share from the national sector-based market is over 30%. Public service broadcaster is exempted. (2) The law &quot;limits the number of media companies in which an owner can hold a majority of shares to one, with the additional possibility to hold an amount not larger than 20% from another company in the field of audiovisual communication.&quot; (3) A &quot;transfer of an audiovisual license is only possible with the approval of the NCA and results in a complete shift of responsibilities to the new license owner (Art. 56). This is particularly relevant for cases of mergers or acquisitions, in which the NCA can intervene by not approving the transfer of license.&quot;

The National Audiovisual Council appears however &quot;more concerned with the regulation of content than with that of the market&quot; The Audiovisual Law does not target vertical concentration/cross-media ownership.

Competition Law

The Competition Law (RP 1996, amended in 2001) applies to all economic sectors. Its focuses mainly on preventing market dominance. Concentration is not illegal in itself, but only when it creates or consolidates a dominant position. Still, it is allowed in some cases, such as when it improves efficiency. The law also targets vertical concentration/cross-ownership. The Competition Council (&quot;Consiliul Concurenței&quot;) is in charge. The law also applies to print media. However, the CC policies are only based on economic principles, without attention for media pluralism.

====Practice====
There are many media outlets in Romania, but a few of them got most of the audience, making pluralism just an illusion.

In 2015 the Centre for Media Pluralism and Media Freedom (CMPF) assessed a medium risk for &quot;Concentration of media ownership&quot; and a high risk for the &quot;Concentration of cross-media ownership&quot;.

In recent years there was a decrease in transnational investments and the so-called &quot;mogulisation&quot;, a consolidation of local capital, often connected with unclear interests, both economical and political. Owners use media outlets in the interest of other business or political purposes. Over 55% of generalists and news channels are directly or indirectly politically affiliated. In 2015 the CMPF assessed a high risk of &quot;Politicisation of control over media outlets&quot; and a medium risk of &quot;Political bias in the media&quot;.

Also, several cases of blackmail involving media can be cited. Some owners had connections with Securitate, the secret police of the Socialist Republic of Romania. 

In 2017, Romanian media watchdog ActiveWatch warned that the private media sector was increasingly influenced by political interests. According to the NGO, &quot;With job-insecurity and low pay commonplace, many Romanian journalists face the stark choice between obeying orders that effectively come from corporate or financial masters, or – if refusing and asking too many questions – being sacked.&quot;

Public funds

For many years after the 1990 public funds were granted &quot;in the form of rescheduling and cancelling tax liabilities for several groups of companies&quot; in a way that &quot;created advantages for the existing players in the market and raised obstacles for potential newcomers and for those who did not benefited from masked subsidies&quot;.

Massive public support to media outlets cabinet was given particularly during Adrian Năstase&#x27;s government (but the example was followed also on lower levels), either directly or through state companies, often with the mean of advertising. And while now public subsidies are close to zero, indirect ones, such as state advertising, are high. According to the CMPF state advertising represents a medium risk.

====Media conglomerates====
This table gives an overview of the main media conglomerates in Romania. More details about some groups are below:
MediaPro

Bermudan Central European Media Enterprises (CME), founded by Ronald Lauder, entered the Romanian market in 1995, with Adrian Sârbu&#x27;s Media Pro as a local partner, something that was required for operating an audiovisual license. Sârbu was also appointed as chief executive and chairman of CME. However, in February 2014 he was charged with tax evasion, money laundering and embezzlement, sold his shares in CME and withdrew from all positions. He was detained for 30 days in February 2015. Meanwhile, Lauder withdrew from CME board. In 2014 CME was bought by Time Warner and Pro FM was sold to RCS &amp; RDS.

According to 2007 informations in terms of ownership the group controls 26% of the television market, 9% of the urban radio market and 5% of the print market. Its main outlet is ProTV which was launched in 1994, but it owns a total of five television stations, two national radio, the main news agency Mediafax, national and local newspaper, publishing company Publimedia. It is also the Romanian publisher of some international media outlets, namely &quot;Maxim Romania&quot;, &quot;Playboy Romania&quot; and MTV România.

The European Community defined ProTV as being dependent on the goodwill of Romanian government, because it is claimed it has granted huge loans to the media, thus allowing its rapid growth. In fact it has given the government more airtime than to the opposition in the 2004 general election.

Intact Group

Intact Group is owned by the family of Dan Voiculescu, former collaborator of Securitate, founder and former president of the Conservative Party (formerly Humanist Party), senator from 2004 to 2012. Before 2004 general election Voiculescu&#x27;s party was allied to the Social Democratic Party (PSD) and Antena 1 was favourable to the party during the campaign. He was sentenced to 10 years of prison on money laundering charges. He is cited as an example of &quot;Berlusconization&quot; in Romania.

According to 2007 informations 15% of the print market, 2% of the urban radio market and 15% of the TV market. Antena 1 was founded in 1993 and is the main competitor of ProTV. The group owns a total of five television channel, others being Antena 2, Antena 3, Antena International, and Euforia TV, radio station Radio Romantic, news agency Amos News, many printed periodicals, a publishing and a production house.

Realitatea Media

Businessman Sorin Ovidiu Vântu was revealed in 2006 as being the key owner of Realitatea Media, which was formally controlled by Cypriot Bluelink Comunicazioni. The company also launched a news agency, NewsIn, but was not able to challenge MediaFax. Vântu has been an informer for Securitate. Sebastian Ghiță has been involved with Realitatea, but he left after a clash with Vântu and went on founding România TV.

According to 2007 informations 4% it has of the television market.

Doğan Holding

Doğan Holding is a Turkish conglomerate founded by Aydın Doğan. It owns Kanal D Romania.

Ringier Romania

In the 1990s Swiss media group Ringier was an exception to the lack of foreign investments.

Ringier controls 56% of the print market, publishing newspapers like &quot;Libertatea&quot; and magazines like &quot;Capital&quot;. From 2003 to 2010 it was also the publisher of &quot;Evenimentul Zilei&quot;.

Prima Broadcasting Group

Cristian Burci founded Prima TV in 1997. Later he associated himself with international conglomerate SBS Broadcasting Group. In 2012 Burci bought Adevărul Holding from Dinu Patriciu (Patriciu had bought &quot;Adevărul&quot; newspaper in 2006).

According to 2007 informations it has 4% of the television market. It used to control also Kiss TV, which is now owned by Antenna Group.

Lagardère

French group Lagardère entered the Romanian market in 2000 with the launch of Europa FM. &quot;Lagardère also owned a stake in Radio XXI together with Fundaţia Secolul XXI&quot;, which has amongst its member politicians of the Social Democratic Party.

Centrul Național Media

Centrul Național Media is owned by Ioan and Viorel Micula, CEOs of European Drinks &amp; Foods. According to 2007 informations it has 4% of the television market.

Public Service Broadcasters

The board of TVR is appointed by parliament. In 2015 the CMPF assessed a high risk for the &quot;Independence of [Public Service Media] governance and funding&quot;. Romanian Television gave the government more airtime than to the opposition in the 2004 general election.

The national news agency Agerpres is publicly funded (€3.1 million in 2014). It was reorganized by Law 19/2003. According to 2007 informations it has 22% of television market share.

==Censorship ==
Article 30 of the Constitution of Romania, adopted in 1991 and amended in 2003, is dedicated to freedom of expression:
===Self-censorship===
A 2008 report on &quot;Labor Relations and Media&quot; in South East European Network for Professionalization of Media (SEENPM) member countries noted that while in Romania there were no cases of direct censorship in mass media, there were indeed cases of &quot;indirect censorship&quot; or self-censorship.

Journalists risk their jobs in they do not respect the editorial policy decided by media owner, who might be a businessman protecting its business. Journalists who stay in line are rewarded.

In its report &quot;The State of Romanian Mass Media 2020&quot;, the Center for Independent Journalism reiterated that self-censorship continues to be a problem in many newsrooms, wherein journalists are forced to tow a certain political line. The end result is that &quot;less and less original stories come from reporters.&quot;

===Internet censorship===

Law 124/2015, passed on June 12, 2015, held that:
According to the Civil Liberties Union for Europe this amount as establishing internet censorship. The most serious fact are that the decision can be taken by an administrative authority, without court intervention, and that the measures targets not only unauthorized gambling websites themselves, but also those advertising them. European Digital Rights (EDRi) advocacy group questions whether Facebook, YouTube or Google could become a target, too.

Since the restriction is operated by Internet service providers (ISP) through block and redirect to the ONJN website, which is the able to collect data about users who attempted to navigate to an unauthorized gambling website.

While DNS blocking can be bypassed, according to ICANN it can damage internet security. Moreover, while at the moment the infrastructure is used only for unauthorized gambling website, it could be potentially used for other purposes.

===Charges, attacks and threats against journalists===
* In 2002 Silvia Vranceanu of the opposition newspaper &quot;Evenimentul Zilei&quot; was intimidated after writing articles about the Social Democratic Party&#x27;s regional leaders.
* Investigative journalist Iosif Costinas disappeared on 8 June 2002 and was found dead on 21 March 2003.
* On 3 December 2003 Ino Ardelean of &quot;Evenimentul Zilei&quot; was beaten unconscious in Timișoara.
* On 6 November 2004 journalist Sebastian Oancea of the Ziarul de Vrancea was harassed in Focșani by three different political and official authorities.
* On 26 January 2005 the chief of the Romanian Intelligence Service Radu Timofte admitted the telephone tapping of two Romanian journalists working for foreign media.
* In February 2006 Sebastian Oancea of &quot;Ziua&quot; and Marian Garleanu of &quot;România liberă&quot; faced charges for possessing and divulging contents of a CD relating to Romanian army action in Iraq and Afghanistan.
* On 10 March 2010 Romanian Member of the European Parliament Gigi Becali insulted ZIUA Veche journalist Cornelia Popescu after she asked him about contradictions in his declarations of financial interests.
* In January 2012 journalists from various media outlets were assaulted while covering the anti-government protests in Bucharest.
* On 16 May 2012 &quot;Dan Buruca, an investigative reporter at Realitatea TV, was beaten by two individuals in the lobby of his apartment building&quot;.
* On 10 November 2014, Stefan Mako, an investigative journalist of Casa Jurnalistului, was detained by police after filming an arrest.
* On 1 February 2017 German freelance cameraman Christian Gesellmann was violently arrested by police in Bucharest while covering an anti-government demonstration.

==See also==
*Romania
*Transparency of media ownership in Romania

==References==
==External links==
*BBC NEWS country profile: Romania</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5154223" start="4" end="25" title="Mass media in Romania" label="mass media in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="36" end="46" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="64" end="71" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="192" end="203" title="advertising" label="advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q322948" start="205" end="217" title="subscription" label="subscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291330" start="257" end="280" title="Constitution of Romania" label="Constitution of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330546" start="316" end="337" title="country in transition" label="country in transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="391" end="416" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067271" start="443" end="472" title="Press Freedom Index" label="Worldwide Press Freedom Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="485" end="498" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="806" end="814" title="European Union" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291330" start="1270" end="1293" title="Constitution of Romania" label="Constitution of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="1302" end="1323" title="freedom of expression" label="freedom of expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="1338" end="1348" title="censorship" label="censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q26084" start="1536" end="1557" title="access to information" label="access to information"/>
<link wikidata="Q653347" start="1650" end="1661" title="Hate speech" label="Hate speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q57279" start="1817" end="1831" title="Traian Basescu" label="Traian Basescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="1854" end="1858" title="Romani people" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="1874" end="1882" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="2011" end="2036" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="2114" end="2124" title="defamation" label="defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q26084" start="2334" end="2355" title="access to information" label="access to information"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466018" start="2930" end="2936" title="Senate of Romania" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743625" start="3089" end="3109" title="Constitutional Court of Romania" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q446780" start="3159" end="3171" title="promulgation" label="promulgation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15275702" start="4265" end="4302" title="Consiliul National al Audiovizualului" label="Consiliul National al Audiovizualului"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4769" end="4839" title="#Charges, attacks and threats against journalists" label="verbal abuse, intimidation, and occasionally even physical aggressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="4860" end="4867" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q846168" start="4993" end="4996" title="Romanian Television" label="TVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q386873" start="5022" end="5028" title="Pro TV" label="Pro TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q658376" start="5033" end="5041" title="Antena 1 (Romania)" label="Antena 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q846168" start="5206" end="5209" title="Romanian Television" label="TVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005406" start="5247" end="5252" title="TVR 2" label="TVR 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q846168" start="5380" end="5399" title="Televiziunea Română" label="Televiziunea Română"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488631" start="5421" end="5456" title="Societatea Română de Radiodifuziune" label="Societatea Română de Radiodifuziune"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651652" start="5558" end="5565" title="ROMPRES" label="ROMPRES"/>
<link wikidata="Q3799262" start="5623" end="5641" title="Intact (group of companies)" label="Intact Media Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q386873" start="5643" end="5652" title="Pro TV" label="Media Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301218" start="5654" end="5674" title="Realitatea-Caţavencu" label="Realitatea-Caţavencu"/>
<link wikidata="Q687721" start="5676" end="5683" title="Ringier" label="Ringier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143391" start="5685" end="5707" title="SBS Broadcasting Group" label="SBS Broadcasting Group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5709" end="5731" title="Național TV" label="Centrul Național Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="5773" end="5789" title="Cable television" label="Cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q202255" start="5863" end="5881" title="digital television" label="digital television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="5981" end="5992" title="FM broadcasting" label="FM stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q895089" start="6185" end="6193" title="Tabloid journalism" label="Tabloids"/>
<link wikidata="Q846168" start="6567" end="6586" title="Televiziunea Română" label="Televiziunea Română"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6780" end="6792" title="Cristi Citre" label="Cristi Citre"/>
<link wikidata="Q224710" start="6808" end="6815" title="Digi TV (TV channel)" label="Digi TV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6824" end="6831" title="RCS-RDS" label="RCS-RDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q57692" start="6880" end="6892" title="Victor Ponta" label="Victor Ponta"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="6909" end="6917" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q646453" start="7062" end="7076" title="Dan Voiculescu" label="Dan Voiculescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350501" start="7098" end="7113" title="Robert Turcescu" label="Robert Turcescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362659" start="7653" end="7688" title="2014 Romanian presidential election" label="2014 Romanian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q426356" start="8251" end="8259" title="Adevărul" label="Adevărul"/>
<link wikidata="Q954232" start="8261" end="8267" title="Gândul" label="Gândul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480744" start="8280" end="8297" title="Evenimentul zilei" label="Evenimentul zilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363426" start="8309" end="8323" title="România liberă" label="România liberă"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480758" start="8344" end="8361" title="Jurnalul Național" label="Jurnalul Național"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055060" start="8653" end="8671" title="Gazeta Sporturilor" label="Gazeta Sporturilor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2949687" start="8694" end="8702" title="ProSport" label="ProSport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071378" start="8752" end="8768" title="Ziarul Financiar" label="Ziarul Financiar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8850" end="8861" title="Financiarul" label="Financiarul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9019" end="9032" title="Gazeta de Sud" label="Gazeta de Sud"/>
<link wikidata="Q168057" start="9036" end="9043" title="Craiova" label="Craiova"/>
<link wikidata="Q83324" start="9056" end="9061" title="Sibiu" label="Sibiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071381" start="9063" end="9069" title="Ziarul" label="Ziarul"/>
<link wikidata="Q46852" start="9073" end="9077" title="Iași" label="Iași"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9079" end="9091" title="Viața liberă" label="Viața liberă"/>
<link wikidata="Q170996" start="9095" end="9101" title="Galați" label="Galați"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9106" end="9125" title="Transilvania Expres" label="Transilvania Expres"/>
<link wikidata="Q82174" start="9129" end="9135" title="Brasov" label="Brasov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671055" start="9543" end="9561" title="Academia Catavencu" label="Academia Catavencu"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="9811" end="9828" title="BBC World Service" label="BBC World Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490400" start="10145" end="10154" title="Lagardère Group" label="Lagardere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488631" start="10428" end="10441" title="Radio România" label="Radio România"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281009" start="10474" end="10499" title="Radio România Actualităţi" label="Radio România Actualităţi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281010" start="10508" end="10530" title="Radio România Cultural" label="Radio România Cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281012" start="10551" end="10572" title="Radio România Muzical" label="Radio România Muzical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280661" start="10582" end="10602" title="Radio Antena Satelor" label="Radio Antena Satelor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10640" end="10679" title="Radio 3Net – &amp;quot;Florian Pittiş&amp;quot;" label="Radio 3Net – &amp;quot;Florian Pittiş&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142390" start="10759" end="10786" title="Radio Romania International" label="Radio Romania International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281013" start="10827" end="10849" title="Radio România Regional" label="Radio România Regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682767" start="10862" end="10872" title="Radio Iași" label="Radio Iași"/>
<link wikidata="Q752960" start="10877" end="10887" title="Radio Cluj" label="Radio Cluj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758705" start="11622" end="11627" title="Niche market" label="niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3799262" start="11683" end="11701" title="Intact Media Group" label="Intact Media Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q658376" start="11708" end="11716" title="Antena 1 (Romania)" label="Antena 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514614" start="11717" end="11725" title="Antena 5" label="Antena 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053787" start="11729" end="11763" title="Central European Media Enterprises" label="Central European Media Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q386873" start="11770" end="11776" title="Pro TV" label="Pro TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q338130" start="11778" end="11783" title="Acasă" label="Acasă"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120420" start="11785" end="11795" title="Pro Cinema" label="Pro Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053590" start="11797" end="11817" title="Pro TV Internaţional" label="Pro TV Internaţional"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579290" start="11822" end="11830" title="Sport.ro" label="Sport.ro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301218" start="11833" end="11853" title="Realitatea-Catavencu" label="Realitatea-Catavencu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080529" start="11860" end="11873" title="Realitatea TV" label="Realitatea TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q485200" start="11875" end="11884" title="Romantica (TV channel)" label="Romantica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751989" start="11889" end="11906" title="The Money Channel" label="The Money Channel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11909" end="11931" title="Centrul Național Media" label="Centrul Național Media"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11938" end="11949" title="Național TV" label="Național TV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11951" end="11954" title="N24 (Romania)" label="N24"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11959" end="11969" title="Favorit TV" label="Favorit TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143391" start="11972" end="11994" title="SBS Broadcasting Group" label="SBS Broadcasting Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723152" start="12001" end="12009" title="Prima TV" label="Prima TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417022" start="12014" end="12021" title="Kiss TV" label="Kiss TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="12095" end="12098" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="12100" end="12103" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q249892" start="12105" end="12112" title="Cinemax" label="Cinemax"/>
<link wikidata="Q300262" start="12114" end="12117" title="AXN" label="AXN"/>
<link wikidata="Q130361121" start="12119" end="12134" title="Cartoon Network (Europe)" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="12210" end="12236" title="public service broadcaster" label="public service broadcaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q846168" start="12240" end="12259" title="Televiziunea Română" label="Televiziunea Română"/>
<link wikidata="Q682554" start="12281" end="12286" title="TVR 1" label="TVR 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005406" start="12288" end="12293" title="TVR 2" label="TVR 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672217" start="12295" end="12300" title="TVR 3" label="TVR 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672222" start="12324" end="12336" title="TVR Cultural" label="TVR Cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q290332" start="12341" end="12349" title="TVR Info" label="TVR Info"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017626" start="12352" end="12356" title="TVRi" label="TVRi"/>
<link wikidata="Q386873" start="12821" end="12827" title="Pro TV" label="Pro TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="12842" end="12849" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053787" start="12856" end="12890" title="Central European Media Enterprises" label="Central European Media Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q658376" start="12896" end="12904" title="Antena 1 (Romania)" label="Antena 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q646453" start="12915" end="12929" title="Dan Voiculescu" label="Dan Voiculescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="13153" end="13169" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="13171" end="13180" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q15275702" start="13282" end="13319" title="Consiliul Național al Audiovizualului" label="Consiliul Național al Audiovizualului"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="13328" end="13335" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="13392" end="13398" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="13556" end="13563" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q224710" start="13571" end="13582" title="RCS&amp;amp;RDS" label="RCS&amp;amp;RDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="13587" end="13600" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q670242" start="13607" end="13617" title="UPC-Astral" label="UPC-Astral"/>
<link wikidata="Q846168" start="13727" end="13741" title="Romanian Television" label="state owned TV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14901" end="14912" title="Romaniafilm" label="Romaniafilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="15595" end="15604" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="15653" end="15661" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355067" start="15872" end="15882" title="Romtelecom" label="Romtelecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462168" start="16021" end="16025" title="Plain old telephone service" label="POTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q224710" start="16056" end="16067" title="RCS&amp;amp;RDS" label="RCS&amp;amp;RDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q670242" start="16072" end="16083" title="UPC Romania" label="UPC Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q230110" start="16227" end="16230" title="Subscriber Identity Module" label="SIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="16278" end="16281" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="16406" end="16410" title="UMTS" label="UMTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023122" start="16444" end="16452" title="CDMA2000" label="CDMA2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q6272576" start="16503" end="16511" title="Vodafone Romania" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355067" start="16513" end="16519" title="Orange România" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q224710" start="16521" end="16531" title="RCS&amp;amp;RDS" label="Digi.Mobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174635" start="16533" end="16540" title="Cosmote Romania" label="Cosmote"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066476" start="16545" end="16549" title="Zapp Mobile" label="Zapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="16563" end="16567" title="UMTS" label="UMTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6272576" start="16583" end="16591" title="Vodafone Romania" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355067" start="16593" end="16599" title="Orange România" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q224710" start="16601" end="16611" title="RCS&amp;amp;RDS" label="Digi.Mobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="16656" end="16660" title="UMTS" label="UMTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066476" start="16687" end="16691" title="Zapp Mobile" label="Zapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174635" start="16720" end="16727" title="Cosmote România" label="Cosmote"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066476" start="16765" end="16769" title="Zapp Mobile" label="Zapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="16770" end="16774" title="UMTS" label="UMTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q12735246" start="17445" end="17453" title="Mediafax" label="Mediafax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651652" start="17637" end="17645" title="Agerpres" label="Agerpres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838095" start="18148" end="18182" title="European Alliance of News Agencies" label="European Alliance of News Agencies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18186" end="18192" title="NewsIn" label="NewsIn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080529" start="18248" end="18258" title="Realitatea" label="Realitatea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18710" end="18719" title="MediaSind" label="MediaSind"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18911" end="18930" title="collective contract" label="collective contract"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19265" end="19284" title="Romanian Press Club" label="Romanian Press Club"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19594" end="19627" title="Conventia Organizatiilor de Media" label="Conventia Organizatiilor de Media"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19707" end="19718" title="ActiveWatch" label="ActiveWatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="20101" end="20117" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="20119" end="20128" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q15275702" start="20230" end="20267" title="Consiliul Național al Audiovizualului" label="Consiliul Național al Audiovizualului"/>
<link wikidata="Q839139" start="20691" end="20711" title="President of Romania" label="President of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309976" start="21931" end="21963" title="concentration of media ownership" label="concentration of media ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361092" start="22014" end="22032" title="Dominance (economics)" label="dominant positions"/>
<link wikidata="Q15275702" start="22810" end="22838" title="National Audiovisual Council" label="National Audiovisual Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q615445" start="23336" end="23346" title="Economic efficiency" label="efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q911554" start="24065" end="24077" title="Business magnate" label="mogulisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34284" start="24549" end="24558" title="blackmail" label="blackmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q208980" start="24622" end="24632" title="Securitate" label="Securitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q214183" start="24638" end="24651" title="secret police" label="secret police"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="24659" end="24688" title="Socialist Republic of Romania" label="Socialist Republic of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q271966" start="25539" end="25553" title="Adrian Năstase" label="Adrian Năstase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053787" start="26036" end="26070" title="Central European Media Enterprises" label="Central European Media Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q699565" start="26089" end="26102" title="Ronald Lauder" label="Ronald Lauder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502151" start="26373" end="26384" title="tax evasion" label="tax evasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="26386" end="26402" title="money laundering" label="money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q157833" start="26407" end="26419" title="embezzlement" label="embezzlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="26592" end="26603" title="Time Warner" label="Time Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246723" start="26608" end="26614" title="Pro FM" label="Pro FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q224710" start="26627" end="26640" title="RCS &amp;amp; RDS" label="RCS &amp;amp; RDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q386873" start="26821" end="26826" title="ProTV" label="ProTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q192283" start="26933" end="26944" title="news agency" label="news agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q12735246" start="26945" end="26953" title="Mediafax" label="Mediafax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257277" start="27004" end="27014" title="PubliMedia International" label="Publimedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552325" start="27100" end="27113" title="Maxim (magazine)" label="Maxim Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="27127" end="27142" title="Playboy" label="Playboy Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296556" start="27153" end="27164" title="MTV (Romania)" label="MTV România"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="27171" end="27189" title="European Community" label="European Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q40286045" start="27436" end="27457" title="2004 Romanian general election" label="2004 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3799262" start="27474" end="27486" title="Intact Group" label="Intact Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q646453" start="27513" end="27527" title="Dan Voiculescu" label="Dan Voiculescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q208980" start="27552" end="27562" title="Securitate" label="Securitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q783621" start="27600" end="27618" title="Conservative Party (Romania)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q752435" start="27744" end="27767" title="Social Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11860" start="27939" end="27955" title="Silvio Berlusconi" label="Berlusconization"/>
<link wikidata="Q658376" start="28086" end="28094" title="Antena 1 (Romania)" label="Antena 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563498" start="28421" end="28439" title="Sorin Ovidiu Vântu" label="Sorin Ovidiu Vântu"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="28538" end="28545" title="Cyprus" label="Cypriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q12740580" start="28702" end="28717" title="Sebastian Ghiță" label="Sebastian Ghiță"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363432" start="28811" end="28821" title="România TV" label="România TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038414" start="28907" end="28920" title="Doğan Holding" label="Doğan Holding"/>
<link wikidata="Q792887" start="28958" end="28969" title="Aydın Doğan" label="Aydın Doğan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474128" start="28979" end="28994" title="Kanal D Romania" label="Kanal D Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q687721" start="29045" end="29052" title="Ringier" label="Ringier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541479" start="29182" end="29192" title="Libertatea" label="Libertatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035439" start="29224" end="29231" title="Capital (Romanian magazine)" label="Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480744" start="29292" end="29309" title="Evenimentul Zilei" label="Evenimentul Zilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723152" start="29367" end="29375" title="Prima TV" label="Prima TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143391" start="29445" end="29467" title="SBS Broadcasting Group" label="SBS Broadcasting Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682411" start="29490" end="29506" title="Adevărul Holding" label="Adevărul Holding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278753" start="29512" end="29525" title="Dinu Patriciu" label="Dinu Patriciu"/>
<link wikidata="Q426356" start="29553" end="29561" title="Adevărul" label="Adevărul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417025" start="29680" end="29687" title="Kiss TV (Romania)" label="Kiss TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q571837" start="29711" end="29724" title="Antenna Group" label="Antenna Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490400" start="29751" end="29760" title="Lagardère Group" label="Lagardère"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979349" start="29816" end="29825" title="Europa FM (Romania)" label="Europa FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q752435" start="29965" end="29988" title="Social Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30015" end="30037" title="Centrul Național Media" label="Centrul Național Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412532" start="30082" end="30109" title="European Drinks &amp;amp; Foods" label="European Drinks &amp;amp; Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q40286045" start="30457" end="30478" title="2004 Romanian general election" label="2004 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651652" start="30506" end="30514" title="Agerpres" label="Agerpres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291330" start="30698" end="30721" title="Constitution of Romania" label="Constitution of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q932071" start="30844" end="30859" title="Labor Relations" label="Labor Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q862207" start="31112" end="31127" title="self-censorship" label="self-censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376533" start="32062" end="32085" title="European Digital Rights" label="European Digital Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="32126" end="32134" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="32136" end="32143" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="32147" end="32153" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="32220" end="32245" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205810" start="32417" end="32429" title="DNS blocking" label="DNS blocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q485750" start="32460" end="32465" title="ICANN" label="ICANN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480744" start="32762" end="32779" title="Evenimentul Zilei" label="Evenimentul Zilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q752435" start="32835" end="32858" title="Social Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q83404" start="33083" end="33092" title="Timișoara" label="Timișoara"/>
<link wikidata="Q192265" start="33184" end="33191" title="Focșani" label="Focșani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426649" start="33285" end="33314" title="Romanian Intelligence Service" label="Romanian Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281731" start="33315" end="33327" title="Radu Timofte" label="Radu Timofte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067529" start="33341" end="33358" title="telephone tapping" label="telephone tapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894227" start="33459" end="33463" title="Ziua" label="Ziua"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363426" start="33499" end="33513" title="România liberă" label="România liberă"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558747" start="33592" end="33605" title="Romanian army" label="Romanian army"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="33616" end="33620" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="33625" end="33636" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="33666" end="33699" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="Member of the European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q737378" start="33700" end="33711" title="Gigi Becali" label="Gigi Becali"/>
<link wikidata="Q948130" start="33936" end="33960" title="2012 Romanian protests" label="anti-government protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="34444" end="34451" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q28135200" start="34453" end="34495" title="Transparency of media ownership in Romania" label="Transparency of media ownership in Romania"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25642" wikidata="Q1291190" url="?curid=25642" title="Transport in Romania">
<text>Transportation infrastructure in Romania is the property of the state, and is administered by the Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure, Constructions and Tourism, except when operated as a concession, in which case the concessions are made by the Ministry of Administration and Interior.

The country&#x27;s most important waterway is the river Danube. The largest port is that of Constanța, which is the second largest port at the Black Sea.

With over 13 million passengers Bucharest Airport is a major international airport and European transportation hub. Air travel is used for greater distances within Romania but faces competition from the state-owned CFR&#x27;s rail network. Public transport is available in most areas.

==History==
Romania has a system of large, navigable rivers, such as the Danube, Olt and Mureș that cross the country.

The first important human improvements were the Roman roads linking major settlements and providing quick passage for marching armies.

==Railway transport==
A fast-growing number of Romania&#x27;s major cities have modern tram or light rail networks, including Bucharest, Timișoara, Cluj-Napoca and Oradea. Recently the tram has seen a very big revival with many experiments such as ground level power supply in Oradea.

==Roads and automotive transport==


According to the CIA Factbook, in 2022 Romania had a total road network of 85,387 km, ranking 59 in the world. 

Romania&#x27;s National Institute of Statistics (INS) 2022 transport report stated that total road network is 86,336 km: 41,653 km (48,2%) modernized roads (94,1% with asphalt pavements of heavy/medium type and 5.9% with concrete), 20,956  km (24.3%) with light asphalt road clothing, 15,713 km (18,2%) stone paving (such as sett paving or cobblestone roads) and 8,014  km (9,3%) dirt roads.

===Motorways===

Motorways are identified by A followed by a number. As of December 2024, Romania has 1,217.77 km of highway completed with more under planning or construction. In recent years, a master plan for the national motorway network has been developed and approved by the European Commission in July 2015.

Currently the A1 motorway, part of the northern branch of the Pan European IV Corridor, is open on 456 km. Under construction are the segments Curtea de Argeș—Pitești (30 km). Margina—Holdea (13 km) and Boița—Curtea de Argeș (73 km) have yet to start construction. It has a total length of 576 km.

The A2 motorway was the first motorway in Romania opened on all its segments, with a length of 205 km. It links Bucharest to Constanța (junction with A4)

The A3 motorway, which is the largest motorway project in Eastern Europe with a length of 588 km from Bucharest to Oradea (near the Hungarian border), is open on 173 km. The segment Chețani—Câmpia Turzii (15.7 km) is under construction. All segments between Nădășelu and Oradea have been tendered by the end of 2020. The remaining sections are still in the planned phase.

The A4 motorway is operational on 22 km, from Ovidiu to Agigea (also known as the Constanța bypass). Another 45 km are planned, from Agigea to Vama Veche (at the border with Bulgaria).

The A6 motorway is also part of the Pan European IV Corridor, but near Lugoj it starts as the southern branch, that connects the cities of Sofia, Istanbul and Athens. It has a length of 270 km, of which 11.4 km between A1 and Lugoj bypass are open.

The A7 motorway starts from the A3 (near Ploiești), linking it to the region of Moldavia and further to the Ukrainian border. From its planned 450 km, 16 km are open near Bacău, which serve as the bypass for that city.

The A10 motorway is the first motorway which links two motorways in Romania: A1 (near Sebeș) and A3 (near Turda). It has 70 km, and since 2021, it has been operational on its entire length.

The A11 motorway is a 135 km motorway, the second to connect A1 with A3 this time between Arad and Oradea, of which a 2.4 km stretch near Arad called the Arad bypass is open.

===Statistics===
According to the Romanian &quot;Direcţia Regim Permise de Conducere şi Înmatriculare a Vehiculelor&quot;, in 2017 there were 7,635,000 vehicles (of which 1,320,230 in Bucharest), and 8,900,000 in 2019. It is estimated that by 2021 there will be more than 10 million registered cars in Romania.

In 2016 62% of road fatalities occurred in urban area, Romania has 1189 fatalities in urban area, that is 60 killed in urban area per million inhabitants, or times more than EU average of 19. This makes Romania the EU member state with the most fatalities per million population, % more fatalities than the second country, Hungary.

==Metro==
Bucharest is the only city in Romania which has an underground railway system, comprising both the Bucharest Metro and the Bucharest Light rail system of the Regia Autonomă de Transport București. 

The Bucharest Metro forms the backbone of Bucharest public transport network. Bucharest has a fairly extensive subway system consisting of five lines (M1, M2, M3, M4, and M5) run by Metrorex. In total, the network is long and has 64 stations, with average distance between stops. It is one of the fastest ways to get around the city. The oldest metro line is M1, which was opened in 1979. The newest metro line is M5, which was opened in 2020. A sixth metro line, M6 line, is currently under construction.

As of 2024, Bucharest Metro is the only metro system in Romania; with a second one, the Cluj-Napoca Metro, being under construction.

==Air transport==

The air traffic in Romania reached 20.28 million passengers in 2017 and 21 million passengers in 2022.

The national carrier of Romania is TAROM, the largest Romanian airline is Blue Air while Wizz Air has the largest share of Romania&#x27;s air transport market.

===Airports===
There are 20 airports in Romania (estimated as of 2006).

*Airports - with paved runways : 25
**&quot;Runways over 3,047 m:&quot; 5
**&quot;Runways from 2,438 to 3,047 m:&quot; 8
**&quot;Runways from 1,524 to 2,437 m:&quot; 12
*Airports - with unpaved runways : 36
**&quot;Runways from 1,524 to 2,437 m:&quot; 2
**&quot;Runways from 914 to 1,523 m:&quot; 11
**&quot;Runways under 914 m:&quot; 23
*Heliports 1 (2006)

:&quot;see: List of airlines of Romania and List of airports in Romania&quot;

==Water transport ==

Romanian companies operate over 700 ships of which 400 are registered in Romania. Romania&#x27;s 110 shipping firms employ 12,500 personnel at sea and 15,500 on shore. Each year, 105 million tonnes of goods and 1 million passengers are transported by sea. Marine transport is responsible for 52% of Romania&#x27;s imports and exports.

===Ports===

* With terminals:
**Port of Constanța (the largest port and shipyard in the Black Sea and one of the busiest ports in Europe)
**Port of Galați (on the Danube)
**Brăila (on the Danube)
**Tulcea (on the Danube)
* Other Black Sea ports:
**Mangalia
**Sulina
**Năvodari
* Other ports on the Danube:
**Giurgiu
**Drobeta-Turnu Severin
**Oltenița
* Ports on the Danube-Black Sea Canal:
**Cernavodă
**Poarta Albă
**Constanța Sud
**Agigea

===Waterways===
As of 2006, there are 1,731 km of navigable waterways of which:
* 1,075 km on Danube River
* 524 km on secondary branches
* 132 km on canals

In 2004, according to europaworld.com, 19 million passenger-km and 4 billion ton-km were carried through these waterways.

===Merchant fleet===
The merchant marine has seen a dramatic drop in capacity during the first decade of the 21st century:
* from 142 ships ( or over) totaling / 1999
* to 19 ships ( or over) / in 2007.

These include: 13 cargo ships, 1 passenger ship, 2 passenger/cargo ships, 2 petroleum tankers, 1 roll-on/roll-off.

50 other ships are registered in other countries: Cambodia 1, Georgia 15, North Korea 6, Malta 10, Marshall Islands 1, Panama 8, Sierra Leone 2, Saint Kitts and Nevis 1, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 1, Syria 4, Tuvalu 1, unknown 4.

===International sea-borne freight traffic===
* Goods loaded: 18.2 million tons
* Goods unloaded: 22.3 million tons (2004)

==Pipelines==
*Oil: 2,427 km
*Natural gas: 3,508 km (2006)

==See also==

*List of airports in Romania
*Automotive industry in Romania
*License plates in Romania
*Highways in Romania
*Plug-in electric vehicles in Romania
*Tourism in Romania

==References==
==External links==

* Prediction of Romanian infrastructure.
* Trains Timetable of Romania
* Bus Timetable of Romania
* Bucharest Airport Henri Coandă
* Cluj-Napoca International Airport
* Timișoara Airport Traian Vuia
* Luxury Taxi Transportation
* Airport transfers in Romania</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="33" end="40" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="98" end="138" title="Government of Romania#Ministries" label="Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="349" end="355" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q79808" start="385" end="394" title="Constanța" label="Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="436" end="445" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q257631" start="480" end="497" title="Bucharest Airport" label="Bucharest Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q795231" start="663" end="666" title="Căile Ferate Române" label="CFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="688" end="704" title="Public transport" label="Public transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="807" end="813" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q126822" start="815" end="818" title="Olt River" label="Olt"/>
<link wikidata="Q207493" start="823" end="828" title="Mureș River" label="Mureș"/>
<link wikidata="Q194029" start="902" end="913" title="Roman roads" label="Roman roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="1116" end="1125" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q83404" start="1127" end="1136" title="Timișoara" label="Timișoara"/>
<link wikidata="Q100188" start="1138" end="1149" title="Cluj-Napoca" label="Cluj-Napoca"/>
<link wikidata="Q93358" start="1154" end="1160" title="Oradea" label="Oradea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312102" start="1238" end="1263" title="ground level power supply" label="ground level power supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q93358" start="1267" end="1273" title="Oradea" label="Oradea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="1330" end="1342" title="CIA Factbook" label="CIA Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973708" start="1441" end="1473" title="National Institute of Statistics (Romania)" label="National Institute of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049667" start="1602" end="1611" title="Road surface" label="pavements"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1647" end="1655" title="Road surface#Concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q189259" start="1688" end="1695" title="Asphalt concrete" label="asphalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328263" start="1729" end="1734" title="Pavers (flooring)" label="stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q757022" start="1751" end="1762" title="Sett (paving)" label="sett paving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996907" start="1766" end="1777" title="cobblestone" label="cobblestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q700143" start="1806" end="1816" title="dirt roads" label="dirt roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q429181" start="2149" end="2160" title="A1 motorway (Romania)" label="A1 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q652838" start="2278" end="2293" title="Curtea de Argeș" label="Curtea de Argeș"/>
<link wikidata="Q187938" start="2294" end="2301" title="Pitești" label="Pitești"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053747" start="2311" end="2318" title="Margina" label="Margina"/>
<link wikidata="Q678246" start="2319" end="2325" title="Holdea" label="Holdea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16427418" start="2338" end="2343" title="Boița" label="Boița"/>
<link wikidata="Q652838" start="2344" end="2359" title="Curtea de Argeș" label="Curtea de Argeș"/>
<link wikidata="Q429447" start="2438" end="2449" title="A2 motorway (Romania)" label="A2 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q79808" start="2559" end="2568" title="Constanța" label="Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q429582" start="2593" end="2604" title="A3 motorway (Romania)" label="A3 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="2691" end="2700" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q93358" start="2704" end="2710" title="Oradea" label="Oradea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057432" start="2771" end="2778" title="Chețani" label="Chețani"/>
<link wikidata="Q458422" start="2779" end="2792" title="Câmpia Turzii" label="Câmpia Turzii"/>
<link wikidata="Q16426202" start="2847" end="2855" title="Nădășelu" label="Nădășelu"/>
<link wikidata="Q789125" start="2966" end="2977" title="A4 motorway (Romania)" label="A4 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q596043" start="3008" end="3014" title="Ovidiu" label="Ovidiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q516748" start="3018" end="3024" title="Agigea" label="Agigea"/>
<link wikidata="Q79808" start="3044" end="3053" title="Constanța" label="Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q936239" start="3105" end="3115" title="Vama Veche" label="Vama Veche"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="3136" end="3144" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15401612" start="3152" end="3163" title="A6 motorway (Romania)" label="A6 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q258981" start="3219" end="3224" title="Lugoj" label="Lugoj"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="3287" end="3292" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="3294" end="3302" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="3307" end="3313" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q26764648" start="3402" end="3413" title="A7 motorway (Romania)" label="A7 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q179585" start="3439" end="3447" title="Ploiești" label="Ploiești"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737004" start="3569" end="3574" title="Bacău" label="Bacău"/>
<link wikidata="Q14760455" start="3622" end="3634" title="A10 motorway (Romania)" label="A10 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q732376" start="3704" end="3709" title="Sebeș" label="Sebeș"/>
<link wikidata="Q209809" start="3724" end="3729" title="Turda" label="Turda"/>
<link wikidata="Q25467153" start="3813" end="3825" title="A11 motorway (Romania)" label="A11 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q173591" start="3899" end="3903" title="Arad, Romania" label="Arad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="4691" end="4702" title="rapid transit" label="underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q622884" start="4739" end="4754" title="Bucharest Metro" label="Bucharest Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982647" start="4763" end="4783" title="Bucharest Light rail" label="Bucharest Light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280353" start="4798" end="4835" title="Regia Autonomă de Transport București" label="Regia Autonomă de Transport București"/>
<link wikidata="Q12071401" start="4881" end="4915" title="Transport in Bucharest" label="Bucharest public transport network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056949" start="4990" end="4992" title="M1 Line (Bucharest Metro)" label="M1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884455" start="4994" end="4996" title="M2 Line" label="M2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735258" start="4998" end="5000" title="M3 Line" label="M3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552821" start="5002" end="5004" title="Bucharest Metro Line M4" label="M4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641397" start="5010" end="5012" title="Bucharest Metro Line M5" label="M5"/>
<link wikidata="Q622884" start="5021" end="5029" title="Metrorex" label="Metrorex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982649" start="5303" end="5305" title="Bucharest Metro Line M6" label="M6"/>
<link wikidata="Q97196987" start="5434" end="5451" title="Cluj-Napoca Metro" label="Cluj-Napoca Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q240656" start="5638" end="5643" title="TAROM" label="TAROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q804561" start="5677" end="5685" title="Blue Air" label="Blue Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q335147" start="5692" end="5700" title="Wizz Air" label="Wizz Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q184590" start="5860" end="5866" title="runway" label="runway"/>
<link wikidata="Q502074" start="6176" end="6184" title="Heliport" label="Heliport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605284" start="6208" end="6235" title="List of airlines of Romania" label="List of airlines of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553638" start="6240" end="6267" title="List of airports in Romania" label="List of airports in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q822981" start="6666" end="6683" title="Port of Constanța" label="Port of Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="6722" end="6731" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231140" start="6774" end="6788" title="Port of Galați" label="Port of Galați"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="6797" end="6803" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q188478" start="6807" end="6813" title="Brăila" label="Brăila"/>
<link wikidata="Q11585" start="6832" end="6838" title="Tulcea" label="Tulcea"/>
<link wikidata="Q467498" start="6882" end="6890" title="Mangalia" label="Mangalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q328647" start="6893" end="6899" title="Sulina" label="Sulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q837960" start="6902" end="6910" title="Năvodari" label="Năvodari"/>
<link wikidata="Q202351" start="6942" end="6949" title="Giurgiu" label="Giurgiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q193890" start="6952" end="6973" title="Drobeta-Turnu Severin" label="Drobeta-Turnu Severin"/>
<link wikidata="Q737188" start="6976" end="6984" title="Oltenița" label="Oltenița"/>
<link wikidata="Q592260" start="7000" end="7022" title="Danube-Black Sea Canal" label="Danube-Black Sea Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q736276" start="7026" end="7035" title="Cernavodă" label="Cernavodă"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188568" start="7038" end="7049" title="Poarta Albă" label="Poarta Albă"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7052" end="7065" title="Constanța Sud" label="Constanța Sud"/>
<link wikidata="Q516748" start="7068" end="7074" title="Agigea" label="Agigea"/>
<link wikidata="Q865132" start="7382" end="7397" title="merchant marine" label="merchant marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q105999" start="7579" end="7589" title="cargo ship" label="cargo ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055880" start="7594" end="7608" title="passenger ship" label="passenger ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q14928" start="7637" end="7654" title="oil tanker" label="petroleum tankers"/>
<link wikidata="Q473932" start="7658" end="7674" title="roll-on/roll-off" label="roll-on/roll-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="7727" end="7735" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="7739" end="7746" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="7751" end="7762" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="7766" end="7771" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="7776" end="7792" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="7796" end="7802" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="7806" end="7818" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q763" start="7822" end="7843" title="Saint Kitts and Nevis" label="Saint Kitts and Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q757" start="7847" end="7879" title="Saint Vincent and the Grenadines" label="Saint Vincent and the Grenadines"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="7883" end="7888" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="7892" end="7898" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553638" start="8113" end="8140" title="List of airports in Romania" label="List of airports in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q20072531" start="8142" end="8172" title="Automotive industry in Romania" label="Automotive industry in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051573" start="8174" end="8199" title="License plates in Romania" label="License plates in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q978928" start="8201" end="8220" title="Highways in Romania" label="Highways in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q118875298" start="8222" end="8258" title="Plug-in electric vehicles in Romania" label="Plug-in electric vehicles in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q724706" start="8260" end="8278" title="Tourism in Romania" label="Tourism in Romania"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25644" wikidata="Q871836" url="?curid=25644" title="Foreign relations of Romania">
<text>The foreign relations of Romania is the policy arm of the government of Romania which guides its interactions with other nations, their citizens, and foreign organizations, as well as its status as a member of the European Union (EU), the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), and other key international organizations. Since the end of the Cold War and the 1989 Romanian Revolution, Romania has pursued a foreign policy centered on Euro-Atlantic integration, joining NATO in 2004 and the EU in 2007. Prioritizing multilateralism, collective security, and democratic values, Romania maintains active diplomatic relations with neighboring states, including Ukraine, Moldova, Hungary, and Bulgaria, while fostering regional cooperation through initiatives such as the Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC) and the Three Seas Initiative. 

Romania is classified by scholars and international relations experts as a middle power, a designation reflecting its moderate but influential role in international relations and regional relations. Analysts highlight Romania&#x27;s strategic geographic position, growing economic capacity, and active participation in multilateral institutions as key factors underpinning this status.

== Diplomatic relations ==
List of countries which Romania maintains diplomatic relations with:
==Relations by continent==
===Multilateral===
===Europe (Inside the European Union)===

Romania joined the European Union (EU) on January 1, 2007.

===Europe (Outside of the European Union)===
===Asia===
===Africa: Arab Maghreb Union (AMU)===
===Africa: Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS)===
===Africa: East African Community (EAC)===
===North America and the Caribbean===
===South and Central America===
===Oceania===
== International organisations ==
Romania is a member of the following international organisations:

* Council of Europe
* International Atomic Energy Agency
* International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement
* International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
* NATO
* United Nations
* International Maritime Organization
* Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
* Black Sea Trade and Development Bank
* Union for the Mediterranean
* Antarctic Treaty System (without consulting status)
* Asia–Europe Meeting
* European Patent Organisation
* Interpol
* European Space Agency

==See also==
* List of diplomatic missions in Romania
* List of diplomatic missions of Romania
* List of Romanian diplomats
* Romania&#x27;s foreign policy in the years preceding the outbreak of the World War I

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q871836" start="4" end="32" title="Foreign relations of Romania" label="foreign relations of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528718" start="58" end="79" title="government of Romania" label="government of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="214" end="228" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="239" end="273" title="North Atlantic Treaty Organization" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="346" end="354" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q204213" start="363" end="387" title="1989 Romanian Revolution" label="1989 Romanian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="438" end="463" title="Euro-Atlantic integration" label="Euro-Atlantic integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413574" start="519" end="534" title="multilateralism" label="multilateralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237584" start="536" end="555" title="collective security" label="collective security"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="561" end="578" title="democratic values" label="democratic values"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889" start="605" end="625" title="diplomatic relations" label="diplomatic relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="661" end="668" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="670" end="677" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="679" end="686" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="692" end="700" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q380340" start="771" end="801" title="Black Sea Economic Cooperation" label="Black Sea Economic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q32069506" start="817" end="838" title="Three Seas Initiative" label="Three Seas Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="842" end="849" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826540" start="867" end="875" title="scholars" label="scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322988" start="917" end="929" title="middle power" label="middle power"/>
<link wikidata="Q166542" start="993" end="1016" title="international relations" label="international relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731645" start="1021" end="1039" title="Regionalism (international relations)" label="regional relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076595" start="1075" end="1104" title="Strategic geography" label="strategic geographic position"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1393" end="1407" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1432" end="1446" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1499" end="1513" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q370862" start="1540" end="1558" title="Arab Maghreb Union" label="Arab Maghreb Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q189966" start="1579" end="1631" title="ECCAS" label="Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q337456" start="1646" end="1668" title="East African Community" label="East African Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1681" end="1694" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="1703" end="1712" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="1865" end="1882" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="1885" end="1919" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="International Atomic Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="1922" end="1971" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069175" start="1974" end="2038" title="International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies" label="International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="2041" end="2045" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2048" end="2062" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="2065" end="2100" title="International Maritime Organization" label="International Maritime Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q380340" start="2103" end="2153" title="Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation" label="Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061083" start="2156" end="2192" title="Black Sea Trade and Development Bank" label="Black Sea Trade and Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q192177" start="2195" end="2222" title="Union for the Mediterranean" label="Union for the Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q182814" start="2225" end="2248" title="Antarctic Treaty System" label="Antarctic Treaty System"/>
<link wikidata="Q726746" start="2279" end="2298" title="Asia–Europe Meeting" label="Asia–Europe Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q685547" start="2301" end="2329" title="European Patent Organisation" label="European Patent Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="2332" end="2340" title="Interpol" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="2343" end="2364" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616522" start="2381" end="2419" title="List of diplomatic missions in Romania" label="List of diplomatic missions in Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982042" start="2422" end="2460" title="List of diplomatic missions of Romania" label="List of diplomatic missions of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595883" start="2463" end="2489" title="List of Romanian diplomats" label="List of Romanian diplomats"/>
<link wikidata="Q18549645" start="2492" end="2576" title="Romania&amp;#x27;s foreign policy in the years preceding the outbreak of the World War I" label="Romania&amp;#x27;s foreign policy in the years preceding the outbreak of the World War I"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25645" wikidata="Q1037" url="?curid=25645" title="Rwanda">
<text>Rwanda, officially the Republic of Rwanda, is a landlocked country in the Great Rift Valley of East Africa, where the African Great Lakes region and Southeast Africa converge. Located a few degrees south of the Equator, Rwanda is bordered by Uganda, Tanzania, Burundi, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is highly elevated, giving it the sobriquet &quot;land of a thousand hills&quot; (), with its geography dominated by mountains in the west and savanna to the southeast, with numerous lakes throughout the country. The climate is temperate to subtropical, with two rainy seasons and two dry seasons each year. It is the most densely populated mainland African country; among countries larger than 10,000 km2, it is the fifth-most densely populated country in the world. Its capital and largest city is Kigali.

Hunter-gatherers settled the territory in the Stone and Iron Ages, followed later by Bantu peoples. The population coalesced first into clans, and then into kingdoms. In the 15th century, one kingdom, under King Gihanga, managed to incorporate several of its close neighbor territories establishing the Kingdom of Rwanda. The Kingdom of Rwanda dominated from the mid-eighteenth century, with the Tutsi kings conquering others militarily, centralising power, and enacting unifying policies. In 1897, Germany colonized Rwanda as part of German East Africa, followed by Belgium, which took control in 1916 during World War I. Both European nations ruled through the Rwandan king and perpetuated a pro-Tutsi policy. The Hutu population revolted in 1959. They massacred numerous Tutsi and ultimately established an independent, Hutu-dominated republic in 1962 led by President Grégoire Kayibanda. A 1973 military coup overthrew Kayibanda and brought Juvénal Habyarimana to power, who retained the pro-Hutu policy. The Tutsi-led Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) launched a civil war in 1990. Habyarimana was assassinated in April 1994. Social tensions erupted in the Rwandan genocide that spanned one hundred days. The RPF ended the genocide with a military victory in July 1994.

Rwanda has been governed by the RPF as a &quot;de facto&quot; one-party state since 1994 with former commander Paul Kagame as President since 2000. The country has been governed by a series of centralized authoritarian governments since precolonial times. Although Rwanda has low levels of corruption compared with neighbouring countries, it ranks among the lowest in international measurements of government transparency, civil liberties and quality of life. The population is young and predominantly rural; Rwanda has one of the youngest populations in the world. Rwandans are drawn from just one cultural and linguistic group, the Banyarwanda. However, within this group there are three subgroups: the Hutu, Tutsi and Twa. The Twa are a forest-dwelling pygmy people and are often considered descendants of Rwanda&#x27;s earliest inhabitants. Christianity is the largest religion in the country; the principal and national language is Kinyarwanda, spoken by native Rwandans, with English, French and Swahili serving as additional official foreign languages.

Rwanda&#x27;s economy is based mostly on subsistence agriculture. Coffee and tea are the major cash crops that it exports. Tourism is a fast-growing sector and is now the country&#x27;s leading foreign exchange earner. As of the most recent survey in 2019/20, 48.8% of the population is affected by multidimensional poverty and an additional 22.7% vulnerable to it. The country is a member of the African Union, the United Nations, the Commonwealth of Nations (one of few member states that does not have any historical links with the British Empire), COMESA, OIF and the East African Community.

== History ==

Modern human settlement of what is now Rwanda dates from, at the latest, the last glacial period, either in the Neolithic period around 8000 BC, or in the long humid period which followed, up to around 3000 BC. Archaeological excavations have revealed evidence of sparse settlement by hunter-gatherers in the late Stone Age, followed by a larger population of early Iron Age settlers, who produced dimpled pottery and iron tools. These early inhabitants were the ancestors of the Twa, aboriginal pygmy hunter-gatherers who remain in Rwanda today. Then by 3,000BC, Central Sudanic and Kuliak farmers and herders began settling into Rwanda, followed by South Cushitic speaking herders in 2,000BC. The forest-dwelling Twa lost much of their habitat and moved to the mountain slopes. Between 800 BC and 1500 AD, a number of Bantu groups migrated into Rwanda, clearing forest land for agriculture. Historians have several theories regarding the nature of the Bantu migrations; one theory is that the first settlers were Hutu, while the Tutsi migrated later to form a distinct racial group, possibly of Nilo-hamitic origin. An alternative theory is that the migration was slow and steady, with incoming groups integrating into rather than conquering the existing society. Under this theory, the Hutu and Tutsi distinction arose later and was a class distinction rather than a racial one.

The earliest form of social organisation in the area was the clan (&quot;ubwoko&quot;). The clans were not limited to genealogical lineages or geographical area, and most included Hutu, Tutsi, and Twa. From the 15th century, the clans began to merge into kingdoms. One kingdom, under King Gihanga, managed to incorporate several of its close neighbor territories establishing the Kingdom of Rwanda. By 1700, around eight kingdoms had existed in the present-day Rwanda. One of these, the Kingdom of Rwanda ruled by the Tutsi Nyiginya clan, became increasingly dominant from the mid-eighteenth century. The kingdom reached its greatest extent during the nineteenth century under the reign of King Kigeli Rwabugiri. Rwabugiri conquered several smaller states, expanded the kingdom west and north, and initiated administrative reforms; these included , in which Tutsi patrons ceded cattle, and therefore privileged status, to Hutu or Tutsi clients in exchange for economic and personal service, and , a corvée system in which Hutu were forced to work for Tutsi chiefs. Rwabugiri&#x27;s changes caused a rift to grow between the Hutu and Tutsi populations. The Twa were better off than in pre-Kingdom days, with some becoming dancers in the royal court, but their numbers continued to decline.

The Berlin Conference of 1884 assigned the territory to the German Empire, who declared it to be part of German East Africa. In 1894, explorer Gustav Adolf von Götzen was the first European to cross the entire territory of Rwanda; he crossed from the south-east to Lake Kivu and met the king. In 1897, Germany established a presence in Rwanda with the formation of an alliance with the king, beginning the colonial era. The Germans did not significantly alter the social structure of the country, but exerted influence by supporting the king and the existing hierarchy, and delegating power to local chiefs. Belgian forces invaded Rwanda and Burundi in 1916, during World War I, and later, in 1922, they started to rule both Rwanda and Burundi as a League of Nations mandate called Ruanda-Urundi and started a period of more direct colonial rule. The Belgians simplified and centralised the power structure, introduced large-scale projects in education, health, public works, and agricultural supervision, including new crops and improved agricultural techniques to try to reduce the incidence of famine. Both the Germans and the Belgians, in the wake of New Imperialism, promoted Tutsi supremacy, considering the Hutu and Tutsi different races. In 1935, Belgium introduced an identity card system, which labelled each individual as either Tutsi, Hutu, Twa or Naturalised. While it had been previously possible for particularly wealthy Hutu to become honorary Tutsi, the identity cards prevented any further movement between the classes.

Belgium continued to rule Ruanda-Urundi (of which Rwanda formed the northern part) as a UN trust territory after the Second World War, with a mandate to oversee eventual independence. Tensions escalated between the Tutsi, who favoured early independence, and the Hutu emancipation movement, culminating in the 1959 Rwandan Revolution: Hutu activists began killing Tutsi and destroying their houses, forcing more than 100,000 people to seek refuge in neighbouring countries. In 1961, the suddenly pro-Hutu Belgians held a referendum in which the country voted to abolish the monarchy. Rwanda was separated from Burundi and gained independence on 1 July 1962, which is commemorated as Independence Day, a national holiday. Cycles of violence followed, with exiled Tutsi attacking from neighbouring countries and the Hutu retaliating with large-scale slaughter and repression of the Tutsi. In 1973, Juvénal Habyarimana took power in a military coup. Pro-Hutu discrimination continued, but there was greater economic prosperity and a reduced amount of violence against Tutsi. The Twa remained marginalised, and by 1990 were almost entirely forced out of the forests by the government; many became beggars. Rwanda&#x27;s population had increased from 1.6 million people in 1934 to 7.1 million in 1989, leading to competition for land.

In 1990, the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), a rebel group composed of Tutsi refugees, invaded northern Rwanda from their base in Uganda, initiating the Rwandan Civil War. The group condemned the Hutu-dominated government for failing to democratize and confront the problems facing these refugees. Neither side was able to gain a decisive advantage in the war, but by 1992 it had weakened Habyarimana&#x27;s authority; mass demonstrations forced him into a coalition with the domestic opposition and eventually to sign the 1993 Arusha Accords with the RPF. 
=== Rwandan genocide ===

The cease-fire ended on 6 April 1994 when Habyarimana&#x27;s plane was shot down near Kigali Airport, killing him. The shooting down of the plane served as the catalyst for the Rwandan genocide, which began within a few hours. Over the course of approximately 100 days, between 500,000 and 1,000,000 Tutsi and politically moderate Hutu were killed in well-planned attacks on the orders of the interim government. Many Twa were also killed, despite not being directly targeted.

The Tutsi RPF restarted their offensive, and took control of the country methodically, gaining control of the whole country by mid-July. The international response to the genocide was limited, with major powers reluctant to strengthen the already overstretched UN peacekeeping force. When the RPF took over, approximately two million Hutu fled to neighbouring countries, in particular Zaïre, fearing reprisals; additionally, the RPF-led army was a key belligerent in the First and Second Congo Wars. Within Rwanda, a period of reconciliation and justice began, with the establishment of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the reintroduction of , a traditional village court system. Since 2000 Rwanda&#x27;s economy, tourist numbers, and Human Development Index have grown rapidly; between 2006 and 2011 the poverty rate reduced from 57% to 45%, while life expectancy rose from 46.6 years in 2000 to 65.4 years in 2021.

===Since 1994===
In 2009, Rwanda joined the Commonwealth of Nations, although the country was never part of the British Empire.

On 25 January 2025, Rwanda was broken off from diplomatic ties with its neighbor, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in support of the country&#x27;s rebel groups, including the M23 Movement.

== Politics and government ==
Rwanda is a &quot;de facto&quot; one-party state ruled by the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) and its leader Paul Kagame continuously since the end of the civil war in 1994. Although Rwanda is nominally democratic, elections are manipulated in various ways, which include banning opposition parties, arresting or assassinating critics, and electoral fraud. The RPF is a Tutsi-dominated party but receives support from other communities as well.

The constitution was adopted following a national referendum in 2003, replacing the transitional constitution which had been in place since 1994. The constitution mandates a multi-party system of government, with politics based on democracy and elections. However, the constitution places conditions on how political parties may operate. Article 54 states that &quot;political organizations are prohibited from basing themselves on race, ethnic group, tribe, clan, region, sex, religion or any other division which may give rise to discrimination&quot;. The president of Rwanda is the head of state, and has broad powers including creating policy in conjunction with the Cabinet of Rwanda, commanding the armed forces, negotiating and ratifying treaties, signing presidential orders, and declaring war or a state of emergency. The president is elected every four years, and appoints the prime minister and all other members of the Cabinet. The Parliament consists of two chambers. It makes legislation and is empowered by the constitution to oversee the activities of the president and the Cabinet. The lower chamber is the Chamber of Deputies, which has 80 members serving five-year terms. Twenty-four of these seats are reserved for women, elected through a joint assembly of local government officials; another three seats are reserved for youth and disabled members; the remaining 53 are elected by universal suffrage under a proportional representation system.

Rwanda&#x27;s legal system is largely based on German and Belgian civil law systems and customary law. The judiciary is independent of the executive branch, although the president and the Senate are involved in the appointment of Supreme Court judges. Human Rights Watch has praised the Rwandan government for progress made in the delivery of justice including the abolition of the death penalty, but also alleges interference in the judicial system by members of the government, such as the politically motivated appointment of judges, misuse of prosecutorial power, and pressure on judges to make particular decisions. The constitution provides for two types of courts: ordinary and specialised. Ordinary courts are the Supreme Court, the High Court, and regional courts, while specialised courts are military courts and a system of commercial courts created in 2011 to expedite commercial litigations. Between 2004 and 2012, a system of &quot;Gacaca&quot; courts was in operation. , a Rwandan traditional court operated by villages and communities, was revived to expedite the trials of genocide suspects. The court succeeded in clearing the backlog of genocide cases, but was criticised by human rights groups as not meeting legal fair standard.

Rwanda has low corruption levels relative to most other African countries; in 2014, Transparency International ranked Rwanda as the fifth-cleanest out of 47 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and 55th-cleanest out of 175 in the world. The constitution provides for an ombudsman, whose duties include prevention and fighting of corruption. Public officials (including the president) are required by the constitution to declare their wealth to the ombudsman and to the public; those who do not comply are suspended from office. Despite this, Human Rights Watch notes extensive political repression throughout the country, including illegal and arbitrary detention, threats or other forms of intimidation, disappearances, politically motivated trials, and the massacre of peacefully protesting civilians.

Rwanda is a member of the United Nations, African Union, Francophonie, East African Community, and the Commonwealth of Nations. For many years during the Habyarimana regime, the country maintained close ties with France, as well as Belgium, the former colonial power. Under the RPF government, however, Rwanda has sought closer ties with neighbouring countries in the East African Community and with the English-speaking world. Diplomatic relations with France were suspended in 2006 following the indictment of Rwandan officials by a French judge, and despite their restoration in 2010, relations between the countries remain strained. Relations with the Democratic Republic of the Congo were tense following Rwanda&#x27;s involvement in the First and Second Congo Wars; the Congolese army alleged Rwandan attacks on their troops, while Rwanda blamed the Congolese government for failing to suppress Hutu rebels in North and South Kivu provinces. In 2010, the United Nations released a report accusing the Rwandan army of committing wide scale human rights violations and crimes against humanity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo during the First and Second Congo Wars, charges denied by the Rwandan government. Relations soured further in 2012, as Kinshasa accused Rwanda of supporting the M23 rebellion, an insurgency in the eastern Congo. In 2015 peace has been restored and relations were improving, but by January 2025 renewed Rwandan support for the M23 rebellion caused DR Congo to sever diplomatic relations in the wake of the 2025 Goma offensive.

Rwanda&#x27;s relationship with Uganda was also tense for much of the 2000s following a 1999 clash between the two countries&#x27; armies as they backed opposing rebel groups in the Second Congo War, but improved significantly in the early 2010s. In 2019, relations between the two countries deteriorated, with Rwanda closing its borders with Uganda.

== Administrative divisions ==

Before western colonization, the Rwandan government system had a quasi-system of political pluralism and power sharing. Despite there being a strict hierarchy, the pre-colonial system achieved an established, combined system of &quot;centralized power and decentralized autonomous units.&quot; Under the monarch, the elected Chief governed a province that was divided into multiple districts. Two other officials appointed by head Chief governed the districts; one official was allocated power over the land while the other oversaw cattle. The king () exercised control through a system of provinces, districts, hills, and neighbourhoods.
As of 2003, the constitution divided Rwanda into provinces (), districts (), cities, municipalities, towns, sectors (), cells (), and villages (); the larger divisions, and their borders, are established by Parliament. In January 2006, Rwanda was reorganized such that twelve provinces were merged to create five, and 106 districts were merged into thirty. The present borders drawn in 2006 aimed at decentralising power and removing associations with the old system and the genocide. The previous structure of twelve provinces associated with the largest cities was replaced with five provinces based primarily on geography. These are Northern Province, Southern Province, Eastern Province, Western Province, and the Municipality of Kigali in the centre.

The five provinces act as intermediaries between the national government and their constituent districts to ensure that national policies are implemented at the district level. The Rwanda Decentralisation Strategic Framework developed by the Ministry of Local Government assigns to provinces the responsibility for &quot;coordinating governance issues in the Province, as well as monitoring and evaluation&quot;. Each province is headed by a governor, appointed by the president and approved by the Senate. The districts are responsible for coordinating public service delivery and economic development. They are divided into sectors, which are responsible for the delivery of public services as mandated by the districts. Districts and sectors have directly elected councils, and are run by an executive committee selected by that council. The cells and villages are the smallest political units, providing a link between the people and the sectors. All adult resident citizens are members of their local cell council, from which an executive committee is elected. The city of Kigali is a provincial-level authority, which coordinates urban planning within the city.

== Geography ==
At , Rwanda is the world&#x27;s 149th-largest country, and the fourth smallest on the African mainland after Gambia, Eswatini, and Djibouti. It is comparable in size to Burundi, Haiti and Albania. The entire country is at a high altitude: the lowest point is the Rusizi River at above sea level. Rwanda is located in Central/Eastern Africa, and is bordered by the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the west, Uganda to the north, Tanzania to the east, and Burundi to the south. It lies a few degrees south of the equator and is landlocked. The capital, Kigali, is located near the centre of Rwanda.

The watershed between the major Congo and Nile drainage basins runs from north to south through Rwanda, with around 80% of the country&#x27;s area draining into the Nile and 20% into the Congo via the Rusizi River and Lake Tanganyika. The country&#x27;s longest river is the Nyabarongo, which rises in the south-west, flows north, east, and southeast before merging with the Ruvubu to form the Kagera; the Kagera then flows due north along the eastern border with Tanzania. The Nyabarongo-Kagera eventually drains into Lake Victoria, and its source in Nyungwe Forest is a contender for the as-yet undetermined overall source of the Nile. Rwanda has many lakes, the largest being Lake Kivu. This lake occupies the floor of the Albertine Rift along most of the length of Rwanda&#x27;s western border, and with a maximum depth of , it is one of the twenty deepest lakes in the world. Other sizeable lakes include Burera, Ruhondo, Muhazi, Rweru, and Ihema, the last being the largest of a string of lakes in the eastern plains of Akagera National Park.

Mountains dominate central and western Rwanda and the country is sometimes called &quot;&quot; in French (&quot;Land of a thousand hills&quot;). They are part of the Albertine Rift Mountains that flank the Albertine branch of the East African Rift, which runs from north to south along Rwanda&#x27;s western border. The highest peaks are found in the Virunga volcano chain in the northwest; this includes Mount Karisimbi, Rwanda&#x27;s highest point, at . This western section of the country lies within the Albertine Rift montane forests ecoregion. It has an elevation of . The centre of the country is predominantly rolling hills, while the eastern border region consists of savanna, plains and swamps.

=== Climate ===
Rwanda has a temperate tropical highland climate, with lower temperatures than are typical for equatorial countries because of its high elevation. Kigali, in the centre of the country, has a typical daily temperature range between , with little variation through the year. There are some temperature variations across the country; the mountainous west and north are generally cooler than the lower-lying east. There are two rainy seasons in the year; the first runs from February to June and the second from September to December. These are separated by two dry seasons: the major one from June to September, during which there is often no rain at all, and a shorter and less severe one from December to February. Rainfall varies geographically, with the west and northwest of the country receiving more precipitation annually than the east and southeast. Global warming has caused a change in the pattern of the rainy seasons. According to a report by the Strategic Foresight Group, change in climate has reduced the number of rainy days experienced during a year, but has also caused an increase in frequency of torrential rains. Both changes have caused difficulty for farmers, decreasing their productivity. Strategic Foresight also characterise Rwanda as a fast warming country, with an increase in average temperature of between 0.7 °C to 0.9 °C over fifty years.

=== Biodiversity ===

In prehistoric times, montane forest occupied one-third of the territory of present-day Rwanda. Naturally occurring vegetation is now mostly restricted to the three national parks, with terraced agriculture dominating the rest of the country. Nyungwe, the largest remaining tract of forest, contains 200 species of tree as well as orchids and begonias. Vegetation in the Volcanoes National Park is mostly bamboo and moorland, with small areas of forest. By contrast, Akagera has a savanna ecosystem in which acacia dominates the flora. There are several rare or endangered plant species in Akagera, including &quot;Markhamia lutea&quot; and &quot;Eulophia guineensis&quot;.

The greatest diversity of large mammals is found in the three national parks, which are designated conservation areas. Akagera contains typical savanna animals such as giraffes and elephants, while Volcanoes is home to an estimated one-third of the worldwide mountain gorilla population. Nyungwe Forest boasts thirteen primate species including common chimpanzees and Ruwenzori colobus arboreal monkeys; the Ruwenzori colobus move in groups of up to 400 individuals, the largest troop size of any primate in Africa.

Rwanda&#x27;s population of lions was destroyed in the aftermath of the genocide of 1994, as national parks were turned into camps for displaced people and the remaining animals were poisoned by cattle herders. In June 2015, two South African parks donated seven lions to Akagera National Park, reestablishing a lion population in Rwanda. The lions were held initially in a fenced-off area of the park, and then collared and released into the wild a month later.

Eighteen endangered black rhinos were brought to Rwanda in 2017 from South Africa. After positive results, five more black rhinos were delivered to Akagera National Park from zoos all over Europe in 2019.

Similarly, the white rhino population is growing in Rwanda. In 2021, Rwanda received 30 white rhinos from South Africa with the goal of Akagera being a safe breeding ground for the near-threatened species.

There are 670 bird species in Rwanda, with variation between the east and the west. Nyungwe Forest, in the west, has 280 recorded species, of which 26 are endemic to the Albertine Rift; endemic species include the Rwenzori turaco and handsome spurfowl. Eastern Rwanda, by contrast, features savanna birds such as the black-headed gonolek and those associated with swamps and lakes, including storks and cranes.

Recent entomological work in the country has revealed a rich diversity of praying mantises, including a new species &quot;Dystacta tigrifrutex&quot;, dubbed the &quot;bush tiger mantis&quot;.

Rwanda contains three terrestrial ecoregions: Albertine Rift montane forests, Victoria Basin forest-savanna mosaic, and Ruwenzori-Virunga montane moorlands. The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 3.85/10, ranking it 139th globally out of 172 countries.

== Economy ==
Rwanda&#x27;s economy suffered heavily during the 1994 genocide, with widespread loss of life, failure to maintain infrastructure, looting, and neglect of important cash crops. This caused a large drop in GDP and destroyed the country&#x27;s ability to attract private and external investment. The economy has since strengthened, with per-capita nominal GDP estimated at $909.9 in 2022, compared with $127 in 1994. As of the most recent survey in 2019/20, 48.8% of the population continues to be affected by multidimensional poverty and an additional 22.7% vulnerable to it. Major export markets include China, Germany, and the United States. The economy is managed by the central National Bank of Rwanda and the currency is the Rwandan franc; in December 2023, the exchange rate was 1250 francs to one United States dollar. Rwanda joined the East African Community in 2007, and has ratified a plan for monetary union amongst the seven member nations, which could eventually lead to a common East African shilling.

Rwanda is a country of few natural resources, and the economy is based mostly on subsistence agriculture by local farmers using simple tools. An estimated 90% of the working population farms, and agriculture constituted an estimated 32.5% of GDP in 2014. Farming techniques are basic, with small plots of land and steep slopes. Since the mid-1980s, farm sizes and food production have been decreasing, due in part to the resettlement of displaced people. Despite Rwanda&#x27;s fertile ecosystem, food production often does not keep pace with population growth, and food imports are required. However, in recent years with the growth of agriculture, the situation has improved.

Subsistence crops grown in the country include matoke (green bananas), which occupy more than a third of the country&#x27;s farmland, potatoes, beans, sweet potatoes, cassava, wheat and maize. Coffee and tea are the major cash crops for export, with the high altitudes, steep slopes and volcanic soils providing favourable conditions. Reports have established that more than 400,000 Rwandans make their living from coffee plantation. Reliance on agricultural exports makes Rwanda vulnerable to shifts in their prices. Animals raised in Rwanda include cows, goats, sheep, pigs, chicken, and rabbits, with geographical variation in the numbers of each. Production systems are mostly traditional, although there are a few intensive dairy farms around Kigali. Shortages of land and water, insufficient and poor-quality feed, and regular disease epidemics with insufficient veterinary services are major constraints that restrict output. Fishing takes place on the country&#x27;s lakes, but stocks are very depleted, and live fish are being imported in an attempt to revive the industry.

The industrial sector is small, contributing 14.8% of GDP in 2014. Products manufactured include cement, agricultural products, small-scale beverages, soap, furniture, shoes, plastic goods, textiles and cigarettes. Rwanda&#x27;s mining industry is an important contributor, generating US$93 million in 2008. Minerals mined include cassiterite, wolframite, gold, and coltan, which is used in the manufacture of electronic and communication devices such as mobile phones.

Rwanda&#x27;s service sector suffered during the late-2000s recession as bank lending, foreign aid projects and investment were reduced. The sector rebounded in 2010, becoming the country&#x27;s largest sector by economic output and contributing 43.6% of the country&#x27;s GDP. Key tertiary contributors include banking and finance, wholesale and retail trade, hotels and restaurants, transport, storage, communication, insurance, real estate, business services and public administration including education and health.

Tourism is one of the fastest-growing economic resources and became the country&#x27;s leading foreign exchange earner in 2007. In spite of the genocide&#x27;s legacy, the country is increasingly perceived internationally as a safe destination. The number of tourist arrivals in 2013 was 864,000 people, up from 504,000 in 2010. Revenue from tourism was US$303 million in 2014, up from just US$62 million in 2000. The largest contributor to this revenue was mountain gorilla tracking, in the Volcanoes National Park; Rwanda is one of only three countries in which mountain gorillas can be visited safely; the gorillas attract thousands of visitors per year, who are prepared to pay high prices for permits. Other attractions include Nyungwe Forest, home to chimpanzees, Ruwenzori colobus and other primates, the resorts of Lake Kivu, and Akagera, a small savanna reserve in the east of the country.

Rwanda was ranked 104th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024.

=== Media and communications ===

The largest radio and television stations are state-run, and the majority of newspapers are owned by the government. Most Rwandans have access to radio; during the 1994 genocide, the radio station Radio Télévision Libre des Mille Collines broadcast across the country, and helped to fuel the killings through anti-Tutsi propaganda. , the state-run Radio Rwanda was the largest station and the main source of news throughout the country. Television access was limited, with most homes not having their own set. The government rolled out digital television in 2014, and a year later there were seven national stations operating, up from just one in the pre-2014 analogue era. The press is tightly restricted, and newspapers routinely self-censor to avoid government reprisals. Nonetheless, publications in Kinyarwanda, English, and French critical of the government are widely available in Kigali. Restrictions were increased in the run-up to the Rwandan presidential election of 2010, with two independent newspapers, &quot;Umuseso&quot; and &quot;Umuvugizi&quot;, being suspended for six months by the High Media Council.

The country&#x27;s oldest telecommunications group, Rwandatel, went into liquidation in 2011, having been 80% owned by Libyan company LAP Green. The company was acquired in 2013 by Liquid Telecom, a company providing telecommunications and fibre optic networks across eastern and southern Africa. , Liquid Telecom provided landline service to 30,968 subscribers, with mobile operator MTN Rwanda serving an additional 15,497 fixed line subscribers. Landlines are mostly used by government institutions, banks, NGOs and embassies, with private subscription levels low. , mobile phone penetration in the country is 72.6%, up from 41.6% in 2011. MTN Rwanda is the leading provider, with 3,957,986 subscribers, followed by Tigo with 2,887,328, and Bharti Airtel with 1,336,679. Rwandatel has also previously operated a mobile phone network, but the industry regulator revoked its licence in April 2011, following the company&#x27;s failure to meet agreed investment commitments. Internet penetration is low but rising rapidly; in 2015 there were 12.8 internet users per 100 people, up from 2.1 in 2007. In 2011, a fibre-optic telecommunications network was completed, intended to provide broadband services and facilitate electronic commerce. This network is connected to SEACOM, a submarine fibre-optic cable connecting communication carriers in southern and eastern Africa. Within Rwanda the cables run along major roads, linking towns around the country. Mobile provider MTN also runs a wireless internet service accessible in most areas of Kigali via pre-paid subscription. As of 2024, the largest internet providers are MTN and Airtel. MTN Rwanda has shown impressive growth in its subscriber base. As of the first quarter of 2024, MTN Rwanda had approximately 7.4 million mobile subscribers. (Additionally, their Mobile Money platform, MoMo, had around 5.1 million users), compared to Airtel Rwanda&#x27;s 5,792,046 active mobile-cellular telephone subscriptions.
In October 2019, Mara Corporation launched the first African-made smartphone in Rwanda. Following its launch in 2024, Airtel Rwanda, in cooperation with the Rwandan government, released the most affordable smartphone in the world, the Airtel Imagine 4G. The phone was introduced as part of the ConnectRwanda 2.0 initiative. It costs only 20,000 RWF (approximately 14.49 USD).

=== Infrastructure ===

The Rwandan government prioritised funding of water supply development during the 2000s, significantly increasing its share of the national budget. This funding, along with donor support, caused a rapid increase in access to safe water; in 2015, 74% of the population had access to safe water, up from about 55% in 2005; the government has committed to increasing this to 100% by 2017. The country&#x27;s water infrastructure consists of urban and rural systems that deliver water to the public, mainly through standpipes in rural areas and private connections in urban areas. In areas not served by these systems, hand pumps and managed springs are used. Despite rainfall exceeding annually in most of the country, little use is made of rainwater harvesting, and residents are forced to use water very sparingly, relative to usage in other African countries. Access to sanitation remains low; the United Nations estimates that in 2006, 34% of urban and 20% of rural dwellers had access to improved sanitation, with this statistic increasing to 92% for the total population (95% urban and 91% urban) in 2022. Kigali is one of the cleanest cities in Africa. Government policy measures to improve sanitation are limited, focusing only on urban areas. The majority of the population, both urban and rural, use public shared pit latrines.

Rwanda&#x27;s electricity supply was, until the early 2000s, generated almost entirely from hydroelectric sources; power stations on Lakes Burera and Ruhondo provided 90% of the country&#x27;s electricity. A combination of below average rainfall and human activity, including the draining of the Rugezi wetlands for cultivation and grazing, caused the two lakes&#x27; water levels to fall from 1990 onwards; by 2004 levels were reduced by 50%, leading to a sharp drop in output from the power stations. This, coupled with increased demand as the economy grew, precipitated a shortfall in 2004 and widespread loadshedding. As an emergency measure, the government installed diesel generators north of Kigali; by 2006 these were providing 56% of the country&#x27;s electricity, but were very costly. The government enacted a number of measures to alleviate this problem, including rehabilitating the Rugezi wetlands, which supply water to Burera and Ruhondo and investing in a scheme to extract methane gas from Lake Kivu, expected in its first phase to increase the country&#x27;s power generation by 40%. Only 18% of the population had access to electricity in 2012, though this had risen from 10.8% in 2009. The government&#x27;s Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy for 2013–18 aims to increase access to electricity to 70% of households by 2017.

The government has increased investment in the transport infrastructure of Rwanda since the 1994 genocide, with aid from the United States, European Union, Japan, and others. The transport system consists primarily of the road network, with paved roads between Kigali and most other major cities and towns in the country. Rwanda is linked by road to other countries in the East African Community, namely Uganda, Tanzania, Burundi and Kenya, as well as to the eastern Congolese cities of Goma and Bukavu; the country&#x27;s most important trade route is the road to the port of Mombasa via Kampala and Nairobi, which is known as the Northern Corridor. The principal form of public transport in the country is the minibus, accounting for more than half of all passenger carrying capacity. Some minibuses, particularly in Kigali, operate an unscheduled service, under a shared taxi system, while others run to a schedule, offering express routes between the major cities. There are a smaller number of large buses, which operate a scheduled service around the country. The principal private hire vehicle is the motorcycle taxi; in 2013 there were 9,609 registered motorcycle taxis in Rwanda, compared with just 579 taxicabs. Coach services are available to various destinations in neighbouring countries. The country has an international airport at Kigali that serves several international destinations, the busiest routes being those to Nairobi and Entebbe; there is one domestic route, between Kigali and Kamembe Airport near Cyangugu. In 2017, construction began on the Bugesera International Airport, to the south of Kigali, which will become the country&#x27;s largest when it opens, complementing the existing Kigali airport. The national carrier is RwandAir, and the country is served by seven foreign airlines. the country had no railways, but there is a project underway, in conjunction with Burundi and Tanzania, to extend the Tanzanian Central Line into Rwanda; the three countries have invited expressions of interest from private firms to form a public private partnership for the scheme. There is no public water transport between the port cities on Lake Kivu, although a limited private service exists and the government has initiated a programme to develop a full service. The Ministry of Infrastructure is also investigating the feasibility of linking Rwanda to Lake Victoria via shipping on the Akagera River.

== Demographics ==
, the National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda estimated Rwanda&#x27;s population to be 11,262,564, while the projection for 2022 was 13,246,394. The 2012 census recorded a population of 10,515,973. The population is young: in the 2012 census, 43.3% of the population were aged 15 and under, and 53.4% were between 16 and 64. According to the CIA &quot;World Factbook&quot;, the annual birth rate is estimated at 40.2 births per 1,000 inhabitants in 2015, and the death rate at 14.9. The life expectancy is 67.67 years (69.27 years for females and 67.11 years for males), which is the 26th lowest out of 224 countries and territories. The overall sex ratio of the country is 95.9 males per 100 females.

At , Rwanda&#x27;s population density is amongst the highest in Africa. Historians such as Gérard Prunier believe that the 1994 genocide can be partly attributed to the population density. The population is predominantly rural, with a few large towns; dwellings are evenly spread throughout the country. The only sparsely populated area of the country is the savanna land in the former province of Umutara and Akagera National Park in the east. Kigali is the largest city, with a population of around one million. Its rapidly increasing population challenges its infrastructural development. According to the 2012 census, the second largest city is Gisenyi, which lies adjacent to Lake Kivu and the Congolese city of Goma, and has a population of 126,000. Other major towns include Ruhengeri, Butare, and Muhanga, all with populations below 100,000. The urban population rose from 6% of the population in 1990, to 16.6% in 2006; by 2011, however, the proportion had dropped slightly, to 14.8%.

Rwanda has been a unified state since pre-colonial times, and the population is drawn from just one cultural and linguistic group, the Banyarwanda; this contrasts with most modern African states, whose borders were drawn by colonial powers and did not correspond to ethnic boundaries or pre-colonial kingdoms. Within the Banyarwanda people, there are three separate groups, the Hutu, Tutsi and Twa. The CIA &quot;World Factbook&quot; gives estimates that the Hutu made up 84% of the population in 2009, the Tutsi 15% and Twa 1%. The Twa are a pygmy people who descend from Rwanda&#x27;s earliest inhabitants, but scholars do not agree on the origins of and differences between the Hutu and Tutsi. Anthropologist Jean Hiernaux contends that the Tutsi are a separate race, with a tendency towards &quot;long and narrow heads, faces and noses&quot;; others, such as Villia Jefremovas, believe there is no discernible physical difference and the categories were not historically rigid. In precolonial Rwanda the Tutsi were the ruling class, from whom the kings and the majority of chiefs were derived, while the Hutu were agriculturalists. The current government discourages the Hutu/Tutsi/Twa distinction, and has removed such classification from identity cards. The 2002 census was the first since 1933 which did not categorise Rwandan population into the three groups.

=== Education ===


Prior to 2012, the Rwandan government provided free education in state-run schools for nine years: six years in primary and three years following a common secondary programme. In 2012, this started to be expanded to 12 years. A 2015 study suggests that while enrollment rates in primary schools are &quot;near ubiquity&quot;, rates of completion are low and repetition rates high. While schooling is fee-free, there is an expectation that parents should contribute to the cost of their children&#x27;s education by providing them with school supplies, supporting teacher development and making a contribution to school construction. According to the government, these costs should not be a basis for the exclusion of children from education, however. There are many private schools across the country, some church-run, which follow the same syllabus but charge fees. From 1994 until 2009, secondary education was offered in either French or English; because of the country&#x27;s increasing ties with the East African Community and the Commonwealth, only the English syllabi are now offered. The country has a number of institutions of tertiary education. In 2013, the public University of Rwanda (UR) was created out of a merger of the former National University of Rwanda and the country&#x27;s other public higher education institutions. In 2013, the gross enrollment ratio for tertiary education in Rwanda was 7.9%, from 3.6% in 2006. The country&#x27;s literacy rate, defined as those aged 15 or over who can read and write, was 78.8% in 2022, up from 71% in 2009, 58% in 1991, and 38% in 1978.

=== Health ===

The quality of healthcare in Rwanda has historically been very low, both before and immediately after the 1994 genocide. In 1998, more than one in five children died before their fifth birthday, often from malaria.

President Kagame has made healthcare one of the priorities for the Vision 2020 development programme, boosting spending on health care to 6.5% of the country&#x27;s gross domestic product in 2013, compared with 1.9% in 1996. The government has devolved the financing and management of healthcare to local communities, through a system of health insurance providers called &quot;mutuelles de santé&quot;. The &quot;mutuelles&quot; were piloted in 1999, and were made available nationwide by the mid-2000s, with the assistance of international development partners. Premiums under the scheme were initially US$2 per annum; since 2011 the rate has varied on a sliding scale, with the poorest paying nothing, and maximum premiums rising to US$8 per adult. , more than 90% of the population was covered by the scheme. The government has also set up training institutes including the Kigali Health Institute (KHI), which was established in 1997 and is now part of the University of Rwanda. In 2005, President Kagame also launched a program known as &quot;The Presidents&#x27; Malaria Initiative&quot;. This initiative aimed to help get the most necessary materials for prevention of malaria to the most rural areas of Rwanda, such as mosquito nets and medication.

In recent years Rwanda has seen improvement on a number of key health indicators. Between 2005 and 2013, life expectancy increased from 55.2 to 64.0, under-5 mortality decreased from 106.4 to 52.0 per 1,000 live births, and incidence of tuberculosis has dropped from 101 to 69 per 100,000 people. The country&#x27;s progress in healthcare has been cited by the international media and charities. &quot;The Atlantic&quot; devoted an article to &quot;Rwanda&#x27;s Historic Health Recovery&quot;. Partners In Health described the health gains &quot;among the most dramatic the world has seen in the last 50 years&quot;.

Despite these improvements, however, the country&#x27;s health profile remains dominated by communicable diseases, and the United States Agency for International Development has described &quot;significant health challenges&quot;, including the rate of maternal mortality, which it describes as &quot;unacceptably high&quot;, as well as the ongoing HIV/AIDS epidemic. According to the American Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, travellers to Rwanda are highly recommended to take preventive malaria medication as well as make sure they are up to date with vaccines such as yellow fever.

Rwanda also has a shortage of medical professionals, with only 0.84 physicians, nurses, and midwives per 1,000 residents. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) is monitoring the country&#x27;s health progress towards Millennium Development Goals 4–6, which relate to healthcare. A mid-2015 UNDP report noted that the country was not on target to meet goal 4 on infant mortality, despite it having &quot;fallen dramatically&quot;; the country is &quot;making good progress&quot; towards goal 5, which is to reduce by three quarters the maternal mortality ratio, while goal 6 is not yet met as HIV prevalence has not started falling.

===Religion===
The largest faith in Rwanda is Catholicism, but there have been significant changes in the nation&#x27;s religious demographics since the genocide, with many conversions to evangelical Christianity, and, to a lesser degree, Islam. According to the 2012 census, Catholic Christians represented 43.7% of the population, Protestants (excluding Seventh-day Adventists) 37.7%, Seventh-day Adventists 11.8%, and Muslims 2.0%; 0.2% claimed no religious beliefs and 1.3% did not state a religion. Traditional religion, despite officially being followed by only 0.1% of the population, retains an influence. Many Rwandans view the Christian God as synonymous with the traditional Rwandan God &quot;Imana&quot;.

===Languages===

The country&#x27;s principal and national language is Kinyarwanda, which is virtually spoken by the entire country (98%). The major European languages during the colonial era were German, though it was never taught or widely used, and then French, which was introduced by Belgium from 1916 and remained an official and widely spoken language after independence in 1962. Dutch was spoken as well. The return of English-speaking Rwandan refugees in the 1990s added a new dimension to the country&#x27;s language policy, and the repositioning of Rwanda as a member of the East African Community has since increased the importance of English; the medium of education was switched from French to English in 2008. Kinyarwanda, English, French, and Swahili are all official languages. Kinyarwanda is the national language while English is the primary medium of instruction in secondary and tertiary education. Swahili, the lingua franca of the East African Community, is also spoken by some as a second language, particularly returned refugees from Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, and the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), and those who live along the border with the DRC. In 2015, Swahili was introduced as a mandatory subject in secondary schools. Inhabitants of Rwanda&#x27;s Nkombo Island speak Mashi, a language closely related to Kinyarwanda.

French was spoken by slightly under 6% of the population according to the 2012 census and the &quot;Organisation internationale de la Francophonie&quot;.
English was reported to be spoken by 15% of the population in 2009, though the same report found the proportion of French-speakers to be 68%.
Swahili is spoken by fewer than 1%.

===Human rights===

Homosexuality is generally considered a taboo topic, and there is no significant public discussion of this issue in any region of the country. Some lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) Rwandans have reported being harassed and blackmailed. Same-sex sexual activity is not specifically illegal in Rwanda. Some cabinet-level government officials have expressed support for the rights of LGBT people; however, no special legislative protections are afforded to LGBT people, who may be arrested by the police under various laws dealing with public order and morality. Same-sex marriages are not recognized by the state, as the constitution provides that &quot;[o]nly civil monogamous marriage between a man and a woman is recognized&quot;.

Since 2006, Human Rights Watch has documented that Rwandan authorities round up and detain street children, street vendors, sex workers, homeless people, and beggars. They have also documented the use of torture in safe houses and other facilities, such as Kami military camp, Kwa Gacinya and Gikondo prison.

== Culture ==
Music and dance are an integral part of Rwandan ceremonies, festivals, social gatherings and storytelling. The most famous traditional dance is a highly choreographed routine consisting of three components: the &quot;umushagiriro&quot;, or cow dance, performed by women; the &quot;intore&quot;, or dance of heroes, performed by men; and the drumming, also traditionally performed by men, on drums known as &quot;ingoma&quot;. The best-known dance group is the National Ballet. It was established by President Habyarimana in 1974, and performs nationally and internationally. Traditionally, music is transmitted orally, with styles varying between the social groups. Drums are of great importance; the royal drummers enjoyed high status within the court of the King (&quot;Mwami&quot;). Drummers play together in groups of varying sizes, usually between seven and nine in number. The country has a growing popular music industry, influenced by African Great Lakes, Congolese, and American music. The most popular genre is hip hop, with a blend of dancehall, rap, ragga, R&amp;B and dance-pop.
Traditional arts and crafts are produced throughout the country, although most originated as functional items rather than purely for decoration. Woven baskets and bowls are especially common, notably the basket style of the agaseke. &quot;Imigongo&quot;, a unique cow dung art, is produced in the southeast of Rwanda, with a history dating back to when the region was part of the independent Gisaka kingdom. The dung is mixed with natural soils of various colours and painted into patterned ridges to form geometric shapes. Other crafts include pottery and wood carving. Traditional housing styles make use of locally available materials; circular or rectangular mud homes with grass-thatched roofs (known as &quot;nyakatsi&quot;) are the most common. The government has initiated a programme to replace these with more modern materials such as corrugated iron.

Rwanda does not have a long history of written literature, but there is a strong oral tradition ranging from poetry to folk stories. Many of the country&#x27;s moral values and details of history have been passed down through the generations. The most famous Rwandan literary figure was Alexis Kagame (1912–1981), who carried out and published research into oral traditions as well as writing his own poetry. The Rwandan Genocide resulted in the emergence of a literature of witness accounts, essays and fiction by a new generation of writers such as Benjamin Sehene and Mfuranzima Fred. A number of films have been produced about the Rwandan Genocide, including the Golden Globe-nominated &quot;Hotel Rwanda&quot;, &quot;100 Days&quot;, &quot;Shake Hands with the Devil&quot;, &quot;Sometimes in April&quot;, and &quot;Shooting Dogs&quot;, the last four having been filmed in Rwanda and having featured survivors as cast members.

Fourteen regular national holidays are observed throughout the year, with others occasionally inserted by the government. The week following Genocide Memorial Day on 7 April is designated an official week of mourning. The victory for the RPF over the Hutu extremists is celebrated as Liberation Day on 4 July. The last Saturday of each month is &quot;umuganda&quot;, a national morning of mandatory community service lasting from 8am to 11am, during which all able bodied people between 18 and 65 are expected to carry out community tasks such as cleaning streets or building homes for vulnerable people. Most normal services close down during &quot;umuganda&quot;, and public transportation is limited.

=== Cuisine ===
The cuisine of Rwanda is based on local staple foods produced by subsistence agriculture such as bananas, plantains (known as &quot;ibitoke&quot;), pulses, sweet potatoes, beans, and cassava (manioc). Many Rwandans do not eat meat more than a few times a month. For those who live near lakes and have access to fish, tilapia is popular. The potato, thought to have been introduced to Rwanda by German and Belgian colonialists, is very popular. Ugali, locally known as &quot;Ubugari&quot; (or &quot;umutsima&quot;) is common, a paste made from cassava or maize and water to form a porridge-like consistency that is eaten throughout the African Great Lakes. &quot;Isombe&quot; is made from mashed cassava leaves and can be served with dried fish, rice, ugali, potatoes etc. Lunch is usually a buffet known as &quot;mélange&quot;, consisting of the above staples and sometimes meat. Brochettes are the most popular food when eating out in the evening, usually made from goat but sometimes tripe, beef, or fish.

In rural areas, many bars have a brochette seller responsible for tending and slaughtering the goats, skewering and barbecuing the meat, and serving it with grilled bananas. Milk, particularly in a fermented yoghurt form called &quot;ikivuguto&quot;, is a common drink throughout the country. Other drinks include a traditional beer called Ikigage made from sorghum and &quot;urwagwa&quot;, made from bananas, and a soft drink called Umutobe which is banana juice; these popular drinks feature in traditional rituals and ceremonies. The major drinks manufacturer in Rwanda is Bralirwa, which was established in the 1950s, a Heineken partner, and is now listed on the Rwandan Stock Exchange. Bralirwa manufactures soft drink products from The Coca-Cola Company, under licence, including Coca-Cola, Fanta, and Sprite, and a range of beers including Primus, Mützig, Amstel, and Turbo King. In 2009 a new brewery, Brasseries des Mille Collines (BMC) opened, manufacturing Skol beer and a local version known as Skol Gatanu; BMC is now owned by Belgian company Unibra. East African Breweries also operate in the country, importing Guinness, Tusker, and Bell, as well as whisky and spirits.

=== Sport ===
The Rwandan government, through its Sports Development Policy, promotes sport as a strong avenue for &quot;development and peace building&quot;, and the government has made commitments to advancing the use of sport for a variety of development objectives, including education. The most popular sports in Rwanda are association football, volleyball, basketball, athletics and Paralympic sports. Cricket has been growing in popularity, as a result of refugees returned from Kenya, where they had learned to play the game. Cycling, traditionally seen largely as a mode of transport in Rwanda, is also growing in popularity as a sport; and Team Rwanda have been the subject of a book, &quot;Land of Second Chances: The Impossible Rise of Rwanda&#x27;s Cycling Team&quot; and a film, &quot;Rising from Ashes&quot;.

Rwandans have been competing at the Olympic Games since 1984, and the Paralympic Games since 2004. The country sent seven competitors to the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, representing it in athletics, swimming, mountain biking and judo, and 15 competitors to the London Summer Paralympics to compete in athletics, powerlifting and sitting volleyball. The country has also participated in the Commonwealth Games since joining the Commonwealth in 2009. The country&#x27;s national basketball team has been growing in prominence since the mid-2000s, with the men&#x27;s team qualifying for the final stages of the African Basketball Championship four times in a row since 2007. The country bid unsuccessfully to host the 2013 tournament. Rwanda&#x27;s national football team has appeared in the African Cup of Nations once, in the 2004 edition of the tournament, but narrowly failed to advance beyond the group stages. The team have failed to qualify for the competition since, and have never qualified for the World Cup. Rwanda&#x27;s highest domestic football competition is the Rwanda National Football League; , the dominant team is APR FC of Kigali, having won 13 of the last 17 championships. Rwandan clubs participate in the Kagame Interclub Cup for Central and East African teams, sponsored since 2002 by President Kagame.

== See also ==

*Index of Rwanda-related articles
*Outline of Rwanda

==Notes==
== Citations ==
== General and cited references ==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
== External links ==

Government
*The Republic of Rwanda (official government site)

General
*Rwanda. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
*Rwanda profile from the BBC News
*

Tourism
*Visit Rwanda (official Rwanda Tourism Board site)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="0" end="6" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="23" end="41" title="Rwanda" label="Republic of Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q123480" start="48" end="66" title="landlocked country" label="landlocked country"/>
<link wikidata="Q81591" start="74" end="91" title="Great Rift Valley" label="Great Rift Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="95" end="106" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q87982" start="118" end="137" title="African Great Lakes" label="African Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569281" start="149" end="165" title="Southeast Africa" label="Southeast Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="211" end="218" title="Equator" label="Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="242" end="248" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="250" end="258" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="260" end="267" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="277" end="309" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q59577332" start="348" end="357" title="sobriquet" label="sobriquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="457" end="464" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="786" end="793" title="Capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859" start="814" end="820" title="Kigali" label="Kigali"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="823" end="838" title="Hunter-gatherer" label="Hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="869" end="874" title="Stone Age" label="Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="879" end="887" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="908" end="921" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125478" start="959" end="964" title="Clans of Rwanda" label="clans"/>
<link wikidata="Q889884" start="1126" end="1143" title="Kingdom of Rwanda" label="Kingdom of Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q329618" start="1322" end="1329" title="German colonial empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q153963" start="1358" end="1376" title="German East Africa" label="German East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="1390" end="1397" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1433" end="1444" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162685" start="1555" end="1563" title="Rwandan Revolution" label="revolted"/>
<link wikidata="Q557995" start="1695" end="1713" title="Grégoire Kayibanda" label="Grégoire Kayibanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575699" start="1717" end="1735" title="1973 Rwandan coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1973 military coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q272580" start="1768" end="1787" title="Juvénal Habyarimana" label="Juvénal Habyarimana"/>
<link wikidata="Q690240" start="1846" end="1869" title="Rwandan Patriotic Front" label="Rwandan Patriotic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q426722" start="1887" end="1896" title="Rwandan Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869996" start="1922" end="1934" title="Assassination of Juvénal Habyarimana and Cyprien Ntaryamira" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q131297" start="1981" end="1997" title="Rwandan genocide" label="Rwandan genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="2157" end="2172" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231345" start="2206" end="2217" title="Paul Kagame" label="Paul Kagame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="2300" end="2325" title="authoritarianism" label="authoritarian governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q25039550" start="2573" end="2578" title="Youth in Rwanda" label="young"/>
<link wikidata="Q438374" start="2729" end="2740" title="Banyarwanda" label="Banyarwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q192647" start="2800" end="2804" title="Hutu" label="Hutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q193092" start="2806" end="2811" title="Tutsi" label="Tutsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q107331" start="2816" end="2819" title="Great Lakes Twa" label="Twa"/>
<link wikidata="Q171927" start="2851" end="2863" title="pygmy people" label="pygmy people"/>
<link wikidata="Q33573" start="3032" end="3043" title="Kinyarwanda" label="Kinyarwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="3197" end="3220" title="subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="3222" end="3228" title="Coffee" label="Coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097" start="3233" end="3236" title="tea" label="tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q932139" start="3251" end="3260" title="cash crop" label="cash crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829205" start="3279" end="3286" title="Tourism in Rwanda" label="Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952348" start="3455" end="3479" title="Multidimensional Poverty Index" label="multidimensional poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="3553" end="3566" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3572" end="3586" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="3592" end="3615" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="3691" end="3705" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165797" start="3708" end="3714" title="Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa" label="COMESA"/>
<link wikidata="Q134102" start="3716" end="3719" title="Organisation internationale de la Francophonie" label="OIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q337456" start="3728" end="3750" title="East African Community" label="East African Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="3845" end="3864" title="last glacial period" label="last glacial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="3880" end="3889" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q60259056" start="3923" end="3940" title="Neolithic Subpluvial" label="long humid period"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="4053" end="4068" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="4082" end="4091" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="4134" end="4142" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="4174" end="4181" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q107331" start="4248" end="4251" title="Great Lakes Twa" label="Twa"/>
<link wikidata="Q171927" start="4264" end="4269" title="Pygmy peoples" label="pygmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190822" start="4332" end="4347" title="Central Sudanic" label="Central Sudanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791476" start="4352" end="4358" title="Kuliak languages" label="Kuliak"/>
<link wikidata="Q56525" start="4419" end="4433" title="South Cushitic languages" label="South Cushitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="4588" end="4593" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q192647" start="4783" end="4787" title="Hutu" label="Hutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q193092" start="4799" end="4804" title="Tutsi" label="Tutsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125478" start="5212" end="5216" title="Clans of Rwanda" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q889884" start="5531" end="5548" title="Kingdom of Rwanda" label="Kingdom of Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q889884" start="5638" end="5655" title="Kingdom of Rwanda" label="Kingdom of Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346657" start="5675" end="5683" title="Nyiginya" label="Nyiginya"/>
<link wikidata="Q327452" start="5846" end="5862" title="Kigeli IV Rwabugiri" label="Kigeli Rwabugiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q466259" start="6150" end="6156" title="corvée" label="corvée"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582" start="6445" end="6462" title="Berlin Conference" label="Berlin Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="6501" end="6514" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q153963" start="6546" end="6564" title="German East Africa" label="German East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q66695" start="6584" end="6607" title="Gustav Adolf von Götzen" label="Gustav Adolf von Götzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q815524" start="7049" end="7056" title="Belgian colonial empire" label="Belgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="7083" end="7090" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="7107" end="7118" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q426759" start="7190" end="7215" title="League of Nations mandate" label="League of Nations mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q590743" start="7223" end="7236" title="Ruanda-Urundi" label="Ruanda-Urundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q304121" start="7596" end="7611" title="New Imperialism" label="New Imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254959" start="7680" end="7685" title="Race (human categorization)" label="races"/>
<link wikidata="Q590743" start="8006" end="8019" title="Ruanda-Urundi" label="Ruanda-Urundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q985073" start="8068" end="8086" title="United Nations trust territories" label="UN trust territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8097" end="8113" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146918" start="8150" end="8162" title="Decolonisation of Africa" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162685" start="8295" end="8313" title="Rwandan Revolution" label="Rwandan Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136659" start="8499" end="8511" title="1961 Rwandan monarchy referendum" label="a referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q272580" start="8876" end="8895" title="Juvénal Habyarimana" label="Juvénal Habyarimana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575699" start="8910" end="8925" title="1973 Rwandan coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="a military coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q690240" start="9324" end="9347" title="Rwandan Patriotic Front" label="Rwandan Patriotic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q426722" start="9463" end="9480" title="Rwandan Civil War" label="Rwandan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429076" start="9838" end="9852" title="Arusha Accords (Rwanda)" label="Arusha Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869996" start="9936" end="9974" title="Assassination of Juvénal Habyarimana and Cyprien Ntaryamira" label="Habyarimana&amp;#x27;s plane was shot down"/>
<link wikidata="Q131297" start="10071" end="10087" title="Rwandan genocide" label="Rwandan genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q262779" start="10633" end="10654" title="United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda" label="UN peacekeeping force"/>
<link wikidata="Q277065" start="10711" end="10741" title="Great Lakes refugee crisis" label="fled to neighbouring countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500954" start="10757" end="10762" title="Zaïre" label="Zaïre"/>
<link wikidata="Q838695" start="10843" end="10848" title="First Congo War" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q75756" start="10853" end="10869" title="Second Congo War" label="Second Congo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q478358" start="10963" end="11005" title="International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda" label="International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="11132" end="11155" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="11246" end="11261" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="11359" end="11382" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="11427" end="11441" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="11530" end="11562" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q63345" start="11625" end="11637" title="M23 Movement" label="M23 Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="11688" end="11696" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="11703" end="11718" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q690240" start="11732" end="11755" title="Rwandan Patriotic Front" label="Rwandan Patriotic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231345" start="11777" end="11788" title="Paul Kagame" label="Paul Kagame"/>
<link wikidata="Q692209" start="12008" end="12023" title="electoral fraud" label="electoral fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q193092" start="12038" end="12043" title="Tutsi" label="Tutsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q596565" start="12672" end="12691" title="president of Rwanda" label="president of Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="12699" end="12712" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176454" start="12785" end="12802" title="Cabinet of Rwanda" label="Cabinet of Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075392" start="12819" end="12831" title="Rwandan Defence Forces" label="armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354809" start="12966" end="12982" title="Elections in Rwanda" label="every four years"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590706" start="13001" end="13015" title="Prime Minister of Rwanda" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162795" start="13058" end="13068" title="Parliament of Rwanda" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q10553309" start="13085" end="13093" title="Legislative chamber" label="chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q320292" start="13238" end="13257" title="Chamber of Deputies (Rwanda)" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="13517" end="13535" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="13544" end="13571" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q695742" start="13628" end="13634" title="Law of Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629330" start="13639" end="13646" title="Law of Belgium" label="Belgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="13647" end="13656" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479995" start="13669" end="13682" title="customary law" label="customary law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644978" start="14303" end="14316" title="Supreme Court of Rwanda" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14322" end="14332" title="High Court of Rwanda" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316812" start="14521" end="14546" title="Gacaca court" label="&amp;quot;Gacaca&amp;quot; courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="14916" end="14942" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="15002" end="15020" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q169180" start="15097" end="15106" title="ombudsman" label="ombudsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="15658" end="15672" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="15674" end="15687" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q134102" start="15689" end="15701" title="La Francophonie" label="Francophonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q337456" start="15703" end="15725" title="East African Community" label="East African Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="15735" end="15758" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="16288" end="16320" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q838695" start="16375" end="16380" title="First Congo War" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q75756" start="16385" end="16401" title="Second Congo War" label="Second Congo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q130625" start="16548" end="16553" title="North Kivu" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q488326" start="16558" end="16568" title="South Kivu" label="South Kivu"/>
<link wikidata="Q838695" start="16780" end="16785" title="First Congo War" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q75756" start="16790" end="16806" title="Second Congo War" label="Second Congo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q82962" start="16930" end="16943" title="M23 rebellion (2012–2013)" label="M23 rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q131920479" start="17174" end="17193" title="2025 Goma offensive" label="2025 Goma offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="17228" end="17234" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q888072" start="18124" end="18128" title="List of kings of Rwanda" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q3976643" start="18248" end="18255" title="subdivisions of Rwanda" label="divided"/>
<link wikidata="Q871217" start="18268" end="18277" title="Provinces of Rwanda" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1841634" start="18282" end="18291" title="Districts of Rwanda" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058029" start="18327" end="18334" title="Sectors of Rwanda" label="sectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q845807" start="18855" end="18872" title="Northern Province, Rwanda" label="Northern Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q853162" start="18874" end="18891" title="Southern Province, Rwanda" label="Southern Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q853152" start="18893" end="18909" title="Eastern Province, Rwanda" label="Eastern Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q737354" start="18911" end="18927" title="Western Province, Rwanda" label="Western Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859" start="20054" end="20060" title="Kigali" label="Kigali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005" start="20270" end="20276" title="Gambia" label="Gambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="20278" end="20286" title="Eswatini" label="Eswatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q977" start="20292" end="20300" title="Djibouti" label="Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="20330" end="20337" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="20339" end="20344" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="20349" end="20356" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q652277" start="20404" end="20416" title="List of countries by lowest point" label="lowest point"/>
<link wikidata="Q748195" start="20424" end="20436" title="Rusizi River" label="Rusizi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="20525" end="20557" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="20571" end="20577" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="20592" end="20600" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="20618" end="20625" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="20675" end="20682" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q123480" start="20690" end="20700" title="landlocked" label="landlocked"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787337" start="20766" end="20775" title="Congo-Nile Divide" label="watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q932289" start="20794" end="20799" title="Congo Basin" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887548" start="20804" end="20808" title="Nile Basin" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="20809" end="20823" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q748195" start="20963" end="20975" title="Rusizi River" label="Rusizi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511" start="20980" end="20995" title="Lake Tanganyika" label="Lake Tanganyika"/>
<link wikidata="Q505366" start="21037" end="21047" title="Nyabarongo River Wetlands" label="Nyabarongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499639" start="21137" end="21143" title="Ruvubu River" label="Ruvubu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750140" start="21156" end="21162" title="Kagera River" label="Kagera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505" start="21281" end="21294" title="Lake Victoria" label="Lake Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="21380" end="21386" title="Source (river or stream)" label="source"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="21394" end="21398" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q125912" start="21441" end="21450" title="Lake Kivu" label="Lake Kivu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711888" start="21488" end="21502" title="Albertine Rift" label="Albertine Rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q744963" start="21615" end="21641" title="List of lakes by depth" label="deepest lakes in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q15045792" start="21672" end="21678" title="Lake Burera" label="Burera"/>
<link wikidata="Q15045797" start="21680" end="21687" title="Lake Ruhondo" label="Ruhondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215074" start="21689" end="21695" title="Lake Muhazi" label="Muhazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808777" start="21697" end="21702" title="Lake Rweru" label="Rweru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657890" start="21708" end="21713" title="Lake Ihema" label="Ihema"/>
<link wikidata="Q116715" start="21788" end="21809" title="Akagera National Park" label="Akagera National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234397" start="22042" end="22059" title="East African Rift" label="East African Rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q751607" start="22163" end="22170" title="Virunga Mountains" label="Virunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q737859" start="22217" end="22232" title="Mount Karisimbi" label="Mount Karisimbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711890" start="22320" end="22350" title="Albertine Rift montane forests" label="Albertine Rift montane forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="22489" end="22496" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="22547" end="22556" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q135712" start="22557" end="22574" title="Tropical climate" label="tropical highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q146575" start="23092" end="23102" title="dry season" label="dry season"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="23390" end="23404" title="Global warming" label="Global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141462" start="23949" end="23963" title="montane forest" label="montane forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979643" start="24086" end="24106" title="National parks of Rwanda" label="three national parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q838625" start="24113" end="24133" title="Terrace (agriculture)" label="terraced agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356828" start="24170" end="24177" title="Nyungwe Forest" label="Nyungwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="24258" end="24264" title="orchid" label="orchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q158617" start="24270" end="24277" title="begonia" label="begonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q932736" start="24298" end="24321" title="Volcanoes National Park" label="Volcanoes National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="24332" end="24338" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="24408" end="24415" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q81666" start="24435" end="24441" title="acacia" label="acacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771037" start="24542" end="24557" title="Markhamia lutea" label="Markhamia lutea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283742" start="24574" end="24593" title="Eulophia guineensis" label="Eulophia guineensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q737878" start="24861" end="24877" title="mountain gorilla" label="mountain gorilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126704" start="24947" end="24964" title="common chimpanzee" label="common chimpanzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q358813" start="24970" end="24987" title="Black-and-white colobus" label="Ruwenzori colobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q140" start="25147" end="25151" title="lion" label="lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q116715" start="25391" end="25412" title="Akagera National Park" label="Akagera National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607775" start="26010" end="26032" title="List of birds of Rwanda" label="bird species in Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101389" start="26210" end="26225" title="Rwenzori turaco" label="Rwenzori turaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074575" start="26230" end="26247" title="handsome spurfowl" label="handsome spurfowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029743" start="26313" end="26333" title="black-headed gonolek" label="black-headed gonolek"/>
<link wikidata="Q28507" start="26388" end="26393" title="stork" label="stork"/>
<link wikidata="Q25365" start="26399" end="26405" title="Crane (bird)" label="cranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131250" start="26482" end="26498" title="praying mantises" label="praying mantises"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711890" start="26647" end="26677" title="Albertine Rift montane forests" label="Albertine Rift montane forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q5558471" start="26679" end="26715" title="Victoria Basin forest-savanna mosaic" label="Victoria Basin forest-savanna mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093753" start="26721" end="26756" title="Ruwenzori-Virunga montane moorlands" label="Ruwenzori-Virunga montane moorlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520600" start="26781" end="26813" title="Forest Landscape Integrity Index" label="Forest Landscape Integrity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="27246" end="27257" title="nominal GDP" label="nominal GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q550207" start="27271" end="27272" title="Geary–Khamis dollar" label="$"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952348" start="27408" end="27432" title="Multidimensional Poverty Index" label="multidimensional poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314980" start="27581" end="27604" title="National Bank of Rwanda" label="National Bank of Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741" start="27629" end="27642" title="Rwandan franc" label="Rwandan franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q337456" start="27743" end="27765" title="East African Community" label="East African Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125321" start="27803" end="27817" title="monetary union" label="monetary union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27892" end="27913" title="East African shilling#Second East African shilling" label="East African shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="27997" end="28020" title="subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626853" start="28641" end="28647" title="matoke" label="matoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="28728" end="28734" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="28738" end="28742" title="bean" label="bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="28745" end="28757" title="sweet potato" label="sweet potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="28761" end="28768" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="28770" end="28775" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="28780" end="28785" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q191222" start="30009" end="30020" title="cassiterite" label="cassiterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q541128" start="30022" end="30032" title="wolframite" label="wolframite"/>
<link wikidata="Q518713" start="30044" end="30050" title="coltan" label="coltan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="30163" end="30177" title="service sector" label="service sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="30198" end="30218" title="late-2000s recession" label="late-2000s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829205" start="30671" end="30678" title="Tourism in Rwanda" label="Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q737878" start="31129" end="31145" title="mountain gorilla" label="mountain gorilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q737878" start="31235" end="31251" title="mountain gorilla" label="mountain gorilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714375" start="31526" end="31541" title="savanna reserve" label="savanna reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="31602" end="31625" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q577922" start="31867" end="31908" title="Radio Télévision Libre des Mille Collines" label="Radio Télévision Libre des Mille Collines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126285" start="32018" end="32030" title="Radio Rwanda" label="Radio Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q202255" start="32206" end="32224" title="digital television" label="digital television"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32772" end="32790" title="High Media Council (Rwanda)" label="High Media Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383759" start="32845" end="32854" title="Rwandatel" label="Rwandatel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32927" end="32936" title="LAP Green" label="LAP Green"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32974" end="32988" title="Liquid Telecom" label="Liquid Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="33033" end="33044" title="fibre optic" label="fibre optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q738621" start="33116" end="33124" title="landline" label="landline"/>
<link wikidata="Q111736319" start="33177" end="33187" title="MTN Rwanda" label="MTN Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="33302" end="33305" title="Non-Government Organisation" label="NGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="33362" end="33374" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q276345" start="33511" end="33515" title="Tigo" label="Tigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q854867" start="33536" end="33549" title="Bharti Airtel" label="Bharti Airtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063249" start="34060" end="34066" title="SEACOM (African cable system)" label="SEACOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="34070" end="34079" title="Submarine communications cable" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q249" start="34278" end="34295" title="wireless internet" label="wireless internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="34390" end="34398" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009483" start="34775" end="34791" title="Mara Corporation" label="Mara Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137507" start="35897" end="35917" title="rainwater harvesting" label="rainwater harvesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973822" start="36029" end="36039" title="Water supply and sanitation in Rwanda" label="sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007834" start="36149" end="36168" title="improved sanitation" label="improved sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097999" start="36480" end="36491" title="pit latrine" label="pit latrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="36587" end="36600" title="hydroelectric" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q15045792" start="36634" end="36640" title="Lake Burera" label="Burera"/>
<link wikidata="Q15045797" start="36645" end="36652" title="Lake Ruhondo" label="Ruhondo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36791" end="36806" title="Rugezi wetlands" label="Rugezi wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438438" start="37103" end="37115" title="loadshedding" label="loadshedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q963375" start="37167" end="37183" title="diesel generator" label="diesel generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764335" start="37906" end="37940" title="Transport in Rwanda" label="transport infrastructure of Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="37999" end="38013" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="38293" end="38298" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q204381" start="38346" end="38350" title="Goma" label="Goma"/>
<link wikidata="Q222279" start="38355" end="38361" title="Bukavu" label="Bukavu"/>
<link wikidata="Q225641" start="38436" end="38443" title="Mombasa" label="Mombasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3894" start="38448" end="38455" title="Kampala" label="Kampala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870" start="38460" end="38467" title="Nairobi" label="Nairobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058265" start="38491" end="38508" title="Northern Corridor" label="Northern Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q946479" start="38571" end="38578" title="minibus" label="minibus"/>
<link wikidata="Q842389" start="38726" end="38737" title="shared taxi" label="shared taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233750" start="38967" end="38982" title="motorcycle taxi" label="motorcycle taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="39071" end="39078" title="taxicab" label="taxicab"/>
<link wikidata="Q12334006" start="39081" end="39086" title="Coach (vehicle)" label="Coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322696" start="39180" end="39201" title="Kigali International Airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q206349" start="39294" end="39301" title="JKIA" label="Nairobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q586065" start="39306" end="39313" title="Entebbe International Airport" label="Entebbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q821267" start="39363" end="39378" title="Kamembe Airport" label="Kamembe Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q782857" start="39384" end="39392" title="Cyangugu" label="Cyangugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884833" start="39429" end="39459" title="Bugesera International Airport" label="Bugesera International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q392542" start="39612" end="39620" title="RwandAir" label="RwandAir"/>
<link wikidata="Q830911" start="39803" end="39815" title="Central Line (Tanzania)" label="Central Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q221096" start="39915" end="39941" title="public private partnership" label="public private partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867221" start="40149" end="40175" title="Ministry of Infrastructure (Rwanda)" label="Ministry of Infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505" start="40235" end="40248" title="Lake Victoria" label="Lake Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750140" start="40269" end="40282" title="Akagera River" label="Akagera River"/>
<link wikidata="Q27517541" start="40310" end="40352" title="National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda" label="National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="40659" end="40673" title="World Factbook" label="World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559026" start="41101" end="41115" title="Gérard Prunier" label="Gérard Prunier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3548251" start="41408" end="41415" title="Umutara Province" label="Umutara"/>
<link wikidata="Q830631" start="41659" end="41666" title="Gisenyi" label="Gisenyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q125912" start="41691" end="41700" title="Lake Kivu" label="Lake Kivu"/>
<link wikidata="Q204381" start="41727" end="41731" title="Goma" label="Goma"/>
<link wikidata="Q246145" start="41792" end="41801" title="Ruhengeri" label="Ruhengeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q509739" start="41803" end="41809" title="Butare" label="Butare"/>
<link wikidata="Q668180" start="41815" end="41822" title="Muhanga" label="Muhanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q438374" start="42140" end="42151" title="Banyarwanda" label="Banyarwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353647" start="42229" end="42244" title="Colonisation of Africa" label="colonial powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155497" start="43153" end="43163" title="Government of Rwanda" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q337456" start="44399" end="44421" title="East African Community" label="East African Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="44430" end="44442" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19888178" start="44570" end="44590" title="University of Rwanda" label="University of Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q650982" start="44638" end="44667" title="National University of Rwanda" label="National University of Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640828" start="44748" end="44770" title="gross enrollment ratio" label="gross enrollment ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="44852" end="44860" title="literacy" label="literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="45217" end="45224" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936129" start="45294" end="45305" title="Vision 2020 (Rwanda)" label="Vision 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="45392" end="45414" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q19888178" start="46189" end="46209" title="University of Rwanda" label="University of Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="46723" end="46735" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="46888" end="46900" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346050" start="46981" end="46999" title="Partners In Health" label="Partners In Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="47228" end="47278" title="United States Agency for International Development" label="United States Agency for International Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="47454" end="47462" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="47499" end="47541" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="47829" end="47865" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="United Nations Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q81737" start="47930" end="47958" title="Millennium Development Goals" label="Millennium Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q11349126" start="48305" end="48319" title="HIV/AIDS in Rwanda" label="HIV prevalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="48392" end="48403" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="48534" end="48545" title="evangelical" label="evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q431770" start="48585" end="48590" title="Islam in Rwanda" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="48702" end="48724" title="Seventh-day Adventists" label="Seventh-day Adventists"/>
<link wikidata="Q825" start="48983" end="48996" title="God in Christianity" label="Christian God"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148951" start="49050" end="49055" title="Imana" label="Imana"/>
<link wikidata="Q33573" start="49135" end="49146" title="Kinyarwanda" label="Kinyarwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="49261" end="49267" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="49321" end="49327" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="49451" end="49456" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q337456" start="49650" end="49672" title="East African Community" label="East African Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="49984" end="49991" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="49997" end="50010" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q337456" start="50018" end="50040" title="East African Community" label="East African Community"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50348" end="50361" title="Nkombo Island" label="Nkombo Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481999" start="50368" end="50373" title="Shi language" label="Mashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q134102" start="50519" end="50565" title="Organisation internationale de la Francophonie" label="Organisation internationale de la Francophonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q171180" start="50812" end="50817" title="taboo" label="taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="51345" end="51362" title="Same-sex marriage" label="Same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687931" start="51404" end="51416" title="Constitution of Rwanda" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q501846" start="51609" end="51624" title="street children" label="street children"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51811" end="51825" title="Gikondo Transit Center" label="Gikondo prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3868596" start="51842" end="51847" title="Music of Rwanda" label="Music"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52059" end="52071" title="umushagiriro" label="umushagiriro"/>
<link wikidata="Q22039472" start="52123" end="52129" title="intore" label="intore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552505" start="52302" end="52317" title="National Ballet of Rwanda" label="National Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="52863" end="52870" title="hip hop" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q474027" start="52888" end="52897" title="dancehall" label="dancehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010" start="52899" end="52902" title="rap" label="rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q740911" start="52904" end="52909" title="ragga" label="ragga"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="52911" end="52918" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q211756" start="52923" end="52932" title="dance-pop" label="dance-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q18545000" start="53158" end="53165" title="agaseke" label="agaseke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069464" start="53173" end="53181" title="Imigongo" label="Imigongo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53326" end="53332" title="Gisaka" label="Gisaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="53916" end="53928" title="folk stories" label="folk stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834552" start="54084" end="54097" title="Alexis Kagame" label="Alexis Kagame"/>
<link wikidata="Q817691" start="54348" end="54363" title="Benjamin Sehene" label="Benjamin Sehene"/>
<link wikidata="Q108516491" start="54368" end="54383" title="Fred Mfuranzima" label="Mfuranzima Fred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="54464" end="54476" title="Golden Globe" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q223884" start="54493" end="54505" title="Hotel Rwanda" label="Hotel Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546117" start="54519" end="54527" title="100 Days (2001 film)" label="100 Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109094" start="54541" end="54567" title="Shake Hands with the Devil (2007 film)" label="Shake Hands with the Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142280" start="54581" end="54599" title="Sometimes in April" label="Sometimes in April"/>
<link wikidata="Q693319" start="54617" end="54630" title="Shooting Dogs" label="Shooting Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257829" start="54746" end="54763" title="public holidays in Rwanda" label="national holidays"/>
<link wikidata="Q964507" start="55013" end="55027" title="Liberation Day" label="Liberation Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q85811865" start="55080" end="55088" title="umuganda" label="umuganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043121" start="55128" end="55145" title="community service" label="community service"/>
<link wikidata="Q736427" start="55490" end="55501" title="staple food" label="staple food"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626853" start="55582" end="55589" title="ibitoke" label="ibitoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="55598" end="55603" title="pulse (legume)" label="pulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="55606" end="55618" title="sweet potato" label="sweet potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="55633" end="55640" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q47793" start="55767" end="55774" title="tilapia" label="tilapia"/>
<link wikidata="Q304121" start="55863" end="55875" title="Second European colonization wave (19th century–20th century)" label="colonialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435874" start="55894" end="55899" title="Ugali" label="Ugali"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55924" end="55931" title="Ubugari" label="Ubugari"/>
<link wikidata="Q186817" start="56030" end="56038" title="porridge" label="porridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56112" end="56118" title="Isombe" label="Isombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323569" start="56330" end="56339" title="Brochette" label="Brochette"/>
<link wikidata="Q470873" start="56436" end="56441" title="tripe" label="tripe"/>
<link wikidata="Q461696" start="56575" end="56585" title="barbecue" label="barbecuing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56693" end="56702" title="ikivuguto" label="ikivuguto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564161" start="56835" end="56842" title="urwagwa" label="urwagwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956057" start="57035" end="57043" title="Bralirwa" label="Bralirwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383727" start="57126" end="57148" title="Rwandan Stock Exchange" label="Rwandan Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="57172" end="57182" title="soft drink" label="soft drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295867" start="57197" end="57218" title="The Coca-Cola Company" label="The Coca-Cola Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="57245" end="57254" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q9935" start="57256" end="57261" title="Fanta" label="Fanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q206978" start="57267" end="57273" title="Sprite (soft drink)" label="Sprite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923625" start="57306" end="57312" title="Primus beer" label="Primus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14627942" start="57314" end="57320" title="Mützig beer" label="Mützig"/>
<link wikidata="Q478119" start="57322" end="57328" title="Amstel Brewery" label="Amstel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57334" end="57344" title="Turbo King" label="Turbo King"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57369" end="57398" title="Brasseries des Mille Collines" label="Brasseries des Mille Collines"/>
<link wikidata="Q152532" start="57427" end="57431" title="Skol" label="Skol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57466" end="57477" title="Skol Gatanu" label="Skol Gatanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884693" start="57515" end="57521" title="Unibra" label="Unibra"/>
<link wikidata="Q493271" start="57523" end="57545" title="East African Breweries" label="East African Breweries"/>
<link wikidata="Q194297" start="57585" end="57593" title="Guinness" label="Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856799" start="57595" end="57601" title="Tusker (beer)" label="Tusker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57607" end="57611" title="Bell (beer)" label="Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q281" start="57624" end="57630" title="whisky" label="whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q56139" start="57635" end="57641" title="Distilled beverage" label="spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="57974" end="57994" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="57996" end="58006" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="58008" end="58018" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q542" start="58020" end="58029" title="Athletics (sport)" label="athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q589184" start="58034" end="58051" title="Paralympic sports" label="Paralympic sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="58053" end="58060" title="Cricket" label="Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q53121" start="58179" end="58186" title="Cycling" label="Cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215841" start="58279" end="58289" title="cycle sport" label="as a sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108261" start="58444" end="58461" title="Rising from Ashes (film)" label="Rising from Ashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="58506" end="58519" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q73633" start="58540" end="58556" title="Paralympic Games" label="Paralympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="58611" end="58631" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q31920" start="58673" end="58681" title="Swimming (sport)" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q520611" start="58683" end="58698" title="mountain biking" label="mountain biking"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420" start="58703" end="58707" title="judo" label="judo"/>
<link wikidata="Q182798" start="58735" end="58760" title="2012 Summer Paralympics" label="London Summer Paralympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126275" start="58786" end="58798" title="Paralympic powerlifting" label="powerlifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q597628" start="58803" end="58821" title="sitting volleyball" label="sitting volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q178340" start="58864" end="58882" title="Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="58901" end="58913" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986820" start="58942" end="58966" title="Rwanda national basketball team" label="national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q610579" start="59083" end="59114" title="African Basketball Championship" label="African Basketball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660736" start="59190" end="59205" title="2013 African Basketball Championship" label="2013 tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q319776" start="59221" end="59243" title="Rwanda national football team" label="national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q83145" start="59264" end="59286" title="African Cup of Nations" label="African Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q588183" start="59300" end="59312" title="2004 African Cup of Nations" label="2004 edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="59480" end="59489" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q960171" start="59550" end="59581" title="Rwanda National Football League" label="Rwanda National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q296266" start="59606" end="59612" title="APR FC" label="APR FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q82336" start="59701" end="59721" title="Kagame Interclub Cup" label="Kagame Interclub Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151172" start="59818" end="59850" title="Index of Rwanda-related articles" label="Index of Rwanda-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112430" start="59852" end="59869" title="Outline of Rwanda" label="Outline of Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="60264" end="60282" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="60290" end="60317" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="60344" end="60352" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25648" wikidata="Q2454814" url="?curid=25648" title="Demographics of Rwanda">
<text>Demographic features of the population of Rwanda include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects.

Rwanda&#x27;s population density is among the highest in Sub-Saharan Africa at . This country has few villages, and nearly every family lives in a self-contained compound on a hillside. The urban concentrations are grouped around administrative centers.

Over half of the adult population is literate, but no more than 5% have received secondary education.

==Population==

In 1950, Rwanda had a very narrow population pyramid, with less than 250,000 males and females between 0–10 years old. The graph only gets narrower as it goes up with virtually no-one living past 50 years of age. In 2017, the population of Rwanda increased dramatically from 1950 with about 750,000 people between 0–20 years old; the graph remains very narrow in the older ages section but has improved from 1950. By 2050, it is predicted that more people will be living longer and the structure will broaden overall. By 2100, it is predicted that there will be more people aged between 30 and 60 than between 0–20, as previous years have shown.

According to the total population was in , compared to only 2,072,000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 42.6%, 54.7% were between 15 and 65 years of age, and 2.7% was 65 years or older

=== Structure of the population ===

Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2012) (Data refer to national projections.):
Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2019) (Projections based on the 2012 Population Census.):
==Vital statistics==

Registration of vital events is in Rwanda not complete. The Population Department of the United Nations prepared the following estimates:
===Demographic and Health Surveys===
Total Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):


Fertility data as of 2014–15 (DHS Program):

===Life expectancy===
Source: UN

== Ethnic groups ==
The Rwandan population largely consists of three ethnic groups. The Hutus, who comprise the majority of the population (85%), are farmers of Bantu origin. The Tutsis (14% before the Genocide, probably less than 10% now) are a pastoral people who arrived in the area in the 15th century. Until 1959, they formed the dominant caste under a feudal system based on cattle-holding.

The Twa (pygmies) (1%) are thought to be the remnants of the earliest settlers of the region.

==Languages==
*Kinyarwanda only (official universal Bantu vernacular) 93.2%
* Kinyarwanda and other language(s) 6.2%
* French (official) and other language(s) 0.1%
* English (official) and other language(s) 0.1%
* Swahili (or Kiswahili used in commercial centers) 0.02%
* Other 0.03%
* Unspecified 0.3% (2002 est.)

==Religion==
Protestant 57.7% (includes Adventist 12.6%), Roman Catholic 38.2%, Muslim 2.1%, other 1% (includes traditional, Jehovah&#x27;s Witness), none 1.1% (2019-20 est.)

==See also==
* Silas Niyibizi

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="0" end="11" title="demography" label="Demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="28" end="38" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="42" end="48" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="57" end="75" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="77" end="86" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="246" end="264" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13006147" start="525" end="544" title="secondary education" label="secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q192647" start="2115" end="2119" title="Hutu" label="Hutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="2188" end="2193" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q193092" start="2206" end="2211" title="Tutsi" label="Tutsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q484416" start="2371" end="2376" title="caste" label="caste"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="2385" end="2398" title="feudal system" label="feudal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q107331" start="2429" end="2432" title="Great Lakes Twa" label="Twa"/>
<link wikidata="Q171927" start="2434" end="2441" title="pygmies" label="pygmies"/>
<link wikidata="Q33573" start="2535" end="2546" title="Kinyarwanda" label="Kinyarwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q33146" start="2572" end="2577" title="Bantu languages" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2639" end="2645" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2686" end="2693" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="2734" end="2741" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="2746" end="2755" title="Kiswahili" label="Kiswahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q27532712" start="3027" end="3041" title="Silas Niyibizi" label="Silas Niyibizi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25649" wikidata="Q1155497" url="?curid=25649" title="Politics of Rwanda">
<text>Rwanda is a &quot;de facto&quot; one-party state ruled by the Rwandan Patriotic Front and its leader Paul Kagame since the end of the 1994 genocide against members of the Tutsi ethnic group. Although Rwanda is nominally democratic, elections are manipulated in various ways, which include banning opposition parties, arresting or assassinating critics, and electoral fraud.

Rwandan law developed from Belgian and German civil law systems and customary law takes place in a framework of a semi-presidential republic, whereby the president of Rwanda is the head of state with significant executive power, with the prime minister of Rwanda being the constitutional head of government.

Legislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of parliament, the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies. On 5 May 1995, the Transitional National Assembly adopted a new constitution which included elements of the constitution of 18 June 1991 as well as provisions of the 1993 Arusha peace accord and the November 1994 multiparty protocol of understanding.

== National legislature ==
In Rwanda the Chamber of Deputies is composed of eighty Deputies. Among them, fifty-three Deputies are elected by direct universal suffrage in secret, elected from a fixed list of names of candidates proposed by political organizations or independent candidates; twenty-four women elected by specific electoral colleges in accordance with the national administrative entities; two Deputies elected by the National Youth Council; one Deputy elected by the National Council of Persons with Disabilities.

Senate is composed of twenty six members. Among them, there are twelve Senators elected by the specific councils in accordance with the administrative entities; eight Senators appointed by the President of the Republic; four Senators designated by the National Forum of Political organizations; one Senator elected among lecturers and researchers of Public Universities and higher learning institutions; and one Senator elected among lecturers and researchers of Private Universities and higher learning institutions.

==Historical background==
After its military victory in July 1994, the Rwandese Patriotic Front organized a coalition government similar to that established by President Juvénal Habyarimana in 1992. Called The Broad Based Government of National Unity, its fundamental law is based on a combination of the constitution, the Arusha accords, and political declarations by the parties. The MRND party was outlawed.

Political organizing was banned until 2003. The first post-Genocide of Tutsi, presidential and legislative elections were held in August and September 2003, respectively.

The biggest problems facing the government were the reintegration of more than 2 million refugees returning from as long ago as 1959; the end of the insurgency and counter-insurgency among ex-military and Interahamwe militia and the Rwandan Patriotic Army, which is concentrated in the north and south west; and the shift away from crisis to medium- and long-term development planning. The prison population will continue to be an urgent problem for the foreseeable future, having swelled to more than 100,000 in the 3 years after the war. 

The government prohibits any form of discrimination by gender, ethnicity, race or religion. The government has passed laws prohibiting emphasis on Hutu or Tutsi identity in most types of political activity.

== Political-economical focus ==
From 2005 to 2010 the political headcount ration on national poverty lines decreased by more than 10 percent and the life expectancy of about 64 years is higher than that of similar Sub-Sahara African countries as well as other low income countries.

In 2011, Rwanda&#x27;s emissions totaled 0.1 metric tons per capita, which was much lower than similar Sub-Sahara African countries as well as other low income countries. Rwanda´s school enrollment rate is much higher than similar Sub-Sahara African countries as well as other low income countries.

As of 2014, Rwanda was still considered a low income country with $7.890 billion GDP, based on U.S. dollars, with a total population of 11.34 million people.

As of 2015 Rwanda had made a shift towards economic improvement, centralizing its foreign exchange around coffee and tea production, &quot;helping to reduce poverty and inequality&quot;. The World Bank has praised Rwanda´s efforts.
Kagame has reached out to large companies, such as Costco and Starbucks, who as of 2015 were the two largest buyers of Rwandan coffee beans.

==Executive branch==
|President
|Paul Kagame
|Rwandese Patriotic Front
|24 March 2000
|Prime Minister
|Édouard Ngirente
|Social Democratic Party
|30 August 2017
The President of Rwanda is elected for a seven-year term by the people. The Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers are appointed by the president. The president has numerous powers that include creating policy in conjunction with the Cabinet, signing presidential orders, put into effect the prerogative of mercy, negotiating and passing treaties, commanding the armed forces, and declaring war or a state of crisis.

== Current Presidential Overview ==
The current President of Rwanda is Paul Kagame, born in 1957. He is the 6th President of Rwanda and was elected in 2003. In 2007, the former president, Pasteur Bizimungu, was released from prison on a presidential pardon. Kagame was reelected in 2010, receiving 93.1 percent of the votes cast. Since taking office, Kagame has raised business, reduced crime and corruption, and has attracted the likes of many foreign investors.

Kagame has not groomed anyone to be his successor, so there is nothing that points to who his successor could or should be.

President Paul Kagame and his Rwandan Patriotic Front are the dominant political forces in Rwanda. There is only one registered opposition party and many political opponents have fled into exile.

President Kagame received military training in Uganda, Tanzania and the United States. He was a founding member of current Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni&#x27;s rebel army in 1979 and headed its intelligence wing, helping Mr Museveni take power in 1986.

==Legislative branch==
The Parliament (&quot;Inteko Ishinga Amategeko &quot;or&quot; Parlement&quot;) has two chambers. The Chamber of Deputies &quot;(Umutwe w&#x27;Abadepite/Chambre des Députés)&quot; has 80 members, 53 of them elected for a five-year term by proportional representation with a 5% threshold, 24 (female members) elected by provincial councils, 2 by the National Youth Council and 1 by the Federation of the Associations of the Disabled. It is the only legislative chamber in the world where women (45) outnumber men (35).

The Senate &quot;(Umutwe wa Sena &quot;or&quot; Sénat)&quot; has 26 members elected or appointed for an eight-year term: 12 elected by provincial and sectoral councils, 8 appointed by the president to ensure the representation of historically marginalized communities, 4 by the Forum of political formations and 2 elected by the staff of the universities. Additional former presidents can request to be member of the senate. Rwanda is a one party dominant state with the Rwanda Patriotic Front in power. Opposition parties are allowed, and are represented in Parliament, but are widely considered to have no real chance of gaining power.

==Political parties and elections==
==Judicial branch==
The Supreme Court of Rwanda is the highest judicial power in Rwanda. It and the High Council of the Judiciary oversee the courts of lower ordinary jurisdictions and courts of the special jurisdictions in Rwanda. The Supreme Court consists of the Court President, Vice President, and 12 judges.

Established in 2001, the Gacaca Court was established by the National Unity Government to try cases of genocide against the Tutsis.

Judges are nominated by the president of the republic, after consulting with the Cabinet and the Superior Council of the Judiciary. They are then approved by the Senate. The court president and vice president are appointed for 8-year nonrenewable terms.

With regard to the legal profession, although the Rwanda Bar Association has been in existence since at least 1997, there is no clear indication as to how certain demographic groups, such as women, have fared in the legal field.

==Decentralization system==
Rwanda is composed of 4 provinces and capital city, 30 districts, 416 sectors, 2,148 cells and 14,837 villages. The four provinces, headed by a governor include the Northern, Southern, Eastern and the Western Provinces. The districts, formerly known as communes, are headed by mayors, two vice mayors, and a district council. As of 2006, Kigali has 3 districts, the Northern Province has 5, the Southern Province has 8, and both the Eastern and Western Provinces have 7 districts. Sectors are responsible for implementing and developing programs which deliver services for the social welfare of the population and promote good governance. Sectors are governed by an Executive Secretary and Sector Council. The council includes representatives of cells; members representing persons with disabilities, women, and youth; members representing all primary and secondary schools; members representing health service organizations; and members representing NGOs and cooperative societies. Cells are administrative providers of public services and development. They are governed by an Executive Secretary and Cell Council, whose membership is similar to that of the Sector Council. Villages are governed by A Village Council, an executive committee, and a village head. The Village council is made up of all residents who are at least 18. The executive committee are elected members who provide services to the community, such as information and training, social welfare, and security.

== Key ministers ==

* President: Paul Kagame
* Prime minister: Dr. Edouard Ngirente
* Agriculture &amp; animal resources: Dr. Ildephonse Musafiri
* Cabinet affairs: Ines Mpambara
* Defence: Juvenal Marizamunda
* Emergency Management: Maj Gen Albert Murasira
* Education: Gaspard Twagirayezu
* Family &amp; gender: Dr Valentine Uwamariya
* Finance &amp; economic planning: Dr. Uzziel Ndagijimana
* Foreign affairs &amp; co-operation: Dr. Vincent Biruta
* Health: Dr. Sabin Nsanzimana
* Infrastructure: Dr. Jimmy Gasore
* Internal security: Alfred Gasana
* Justice/attorney-general: Dr. Emmanuel Ugirashebuja
* Local government: Jean Claude Musabyimana
* Natural resources: Amb. Dr. Jeanne d&#x27;Arc Mujawamariya
* President&#x27;s office: Judith Uwizeye
* Public service &amp; labour: Prof Jeannette Bayisenge
* Sports: Aurore Mimosa Munyangaju
* Minister of Youth : Dr. Utumatwishima Jean Nepo Abdallah
* Trade &amp; industry: Prof. Jean Chrysostome Ngabitsinze
* ICT and Innovation: Paula Ingabire
* Minister of National Unity and Civic Engagement: Dr. Jean-Damascène Bizimana

== Ministers of State ==
* Minister of State in the Ministry of Local Government in charge of Social Affairs: Assumpta Ingabire
* Minister of State in the Ministry of Justice in Charge of Constitutional and Legal Affairs: Amb. Solina Nyirahabimana
* Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning in charge of Economic Planning: Dr. Claudine Uwera
* Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning in Charge of the National Treasury: Richard Tusabe
* Minister of State in the Ministry of Education in charge of Primary and Secondary Education: Gaspard Twagirayezu
* Minister of State in the Ministry of Education in Charge of ICT and TVET Education: Irere Claudette
* Minister of State in the Ministry of Health in charge of Primary Healthcare: Lt Col Dr. Tharcisse Mpunga 
* Minister of State in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation in charge of the East African Community: Prof. Manasseh Nshuti
* Minister of State of the Ministry of Youth and Culture: Sandrine Umutoni
* Minister of State of the Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources: Prof. Jean Chrysostome Ngabitsinze

== Other Cabinet Members ==
* Chief Executive Officer of Rwanda Development Board: Francis Gatare

==International organization participation==
Rwanda is member of
ACCT,
ACP,
AfDB,
C,
CCC,
CEEAC,
CEPGL,
ECA,
FAO,
G-77,
IBRD,
ICAO,
ICFTU,
ICRM,
IDA,
IFAD,
IFC,
IFRCS,
ILO,
IMF,
Intelsat,
Interpol,
IOC,
IOM (observer),
ITU,
NAM,
OPCW,
UN,
UNCTAD,
UNESCO,
UNIDO,
UPU,
WCL,
WHO,
WIPO,
WMO,
WToO,
WTrO

Rwanda joined the Commonwealth of Nations in 2009, making the country one of only two in the Commonwealth without a British colonial past; the other being the former Portuguese colony Mozambique.

== References ==
==External links==
*Official website of the Republic of Rwanda
*Official website of the Office of the Prime Minister of Rwanda
*Official website of the Office of the Prime Minister of Rwanda - Directory of Ministries and web addresses 
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="33" end="48" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q690240" start="62" end="85" title="Rwandan Patriotic Front" label="Rwandan Patriotic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231345" start="101" end="112" title="Paul Kagame" label="Paul Kagame"/>
<link wikidata="Q131297" start="134" end="147" title="Rwandan genocide" label="1994 genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q193092" start="171" end="176" title="Tutsi" label="Tutsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="177" end="189" title="Ethnicity" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q692209" start="357" end="372" title="electoral fraud" label="electoral fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="489" end="506" title="Semi-presidential system" label="semi-presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="507" end="515" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q596565" start="529" end="548" title="List of presidents of Rwanda" label="president of Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="556" end="569" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="587" end="602" title="executive power" label="executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590706" start="613" end="637" title="Prime Minister of Rwanda" label="prime minister of Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687931" start="648" end="662" title="Constitution of Rwanda" label="constitutional"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="663" end="681" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="684" end="701" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="724" end="734" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510861" start="775" end="781" title="Senate of Rwanda" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q320292" start="790" end="809" title="Chamber of Deputies of Rwanda" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="1093" end="1099" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q690240" start="2183" end="2207" title="Rwandese Patriotic Front" label="Rwandese Patriotic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q272580" start="2282" end="2301" title="Juvénal Habyarimana" label="Juvénal Habyarimana"/>
<link wikidata="Q957943" start="2498" end="2502" title="MRND" label="MRND"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323212" start="2845" end="2855" title="insurgency" label="insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q760037" start="2860" end="2878" title="counter-insurgency" label="counter-insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q755973" start="2901" end="2912" title="Interahamwe" label="Interahamwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q426722" start="3231" end="3234" title="Rwandan Civil War" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="3753" end="3762" title="Greenhouse gas emissions" label="emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="4380" end="4390" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q715583" start="4472" end="4478" title="Costco" label="Costco"/>
<link wikidata="Q37158" start="4483" end="4492" title="Starbucks" label="Starbucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q596565" start="4585" end="4594" title="President of Rwanda" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231345" start="4596" end="4607" title="Paul Kagame" label="Paul Kagame"/>
<link wikidata="Q690240" start="4609" end="4633" title="Rwandese Patriotic Front" label="Rwandese Patriotic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590706" start="4650" end="4664" title="Prime Minister of Rwanda" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q38188115" start="4666" end="4682" title="Édouard Ngirente" label="Édouard Ngirente"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366714" start="4684" end="4707" title="Social Democratic Party (Rwanda)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q596565" start="4728" end="4747" title="List of Presidents of Rwanda" label="President of Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176454" start="4823" end="4843" title="Council of Ministers of Rwanda" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162795" start="6219" end="6229" title="Parliament of Rwanda" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="6302" end="6310" title="bicameralism" label="chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q320292" start="6316" end="6335" title="Chamber of Deputies of Rwanda" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="6453" end="6480" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510861" start="6737" end="6743" title="Senate of Rwanda" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439061" start="7170" end="7194" title="one party dominant state" label="one party dominant state"/>
<link wikidata="Q690240" start="7204" end="7226" title="Rwanda Patriotic Front" label="Rwanda Patriotic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q192852" start="7237" end="7247" title="Opposition (politics)" label="Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="7248" end="7255" title="political parties" label="parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644978" start="7432" end="7455" title="Supreme Court of Rwanda" label="Supreme Court of Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q871217" start="8393" end="8402" title="Provinces of Rwanda" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q845807" start="8534" end="8542" title="Northern Province, Rwanda" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q853162" start="8544" end="8552" title="Southern Province, Rwanda" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q853152" start="8554" end="8561" title="Eastern Province, Rwanda" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q737354" start="8570" end="8587" title="Western Province, Rwanda" label="Western Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231345" start="9883" end="9894" title="Paul Kagame" label="Paul Kagame"/>
<link wikidata="Q38188115" start="9917" end="9933" title="Edouard Ngirente" label="Edouard Ngirente"/>
<link wikidata="Q122199322" start="9976" end="9995" title="Ildephonse Musafiri" label="Ildephonse Musafiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q109610585" start="10015" end="10028" title="Ines Mpambara" label="Ines Mpambara"/>
<link wikidata="Q119217524" start="10040" end="10059" title="Juvenal Marizamunda" label="Juvenal Marizamunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q57586146" start="10092" end="10107" title="Albert Murasira" label="Albert Murasira"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10121" end="10140" title="Gaspard Twagirayezu" label="Gaspard Twagirayezu"/>
<link wikidata="Q108571050" start="10167" end="10186" title="Valentine Uwamariya" label="Valentine Uwamariya"/>
<link wikidata="Q55760353" start="10222" end="10244" title="Uzziel Ndagijimana" label="Dr. Uzziel Ndagijimana"/>
<link wikidata="Q40155410" start="10287" end="10301" title="Vincent Biruta" label="Vincent Biruta"/>
<link wikidata="Q47006446" start="10316" end="10332" title="Sabin Nsanzimana" label="Sabin Nsanzimana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10355" end="10367" title="Jimmy Gasore" label="Jimmy Gasore"/>
<link wikidata="Q110274041" start="10389" end="10402" title="Alfred Gasana" label="Alfred Gasana"/>
<link wikidata="Q110489422" start="10435" end="10456" title="Emmanuel Ugirashebuja" label="Emmanuel Ugirashebuja"/>
<link wikidata="Q115165712" start="10477" end="10500" title="Jean Claude Musabyimana" label="Jean Claude Musabyimana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176134" start="10522" end="10561" title="Jeanne d&amp;#x27;Arc Mujawamariya" label="Amb. Dr. Jeanne d&amp;#x27;Arc Mujawamariya"/>
<link wikidata="Q38242931" start="10589" end="10603" title="Judith Uwizeye" label="Judith Uwizeye"/>
<link wikidata="Q109606456" start="10640" end="10659" title="Jeannette Bayisenge" label="Jeannette Bayisenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q74386992" start="10670" end="10694" title="Aurore Mimosa Munyangaju" label="Aurore Mimosa Munyangaju"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10721" end="10753" title="Utumatwishima Jean Nepo Abdallah" label="Utumatwishima Jean Nepo Abdallah"/>
<link wikidata="Q113493894" start="10784" end="10812" title="Jean Chrysostome Ngabitsinze" label="Jean Chrysostome Ngabitsinze"/>
<link wikidata="Q57531804" start="10835" end="10849" title="Paula Ingabire" label="Paula Ingabire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684792" start="10905" end="10928" title="Jean-Damascène Bizimana" label="Jean-Damascène Bizimana"/>
<link wikidata="Q109658557" start="11040" end="11057" title="Assumpta Ingabire" label="Assumpta Ingabire"/>
<link wikidata="Q57531764" start="11157" end="11177" title="Solina Nyirahabimana" label="Solina Nyirahabimana"/>
<link wikidata="Q109606476" start="11283" end="11297" title="Claudine Uwera" label="Claudine Uwera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11403" end="11417" title="Richard Tusabe" label="Richard Tusabe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11513" end="11532" title="Gaspard Twagirayezu" label="Gaspard Twagirayezu"/>
<link wikidata="Q110351618" start="11619" end="11634" title="Irere Claudette" label="Irere Claudette"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11725" end="11741" title="Tharcisse Mpunga" label="Tharcisse Mpunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q93111837" start="11875" end="11890" title="Manasseh Nshuti" label="Manasseh Nshuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q113493894" start="12045" end="12073" title="Jean Chrysostome Ngabitsinze" label="Jean Chrysostome Ngabitsinze"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12158" end="12172" title="Francis Gatare" label="Francis Gatare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826590" start="12239" end="12243" title="Agency for the French-Speaking Community" label="ACCT"/>
<link wikidata="Q294278" start="12245" end="12248" title="African, Caribbean, and Pacific Group of States" label="ACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q340195" start="12250" end="12254" title="African Development Bank" label="AfDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="12256" end="12257" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q605326" start="12259" end="12262" title="Customs Cooperation Council" label="CCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q189966" start="12264" end="12269" title="Economic Community of Central African States" label="CEEAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331783" start="12271" end="12276" title="Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries" label="CEPGL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144508" start="12278" end="12281" title="Economic Commission for Africa" label="ECA"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="12283" end="12286" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="FAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q477328" start="12288" end="12292" title="Group of 77" label="G-77"/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="12294" end="12298" title="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="IBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="12300" end="12304" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="ICAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138589" start="12306" end="12311" title="International Confederation of Free Trade Unions" label="ICFTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="12313" end="12317" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="ICRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q827525" start="12319" end="12322" title="International Development Association" label="IDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q689859" start="12324" end="12328" title="International Fund for Agricultural Development" label="IFAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q656801" start="12330" end="12333" title="International Finance Corporation" label="IFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069175" start="12335" end="12340" title="International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies" label="IFRCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="12342" end="12345" title="International Labour Organization" label="ILO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="12347" end="12350" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q15546770" start="12352" end="12360" title="International Telecommunications Satellite Organization" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="12362" end="12370" title="International Criminal Police Organization" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="12372" end="12375" title="International Olympic Committee" label="IOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q472311" start="12377" end="12380" title="International Organization for Migration" label="IOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="12393" end="12396" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="ITU"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="12398" end="12401" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="NAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="12403" end="12407" title="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons" label="OPCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="12409" end="12411" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="12413" end="12419" title="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development" label="UNCTAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="12421" end="12427" title="United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q386120" start="12429" end="12434" title="United Nations Industrial Development Organization" label="UNIDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="12436" end="12439" title="Universal Postal Union" label="UPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q595208" start="12441" end="12444" title="World Confederation of Labour" label="WCL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="12446" end="12449" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q177773" start="12451" end="12455" title="World Intellectual Property Organization" label="WIPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="12457" end="12460" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="WMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q61923" start="12462" end="12466" title="World Tourism Organization" label="WToO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="12468" end="12472" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTrO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="12492" end="12515" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="12590" end="12611" title="British Empire" label="British colonial past"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="12640" end="12657" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="12658" end="12668" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25650" wikidata="Q966227" url="?curid=25650" title="Economy of Rwanda">
<text>The economy of Rwanda has undergone rapid industrialisation due to a successful governmental policy. It has a mixed economy. Since the early-2000s, Rwanda has witnessed an economic boom, which improved the living standards of many Rwandans. The President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame, has noted his ambition to make Rwanda the &quot;Singapore of Africa&quot;. The industrial sector is growing, contributing 16% of GDP in 2012.

==History==

===Before the civil war and genocide===
In the 1960s and 1970s, Rwanda&#x27;s prudent financial policies, coupled with generous external aid and relatively favorable terms of trade, resulted in sustained growth in per capita income and low inflation rates. However, when world coffee prices fell sharply in the 1980s, growth became erratic.

Compared to an annual GDP growth rate of 6.5% from 1973 to 1980, growth slowed to an average of 2.9% a year from 1980 through 1985 and was stagnant from 1986 to 1990. The crisis peaked in 1990 when the first measures of an IMF structural adjustment program were carried out. While the program was not fully implemented before the war, key measures such as two large devaluations and the removal of official prices were enacted. The consequences on salaries and purchasing power were rapid and dramatic. This crisis particularly affected the educated elite, most of whom were employed in civil service or state-owned enterprises.

During the 5 years of civil war that culminated in the 1994 genocide, GDP declined in 3 out of 5 years, posting a rapid decline at more than 40% in 1994, the year of the genocide. The 9% increase in real GDP for 1995, the first postwar year, signalled the resurgence of economic activity.

===After the genocide ===

The 1994 genocide destroyed Rwanda&#x27;s fragile economic base, severely impoverished the population, particularly women, and eroded the country&#x27;s ability to attract private and external investment. However, Rwanda has made significant progress in stabilizing and rehabilitating its economy. In June 1998, Rwanda signed an Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility with the International Monetary Fund. Rwanda has also embarked upon an ambitious privatization program with the World Bank.

In the immediate postwar period—mid-1994 through 1995—emergency humanitarian assistance of more than $307.4 million was largely directed to relief efforts in Rwanda and in the refugee camps in neighboring countries where Rwandans fled during the war. In 1996, humanitarian relief aid began to shift to reconstruction and development assistance.

The United States, Belgium, Germany, the Netherlands, France, the People&#x27;s Republic of China, the World Bank, the UN Development Programme and the European Development Fund will continue to account for the substantial aid. Rehabilitation of government infrastructure, in particular the justice system, was an international priority, as well as the continued repair and expansion of infrastructure, health facilities, and schools.

After the Rwandan Genocide, the Tutsi-led government began a major program to improve the country&#x27;s economy and reduce its dependence on subsistence farming. The failing economy had been a major factor behind the genocide, as was overpopulation and the resulting competition for scarce farmland and other resources. The government focused primarily on building up its manufacturing and service industries and eliminating barriers to trade and development.
The Government of Rwanda posted a 13% GDP growth rate in 1996 through improved collection of tax revenues, accelerated privatization of state enterprises to stop the drain on government resources, and continued improvement in export crop and food production. Tea plantations and factories continue to be rehabilitated, and coffee, always a smallholder&#x27;s crop, is being more seriously rehabilitated and tended as the farmers&#x27; sense of security returns.

Coffee production of 14,578,560 tons in 2000 compares to a pre-civil war variation between 35,000 and 40,000 tons. By 2002 tea became Rwanda&#x27;s largest export, with export earnings from tea reaching US$18 million equating to 15,000 tons of dried tea. Rwanda&#x27;s natural resources are limited. A small mineral industry provides about 5% of foreign exchange earnings. Concentrates exist of the heavy minerals cassiterite (a primary source of tin), and coltan (used to manufacture electronic capacitors, used in consumer electronics products such as cell phones, DVD players, video game systems and computers).

By mid-1997, up to 75% of the factories functioning before the war had returned to production, at an average of 75% of their capacity. Investments in the industrial sector continue to mostly be limited to the repair of existing industrial plants. Retail trade, devastated by the war, has revived quickly, with many new small businesses established by Rwandan returnees from Uganda, Burundi, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Industry received little external assistance from the end of the war through 1995. Beginning in 1996–97, the government became increasingly active in helping the industrial sector to restore production through technical and financial assistance, including loan guarantees, economic liberalization, and the privatization of state-owned enterprises. In early 1998, the government set up a one-stop investment promotion center and implemented a new investment code that created an enabling environment for foreign and local investors. An autonomous revenue authority also has begun operation, improving collections and accountability.

Cassiterite production peaked at 1,000 tonnes in 1990, but was under 700 tonnes in 2000. Recorded coltan production has soared from 147 tonnes in 1999 to 1,300 tonnes in 2001, and coltan was the country&#x27;s biggest single export earner in 2001. At least part of the increase in production is because of new mines opening up in Rwanda. However it is true, as has frequently been observed, that the increase is also because of the fraudulent re-export of Congolese coltan. In addition to the well-publicised involvement in this trade of the Rwandan Defence Force (RDF), another important factor in the coltan re-export is that international dealers are under pressure not to buy from the DRC, thus increasing the incentive for DRC coltan to be re-exported as Rwanda&#x27;s. Rwanda is also alleged to be trading in fraudulently exported gold and diamonds from the DRC.

===Current economy and economic prospects===

The country entered a high period of economic growth in 2006, and the following year managed to register 8% economic growth, a record it has sustained since, turning it into one of the fastest-growing economies in Africa. This sustained economic growth has succeeded in reducing poverty and also reducing fertility rates, with growth between 2006 and 2011 reducing the percentage of the country&#x27;s population living in poverty from 57% to 45%.The country&#x27;s infrastructure has also grown rapidly, with connections to electricity going from 91,000 in 2006 to 215,000 in 2011. Rwanda wants to achieve Middle Income Country status by 2035 and High-Income Country status by 2050.

Existing foreign investment is concentrated in commercial establishments, mining, tea, coffee, and tourism. Minimum wage and social security regulations are in force, and the four prewar independent trade unions are back in operation. The largest union, CESTRAR, was created as an organ of the government but became fully independent with the political reforms introduced by the 1991 constitution.

In 2016, Rwanda was ranked 42nd and second best country in Africa to do business in the Mara Foundation-The Ashish J Thakkar Global Entrepreneurship Index report.

However, a recent research in the UK-based political science journal, &quot;Review of African Political Economy&quot;, indicates that economic growth may be slower than what official figures suggest. Researchers stated that average consumption per household closely followed growth in GDP per capita from 2000 to 2005, but diverged afterwards when average consumption per household stagnated despite huge improvements in GDP per capita from 2005 to 2013.

==Agriculture and primary resources==


Rwanda produced in 2019:

* 2.6 million tons of banana;
* 1.2 million tonnes of sweet potato;
* 1.1 million tons of cassava;
* 973 thousand tons of potato;
* 484 thousand tons of beans;
* 421 thousand tons of maize;
* 256 thousand tons of pumpkin;
* 171 thousand tons of taro;
* 159 thousand tons of sorghum;
* 131 thousand tons of rice;
* 114 thousand tons of sugarcane;
* 105 thousand tons of tomato;
* 36 thousand tons of pineapple;
* 31 thousand tons of tea;
* 29 thousand tons of coffee;
* 5.4 thousand tons of tobacco;

In addition to other productions of other agricultural products. Products such as bananas, pineapples, tea, coffee, and tobacco are high-value, export-oriented products.

In 2019 agriculture accounted for 29% of the economy of Rwanda.

Rwanda has long relied on coffee as a cash crop. The crash of coffee prices in 1989 caused a great decrease in purchasing power, and increased domestic tensions.

Rwanda&#x27;s economy suffered heavily during the 1994 Genocide, with widespread loss of life, failure to maintain the infrastructure, looting, and neglect of important cash crops. This caused a large drop in GDP and destroyed the country&#x27;s ability to attract private and external investment. The economy has since strengthened, with per-capita GDP (PPP) estimated at $2,225 in 2018, compared with $416 in 1994.
Major export markets include China, Germany, and the United States. The economy is managed by the central National Bank of Rwanda and the currency is the Rwandan franc; in June 2010, the exchange rate was 588 francs to the United States dollar. Rwanda joined the East African Community in 2007 and there were plans for a common East African shilling, which it had been hoped would be in place by 2015, but have not yet reached fruition (2020).

Rwanda is a country of few natural resources, and the economy is based mostly on subsistence agriculture by local farmers using simple tools. An estimated 90% of the working population farms, and agriculture comprised an estimated 42.0% of GDP in 2010. Since the mid-1980s, farm sizes and food production have been decreasing, due in part to the resettlement of displaced people. Despite Rwanda&#x27;s fertile ecosystem, food production often does not keep pace with population growth, and food imports are required.

Crops grown in the country include coffee, tea, pyrethrum, bananas, beans, sorghum and potatoes. Coffee and tea are the major cash crops for export, with the high altitudes, steep slopes and volcanic soils providing favourable conditions. Reliance on agricultural exports makes Rwanda vulnerable to shifts in their prices.

Agricultural animals raised in Rwanda include cows, goats, sheep, pigs, chicken, and rabbits, with geographical variation in the numbers of each. Production systems are mostly traditional, although there are a few intensive dairy farms around Kigali. Shortages of land and water, insufficient and poor-quality feed, and regular disease epidemics with insufficient veterinary services are major constraints that restrict output. A &quot;One Cow per Poor Family Programme&quot; (Girinka), implemented in 2006, distributed 341,065 cows in 2018.

Fishing takes place on the country&#x27;s lakes, but stocks are very depleted, and live fish are being imported in an attempt to revive the industry.

==Mining==

Rwanda&#x27;s mining industry is an important contributor, generating US$93 million in 2008. Minerals mined include cassiterite, wolframite, sapphires, gold, and coltan, which is used in the manufacture of electronic and communication devices such as mobile phones.
Production of methane from Lake Kivu began in 1983, but to date has been used only by the Bralirwa Brewery.

In 2019, the country was the 7th largest world producer of tungsten and the 12th largest world producer of tin.

== Energy and electrification ==
Rwanda has made tremendous strides in improving electrification in the 21st century. A great number of new areas has become electrified through an expansion of infrastructure.

Depletion of the forests will eventually pressure Rwandans to turn to fuel sources other than charcoal for cooking and heating. Given the abundance of mountain streams and lakes, the potential for hydroelectric power is substantial. Rwanda is exploiting these natural resources through joint hydroelectric projects with Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

== Manufacturing ==
Rwanda&#x27;s manufacturing sector is dominated by the production of import substitutes for internal consumption. The larger enterprises produce beer, soft drinks, cigarettes, hoes, wheelbarrows, soap, mattresses, plastic pipe, roofing materials, and bottled water. Other products manufactured include agricultural products, small-scale beverages, soap, furniture, shoes, cement, plastic goods, textiles and cigarettes.

== Tourism and services ==

Rwanda&#x27;s service sector suffered during the late-2000s recession as banks reduced lending and foreign aid projects and investment were reduced. The sector rebounded in 2010, becoming the country&#x27;s largest sector by economic output and contributing 43.6% of the country&#x27;s GDP. Key tertiary contributors include banking and finance, wholesale and retail trade, hotels and restaurants, transport, storage, communication, insurance, real estate, business services and public administration including education and health.

Tourism is one of the fastest-growing economic resources and became the country&#x27;s leading foreign exchange earner in 2011. In spite of the genocide&#x27;s legacy, the country is increasingly perceived internationally as a safe destination; The Directorate of Immigration and Emigration recorded 405,801 people visiting the country between January and June 2011; 16% of these arrived from outside Africa. Revenue from tourism was US$115,600,000 between January and June 2011; holidaymakers contributed 43% of this revenue, despite being only 9% of the numbers.

Rwanda is one of only two countries in which mountain gorillas can be visited safely; gorilla tracking in the Volcanoes National Park attracts thousands of visitors per year, who are prepared to pay high prices for permits. Other attractions include: Nyungwe Forest, home to chimpanzees, Ruwenzori colobus and other primates, the resorts of Lake Kivu, and Akagera, a small savanna reserve in the east of the country.

Rwanda&#x27;s tourism is centred on the attractions of Volcanoes National Park (PNV) with its six volcanoes and the protected population of mountain gorillas made famous by Dian Fossey. Additionally, tourism is drawn to central Africa&#x27;s largest protected wetland Akagera National Park, with its populations of hippopotami, cape buffalo, zebras, elephants, elands, and other big game animals. Birdwatching-related tourism has a potential to develop as well, especially in Nyungwe National Park, among the largest uncut forest reserves in Africa. Nyungwe National Park is home to over 300 species of birds. And a vast variety of wild life as well.

Several memorial sites associated with the Rwandan genocide have begun to generate significant dark tourism. For example, the Gisozi Genocide Memorial Site in the Gasabo District of Kigali—the burial place of approximately 300,000 victims of the genocide—has a related genocide exhibition area and library and has plans to develop a teaching centre on the history of the genocide. Another major genocide-related memorial centre attracting tourists is the Murambi Genocide Memorial Site housed in the former Murambi Technical School where 45,000 people were murdered and 850 skeletons and mummified remains of the victims are on display.

Two other major memorial sites associated with the genocide are in Kicukiro District: Rebero Genocide Memorial Site where 14,400 victims are buried and the Nyanza-Kicukiro Genocide Memorial Site where 5,000 victims were killed after Belgian soldiers who serving in the United Nations peacekeeping forces abandoned them. In Kibungo Province, the site of the Nyarubuye Massacre is home to the Nyarubuye Genocide Memorial Site where an estimated 20,000 victims were killed after seeking refuge in the Roman Catholic church and homes of the nuns and priest there.

== Historical statistics ==
=== GDP per capita (nominal) ===
Source: International Monetary Fund (IMF)

=== GDP per capita (PPP) ===
Source: International Monetary Fund (IMF)
The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2023.
== See also ==
* Rwanda
* Energy in Rwanda
* Telecommunications in Rwanda
* Transport in Rwanda
* United Nations Economic Commission for Africa

General:
* Economy of Africa

==References==
===Works cited===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* Pulitzer Center on Crisis Reporting Rwanda Human Conflict and Environmental Consequences (Video)
* Rwanda latest trade data on ITC Trade Map
* World Bank Summary Trade Statistics Rwanda


* Visit Rwanda </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q966227" start="4" end="21" title="Economy of Rwanda" label="economy of Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="148" end="154" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231345" start="266" end="277" title="Paul Kagame" label="Paul Kagame"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="327" end="336" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="340" end="346" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141807" start="1004" end="1025" title="structural adjustment" label="structural adjustment"/>
<link wikidata="Q426722" start="1429" end="1438" title="Rwandan Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q131297" start="1728" end="1741" title="Rwandan genocide" label="1994 genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378807" start="2053" end="2092" title="Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility" label="Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="2102" end="2129" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="2205" end="2215" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q865909" start="2539" end="2561" title="development aid" label="development assistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2568" end="2581" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="2583" end="2590" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2592" end="2599" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="2605" end="2616" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2618" end="2624" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="2630" end="2661" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="2683" end="2707" title="UN Development Programme" label="UN Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377704" start="2716" end="2741" title="European Development Fund" label="European Development Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q191222" start="4338" end="4349" title="cassiterite" label="cassiterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="4371" end="4374" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q518713" start="4381" end="4387" title="coltan" label="coltan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="4478" end="4488" title="Mobile phone" label="cell phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783103" start="4491" end="4501" title="DVD player" label="DVD player"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076" start="4504" end="4522" title="video game systems" label="video game systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="4527" end="4536" title="Personal computer" label="computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="4914" end="4920" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="4922" end="4929" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="4939" end="4971" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="6560" end="6575" title="economic growth" label="economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="6802" end="6809" title="poverty" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="6828" end="6843" title="fertility rates" label="fertility rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q376860" start="7130" end="7151" title="Middle-income country" label="Middle Income Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="7171" end="7190" title="High-income country" label="High-Income Country"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7462" end="7469" title="CESTRAR" label="CESTRAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318360" start="7847" end="7882" title="Review of African Political Economy" label="Review of African Political Economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="8315" end="8321" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="8347" end="8359" title="sweet potato" label="sweet potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="8383" end="8390" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="8415" end="8421" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="8446" end="8451" title="beans" label="beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="8476" end="8481" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q165308" start="8506" end="8513" title="pumpkin" label="pumpkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q227997" start="8538" end="8542" title="taro" label="taro"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="8567" end="8574" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="8599" end="8603" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="8628" end="8637" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="8662" end="8668" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493" start="8692" end="8701" title="pineapple" label="pineapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097" start="8725" end="8728" title="tea" label="tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="8752" end="8758" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="8783" end="8790" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="9547" end="9550" title="Purchasing power parity" label="PPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q550207" start="9565" end="9566" title="Geary-Khamis dollar" label="$"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314980" start="9715" end="9738" title="National Bank of Rwanda" label="National Bank of Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741" start="9763" end="9776" title="Rwandan franc" label="Rwandan franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275499" start="9937" end="9958" title="East African shilling (new)" label="East African shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="10135" end="10158" title="subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q16269373" start="10620" end="10629" title="pyrethrum" label="pyrethrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="10647" end="10654" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q191222" start="11718" end="11729" title="cassiterite" label="cassiterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q541128" start="11731" end="11741" title="wolframite" label="wolframite"/>
<link wikidata="Q127583" start="11743" end="11751" title="sapphire" label="sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="Q518713" start="11764" end="11770" title="coltan" label="coltan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="11882" end="11889" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q125912" start="11895" end="11904" title="Lake Kivu" label="Lake Kivu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956057" start="11958" end="11974" title="Bralirwa Brewery" label="Bralirwa Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="12036" end="12044" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="12084" end="12087" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q177463" start="12394" end="12402" title="charcoal" label="charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="12497" end="12516" title="hydroelectric power" label="hydroelectric power"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="13154" end="13168" title="service sector" label="service sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="13189" end="13209" title="late-2000s recession" label="late-2000s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829205" start="13674" end="13681" title="Tourism in Rwanda" label="Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q737878" start="14285" end="14301" title="mountain gorilla" label="mountain gorilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714375" start="14613" end="14628" title="savanna reserve" label="savanna reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q932736" start="14713" end="14736" title="Volcanoes National Park" label="Volcanoes National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="14756" end="14763" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q737878" start="14798" end="14814" title="mountain gorilla" label="mountain gorilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q234224" start="14831" end="14842" title="Dian Fossey" label="Dian Fossey"/>
<link wikidata="Q116715" start="14926" end="14947" title="Akagera National Park" label="Akagera National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="14973" end="14984" title="hippopotamus" label="hippopotami"/>
<link wikidata="Q160042" start="14986" end="14998" title="cape buffalo" label="cape buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q32789" start="15000" end="15005" title="zebra" label="zebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="15008" end="15016" title="elephant" label="elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q840041" start="15019" end="15025" title="Taurotragus" label="elands"/>
<link wikidata="Q685629" start="15055" end="15067" title="Birdwatching" label="Birdwatching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356828" start="15134" end="15155" title="Nyungwe National Park" label="Nyungwe National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q131297" start="15353" end="15369" title="Rwandan genocide" label="Rwandan genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042619" start="15405" end="15417" title="dark tourism" label="dark tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424659" start="15473" end="15488" title="Gasabo District" label="Gasabo District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5964053" start="15817" end="15841" title="Murambi Technical School" label="Murambi Technical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424726" start="16015" end="16032" title="Kicukiro District" label="Kicukiro District"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="16181" end="16188" title="Belgium" label="Belgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="16217" end="16231" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408373" start="16271" end="16287" title="Kibungo Province" label="Kibungo Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q655304" start="16305" end="16323" title="Nyarubuye Massacre" label="Nyarubuye Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="16446" end="16460" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="16578" end="16605" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="16650" end="16677" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="16770" end="16776" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q11857921" start="16779" end="16795" title="Energy in Rwanda" label="Energy in Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696010" start="16798" end="16826" title="Telecommunications in Rwanda" label="Telecommunications in Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764335" start="16829" end="16848" title="Transport in Rwanda" label="Transport in Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144508" start="16851" end="16896" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa" label="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q580864" start="16909" end="16926" title="Economy of Africa" label="Economy of Africa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25651" wikidata="Q7696010" url="?curid=25651" title="Telecommunications in Rwanda">
<text>Telecommunications in Rwanda include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.

==Regulation==

Two government-appointed regulatory bodies, the Rwanda Information Technology Authority under the Rwanda Development Board, and the Rwanda Utilities Regulatory Agency (RURA), supervise the regulatory frameworks and implementation of the county&#x27;s policies and strategies in the telecommunications sector. RURA is a national body with autonomy in its administrative and financial management. However, its seven board members, supervisory board, and the managing director are nominated by and work under full control of the government.

The telecommunications sector was liberalized in 2001, and the number of companies providing telephone and Internet services increased from one, the state-run Rwandatel, to 10 in 2012. These providers are all privately owned, with the exception of Rwandatel. Rwandatel had the largest market share of fixed broadband subscriptions as of September 2012.

==Radio and television==

* Radio stations:
** Government-owned and operated Radio Rwanda has a national reach; 9 private radio stations; transmissions of multiple international broadcasters are available (2007);
** 0 AM, 8 FM, and 1 shortwave stations; two main FM programs are broadcast through a system of repeaters (2005).
* Radios: 601,000 (1997).
* Television stations: (RBA)
** Rwanda Television: The government owns and operates the only TV station, Television Rwandaise (2007);
** Two stations (2004).
* Television sets: NA; probably less than 1,000 (1997).

State TV and radio reach the largest audiences, radio is the main source of news, and the international radio stations BBC World Service, Voice of America (VOA), and Deutsche Welle (DW) are available. Most radio stations are accessible online, either through their own websites and blogs, or through social media.

Radio, and in particular the &quot;hate&quot; station Radio Télévision Libre des Mille Collines (RTLM), played a role in the 1994 genocide.

==Telephones==
* Calling code: +250
* International call prefix: 000
* Main lines:
** 11,215 lines in use, 188th in the world (2019)
** Fixed lines subscriptions have dropped sharply since 2014
**Airtel Rwanda Ltd controls over 80% of the market
* Mobile cellular: 
**9.53 million lines, 90th in the world (2019)
**Mobile cellular subscriptions have almost tripled over the past decade
**MTN Rwanda Ltd and Airtel Rwanda Ltd split the mobile cellular market roughly 60/40 
* Telephone system: 
** a government-sponsored fiber-optic cable expansion project was completed improving telecommunication services throughout the country (2011); a well-developed mobile cellular network covers nearly 98 percent of the population (2013).
** a small, inadequate telephone system primarily serves business, education, and government; the capital, Kigali, is connected to the centers of the provinces by microwave radio relay and by cellular telephone service; much of the network depends on wire and HF radiotelephone; combined fixed-line and mobile-cellular telephone density has increased and now exceeds 40 telephones per 100 persons, international connections employ microwave radio relay to neighboring countries and satellite communications to more distant countries (2010). 
* Satellite earth stations: 1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean) in Kigali includes telex and telefax service (2010).

==Internet==

* Top-level domain: .rw
* Internet users: 
** 2.65 million, 107th in the world; 21.77% of the population (2018)
** 450,000 users (2009), 118th in the world; 
** 25,000 users (2002).
* Fixed broadband: 7,501 subscriptions, 175th in the world; less than 1% of population (2018)
* Wireless broadband: 379,331 subscriptions, 99th in the world; 3.2% of the population, 119th in the world (2012).
* Internet hosts: 1,447 hosts, 168th in the world (2012).
* IPv4: 195,840 addresses allocated, 117th in the world, less than 0.05% of the world total, 16.8 addresses per 1000 people (2012).
* Internet Service Providers: 4 ISPs (2005).

Rwanda ranked in first place in Africa for broadband download speeds and 62nd globally with a speed of 7.88 Mbit/s in February 2013.

The Internet has been available from mobile cellular phones since 2007, but the high cost of phones and limited bandwidth restrained its popularity for several years. With completion of the government-sponsored fiber-optic cable expansion project in 2011, telecommunication services throughout the country have improved and the amount of mobile cellular Internet access and use has increased.

In 2009, RURA set up the Rwanda Internet Exchange (RINEX) to connect ISPs and enable the routing of local Internet traffic through a central exchange point without having to pass through international networks. ISPs can also opt to connect via RINEX to the international Internet. As of the end of 2013, only five ISPs exchange Internet traffic via RINEX, and the price for national access remained the same as for international access.

Internet access is limited mostly to Kigali, the capital city, and remains beyond the economic capacity of most citizens, particularly those in rural areas who are limited by low disposable incomes and a low level of digital literacy. More than 90% of the population lives in rural areas, with most engaged in subsistence agriculture. Between 70% and 90% of the population speaks only Kinyarwanda, making Internet content in English unavailable to the majority of Rwandans. In 2015, the Internet penetration rate was about 25% of the population.

=== Digital Progress ===
The 2021 UNDP report highlights Rwanda&#x27;s advancements in incorporating technology in education, specifically aiding students with disabilities. Smart e-learning technology, including smart boards and internet access, has been introduced to support students with visual and hearing impairments.

===Internet censorship and surveillance===
Rwanda was rated &quot;partly free&quot; in &quot;Freedom on the Net 2013&quot; by Freedom House with a score of 48, somewhat past the midway point between the end of the range for &quot;free&quot; (30) and the start of the range for &quot;not free&quot; (60).

The law does not provide for government restrictions on access to the Internet, but there are reports that the government blocks access to Web sites within the country that are critical of the government.

In 2012 and 2013, some independent online news outlets and opposition blogs were intermittently inaccessible. It is uncertain whether the disruptions are due to government blocking, as was the case in past years, or to technical issues. Some opposition sites continue to be blocked on some ISPs in early 2013, including Umusingi and Inyenyeri News, which were first blocked in 2011. Social-networking sites such as YouTube, Facebook, Twitter, and international blog hosting services are freely available.

The websites of international human rights organizations such as Freedom House, Amnesty International, and Human Rights Watch, as well as the online versions of media outlets such as the BBC, Le Monde, Radio France Internationale, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, and many others are freely accessible. Websites of national news outlets are also easily accessible. These include the web versions of state-run media and pro-government outlets as well as independent outlets such as The Rwanda Focus, Rushyashya, The Chronicles, Umusanzu, and Rwanda Dispatch.

The constitution provides for freedom of speech and press &quot;in conditions prescribed by the law.&quot; The government at times restricts these rights. The government intimidates and arrests journalists who express views that are deemed critical on sensitive topics. Laws prohibit promoting divisionism, genocide ideology, and genocide denial, &quot;spreading rumors aimed at inciting the population to rise against the regime&quot;, expressing contempt for the Head of State, other high-level public officials, administrative authorities or other public servants, and slander of foreign and international officials and dignitaries. These acts or expression of these viewpoints sometimes results in arrest, harassment, or intimidation. Numerous journalists practice self-censorship.

In June 2011 a court convicted journalist Jean Bosco Gasasira in absentia of displaying contempt for the head of state and incitement to civil disobedience for his writings in the online publication Umuvugizi and sentenced him to two and a half years in prison.

The constitution and law prohibit arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence; however, there are numerous reports the government monitors homes, telephone calls, e-mail, Internet chat rooms, other private communications, movements, and personal and institutional data. In some cases monitoring has led to detention and interrogation by State security forces (SSF).

== See also ==
* Terrestrial fibre optic cable projects in Rwanda
* Media of Rwanda

==References==
* 
==External links==
* Rwanda Information Communication and Technology Association (RICTA), manager of the .rw domain.
* Rwanda Broadcasting Agency (RBA), state-owned radio and television broadcaster.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7696010" start="0" end="28" title="Telecommunications in Rwanda" label="Telecommunications in Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383759" start="818" end="827" title="Rwandatel" label="Rwandatel"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="1041" end="1055" title="Radio broadcasting" label="Radio stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126285" start="1090" end="1102" title="Radio Rwanda" label="Radio Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q159391" start="1342" end="1348" title="Receiver (radio)" label="Radios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254874" start="1368" end="1387" title="Television broadcasting" label="Television stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926780" start="1398" end="1415" title="Rwanda Television" label="Rwanda Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075" start="1526" end="1540" title="Television set" label="Television set"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="1700" end="1717" title="BBC World Service" label="BBC World Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q228389" start="1719" end="1735" title="Voice of America" label="Voice of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q153770" start="1747" end="1761" title="Deutsche Welle" label="Deutsche Welle"/>
<link wikidata="Q577922" start="1950" end="1991" title="Radio Télévision Libre des Mille Collines" label="Radio Télévision Libre des Mille Collines"/>
<link wikidata="Q131297" start="2021" end="2034" title="Rwandan genocide" label="1994 genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q34768" start="2054" end="2066" title="Calling code" label="Calling code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3190395" start="2075" end="2100" title="List of international call prefixes" label="International call prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q197961" start="2557" end="2574" title="fiber-optic cable" label="fiber-optic cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859" start="2874" end="2880" title="Kigali" label="Kigali"/>
<link wikidata="Q747066" start="2930" end="2951" title="microwave radio relay" label="microwave radio relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313348" start="3030" end="3044" title="radiotelephone" label="radiotelephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="3311" end="3335" title="Communications satellite" label="Satellite earth stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="3339" end="3347" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="3349" end="3361" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859" start="3366" end="3372" title="Kigali" label="Kigali"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="3382" end="3387" title="teleprinter" label="telex"/>
<link wikidata="Q132744" start="3392" end="3399" title="fax" label="telefax"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="3433" end="3449" title="Top-level domain" label="Top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q43592" start="3451" end="3454" title=".rw" label=".rw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622451" start="3457" end="3471" title="List of countries by number of Internet users" label="Internet users"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992993" start="3615" end="3630" title="List of countries by number of broadband Internet subscriptions" label="Fixed broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992993" start="3709" end="3727" title="List of countries by number of broadband Internet subscriptions" label="Wireless broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q8215105" start="3824" end="3838" title="List of countries by number of Internet hosts" label="Internet hosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q13211867" start="3882" end="3886" title="List of countries by IPv4 address allocation" label="IPv4"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="4014" end="4039" title="Internet Service Provider" label="Internet Service Provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q242069" start="5241" end="5257" title="digital literacy" label="digital literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q33573" start="5409" end="5420" title="Kinyarwanda" label="Kinyarwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="5605" end="5609" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="UNDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068473" start="5751" end="5761" title="e-learning" label="e-learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="6022" end="6035" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="6790" end="6807" title="Social-networking" label="Social-networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="6822" end="6829" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="6831" end="6839" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="6841" end="6848" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="6868" end="6888" title="blog hosting service" label="blog hosting service"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="6978" end="6991" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="6993" end="7014" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="7020" end="7038" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="7100" end="7103" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q12461" start="7105" end="7113" title="Le Monde" label="Le Monde"/>
<link wikidata="Q19912" start="7115" end="7142" title="Radio France Internationale" label="Radio France Internationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="7150" end="7168" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="7501" end="7518" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="7523" end="7528" title="freedom of the press" label="press"/>
<link wikidata="Q862207" start="8240" end="8255" title="self-censorship" label="self-censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="8709" end="8715" title="e-mail" label="e-mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q574577" start="8726" end="8736" title="chat rooms" label="chat rooms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8930" end="8978" title="List of terrestrial fibre optic cable projects in Africa#Rwanda" label="Terrestrial fibre optic cable projects in Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401544" start="8981" end="8996" title="Media of Rwanda" label="Media of Rwanda"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25652" wikidata="Q5764335" url="?curid=25652" title="Transport in Rwanda">
<text>The transport system in Rwanda centres primarily around the road network. Paved roads lie between the capital, Kigali, and most other major cities and towns in the country. Rwanda is also linked by road with other countries in the African Great Lakes, via which the majority of the country&#x27;s imports and exports are made.

The country has an international airport at Kigali, serving one domestic and several international destinations, and also has limited transport between the port cities on Lake Kivu.There are currently no railways in Rwanda.

A large amount of investments in the transport infrastructure has been made by the government since the 1994 genocide, with aid from the European Union, China, Japan and others.

==The road network==
Rwanda has a total of of roads, of which are paved. The remainder are dirt roads with quality varying from smooth hard surfaces with drainage to rutted, extremely uneven tracks passable only with a four-wheel drive vehicle.

Vehicles in the country drive on the right-hand side of the road. However, the three largest members of the East African Community (EAC) to which Rwanda is a part of, including neighbouring Tanzania and Uganda, drive on the left. It is significantly cheaper to import vehicles designed to drive on the left than on the right, possibly due to the second hand market from India and Japan being cheaper than that of Europe, so more of these cars were imported until the government banned their import in 2005 due to safety concerns. Due to the difference in car price, and the potential to better economically integrate with other EAC and Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa countries, the government has considered switching the country to driving on the left.

===Paved roads===
Most of the main towns in the country are now connected by paved road. The condition of these roads was until recently very poor, with numerous pot-holes and vehicles often driving on the dirt verges since these were deemed smoother than the road itself. A recent government programme of upgrading and resurfacing means that most major routes are now in good condition.

The major urban arteries of Kigali, as well as the high streets in Ruhengeri, Kibuye, and Gisenyi are dual carriageways, but all national long distance roads are single carriageway. There are no motorways in Rwanda.

The principal routes are (refer to map for number references):

There is also one road that is currently a quite poor-quality dirt road, but it may soon be upgraded to paved status:
* The road running along Lake Kivu between Cyangugu, Kibuye and Gisenyi, since these towns are now linked politically in by the newly formed Western Province.

==Public transport==

===International===
There are several daily coach services from Rwanda to destinations in the African Great Lakes:
* Jaguar Executive Coaches, which connects Kigali to Kampala, the Ugandan capital, via Gatuna (road 1 on the map above) or via Kayonza and Kagitumba (roads 2 and 2a).
* Regional Coach Services, which runs services to Kampala (8 hours), Nairobi, Kenya (20 hours) and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania (36 hours), all via the Gatuna border crossing. These buses are usually air-conditioned.
* Trinity Coach - a Rwandan service using quite basic buses, running between Kigali and Kampala.
* Modern Coast, a Kenyan coach and courier service which connects Gisenyi/Goma and Kigali through Gatuna to Kampala and Nairobi. It offers online booking and payment, three seat classes and in some busses personal TVs and 240 V / USB sockets. 
* Yahoo Car Express - A minibus service running between Kigali and Bujumbura, Burundi. This service has been subject to ambush in the past by rebels in Burundi, although the new government claim to have sorted out this problem now.

In addition the national express share taxi services (see below) to Gisenyi and Cyangugu often cross the DRC border to carry passengers to Goma and Bukavu respectively.

===National===
The main form of public transport within Rwanda is the express bus, which has superseded the share taxi on the main routes.

==== Share taxi ====

Share taxis run between two termini (known as taxi parks), but stop frequently en route to pick up and drop off passengers. They are known locally simply as &quot;taxi&quot; or, colloquially, &quot;twegerane&quot;, which means &#x27;let&#x27;s sit together&#x27; in the Kinyarwanda language (a conventional private taxi is referred to as a &quot;special hire&quot; or &quot;taxi voiture&quot;).

They almost always wait until full before departing, and can also wait for long periods in locations along the route if not enough people are on board.

The vehicles are usually Toyota minibuses owned by a private individual who employs a driver (Fr: &quot;chauffeur&quot;) and a conductor (Fr: &quot;convoyeur&quot;) to operate and maintain the vehicle on a day-to-day basis. Most have four rows of seats, each of which seats four adults (babies and children not being counted as they are expected to sit on the lap of an adult). Additionally there are two front passenger seats, so the vehicle can carry a total of up to eighteen passengers, in addition to the driver and the conductor.

The conductor is responsible for opening and closing the main sliding door and collecting money from passengers, and will stand in the space by the door if all seats re occupied. No tickets are issued on this form of taxi.

Moto taxis

A large portion of the vehicles on roads in Rwanda, especially Kigali, are moto taxis. A motorbike or scooter is driven and a single passenger can hop on and off the back and pay the required fare. 

==== Express bus ====
These run to a set timetable (usually each 30 minutes) between major towns, only stopping at official stops near the destination(s). Even if alighting earlier, the price to the next major stop has to be paid. Almost all routes pass through Nyabugogo in Kigali.

The buses are run by private companies and issue tickets in advance with a price set by the government. As tickets are paid and printed at the offices (major stops) or by an employee along the road (smaller stops), there is no need for a conductor to collect the money in the bus. Tickets can be issued in advance, so they might be sold out quickly at busy times (especially Fridays, Sundays and at the beginning/end of school holidays).

In contrast to the Share Taxi, this form of transport respects the schedule rather than waiting to be full. Also, they are almost never overfilled and rather depart earlier.

The size ranges from Toyota Coaster to big coaches. Most coaches are run by Ritco, on which the government holds a share. It is also the only company to have stops all across the country, while its private competitors are limited to specific regions. When it was founded it replaced Onatracom, another public company.

==== Comparison ====
As of 2018, share taxis are still the main form of transport in remote areas, while express buses are used wherever available. This is due to the almost equal price and increased comfort and speed of the express buses.

===Urban===

Public transport in Kigali takes the form of the stopping share taxis mentioned above, but running much more frequently due to greater demand. While the national ones are typically unmarked, Kigali taxis have a yellow stripe running round the vehicle, on which is imprinted the start and end points of its route. Most services start or finish either in the city centre or at Nyabugogo, the city&#x27;s main national bus station.

A recent survey carried out by the Transport Companies Association in Kigali
gives us the following statistics:
There are 19 bus companies operating a total of 1633 buses of various makes,
models and sizes in various parts of Rwanda. In Kigali City itself there are 622
buses operating. Of these 622, 90.6% of them are small Toyota Hiace vehicles, mostly more than
10 years old, and many much older. Of the larger type vehicles carrying up to 30 passengers or so there are 58 units of which 34.4% are new vehicles owned and operated by Kigali Bus Services Ltd.

==Air transport==

The country&#x27;s main aviation hub is Kigali International Airport, which is located at Kanombe, a suburb approximately from Kigali city centre. The airport has international flights to: Lagos, Brazzaville, Dubai, Nairobi, Entebbe, Addis Ababa, Bujumbura, Johannesburg, Amsterdam, Brussels and Doha and is the main airport for the national carrier RwandAir.

There are plans being discussed to build a new airport at Nyamata in Bugesera district, approximately from Kigali which would be larger and could act as a hub for the entire region. 
The only other airport in the country with passenger service is Kamembe Airport, which is in the city of Cyangugu. RwandAir operates a service between Kigali and Kamembe, which serves southwestern Rwanda and the Congolese city of Bukavu.

==Water transport==

===Lake Kivu===

This is by far the largest of Rwanda&#x27;s lakes, forming the border with the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). There are occasional boat services between the major ports of Cyangugu, Kibuye and Gisenyi but these do not run to a regular timetable and often have to be chartered. There are also boats used to ferry people to some of the islands in the lake, but these also do not run regularly. Local fishermen operate along the entirety of the lakeshore, usually in dug-out canoes or other hand-crafted boats. The Rwandan navy operates a few boats on the lake to protect the country against infiltrators from the Congolese side.

===Other lakes===
Transport on Rwanda&#x27;s other major lakes is mostly limited to ferries, usually local boats similar to those used to fishing, which transport people from one side to the other. Some lakes have resort bars and hotels, such as Jambo Beach on Lake Muhazi, which can offer a pleasure cruise to their customers in their own speed boat. Local fishermen operate on most lakes.

==Railways==

There are currently no railways in Rwanda.

==See also==
* Rwanda
* East African Railway Master Plan

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5764335" start="4" end="30" title="Transport in Rwanda" label="transport system in Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859" start="111" end="117" title="Kigali" label="Kigali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="173" end="179" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q87982" start="231" end="250" title="African Great Lakes" label="African Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q125912" start="499" end="508" title="Lake Kivu" label="Lake Kivu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155497" start="636" end="646" title="Politics of Rwanda" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q131297" start="657" end="670" title="Rwandan genocide" label="1994 genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q700143" start="823" end="832" title="dirt road" label="dirt road"/>
<link wikidata="Q214833" start="951" end="967" title="four-wheel drive" label="four-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q220656" start="1015" end="1030" title="Left- and right-hand traffic" label="right-hand side"/>
<link wikidata="Q337456" start="1086" end="1108" title="East African Community" label="East African Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165797" start="1614" end="1659" title="Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa" label="Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859" start="2165" end="2171" title="Kigali" label="Kigali"/>
<link wikidata="Q246145" start="2204" end="2213" title="Ruhengeri" label="Ruhengeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q617032" start="2215" end="2221" title="Kibuye, Rwanda" label="Kibuye"/>
<link wikidata="Q830631" start="2227" end="2234" title="Gisenyi" label="Gisenyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="2332" end="2341" title="motorways" label="motorways"/>
<link wikidata="Q125912" start="2561" end="2570" title="Lake Kivu" label="Lake Kivu"/>
<link wikidata="Q782857" start="2579" end="2587" title="Cyangugu" label="Cyangugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q617032" start="2589" end="2595" title="Kibuye, Rwanda" label="Kibuye"/>
<link wikidata="Q830631" start="2600" end="2607" title="Gisenyi" label="Gisenyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q737354" start="2677" end="2693" title="Western Province, Rwanda" label="Western Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q3894" start="2886" end="2893" title="Kampala" label="Kampala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="2899" end="2905" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527540" start="2920" end="2926" title="Gatuna" label="Gatuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566641" start="2960" end="2967" title="Kayonza" label="Kayonza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346593" start="2972" end="2981" title="Kagitumba" label="Kagitumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870" start="3069" end="3076" title="Nairobi" label="Nairobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="3078" end="3083" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960" start="3099" end="3112" title="Dar es Salaam" label="Dar es Salaam"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="3114" end="3122" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="3327" end="3332" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q830631" start="3375" end="3382" title="Gisenyi" label="Gisenyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q204381" start="3383" end="3387" title="Goma" label="Goma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859" start="3392" end="3398" title="Kigali" label="Kigali"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527540" start="3407" end="3413" title="Gatuna" label="Gatuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3894" start="3417" end="3424" title="Kampala" label="Kampala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870" start="3429" end="3436" title="Nairobi" label="Nairobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854" start="3620" end="3629" title="Bujumbura" label="Bujumbura"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="3631" end="3638" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153981" start="3731" end="3741" title="Politics of Burundi" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="3891" end="3894" title="Democratic Republic of Congo" label="DRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q204381" start="3925" end="3929" title="Goma" label="Goma"/>
<link wikidata="Q222279" start="3934" end="3940" title="Bukavu" label="Bukavu"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="3988" end="4004" title="public transport" label="public transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q842389" start="4064" end="4074" title="share taxi" label="share taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33573" start="4388" end="4408" title="Kinyarwanda language" label="Kinyarwanda language"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="4433" end="4437" title="Taxicab" label="taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="4692" end="4698" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q946479" start="4699" end="4706" title="minibus" label="minibus"/>
<link wikidata="Q999646" start="4753" end="4759" title="Driving" label="driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="4761" end="4763" title="French language" label="Fr"/>
<link wikidata="Q228422" start="4794" end="4803" title="Conductor (transportation)" label="conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="4805" end="4807" title="French language" label="Fr"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5902" end="5911" title="Nyabugogo" label="Nyabugogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859" start="5915" end="5921" title="Kigali" label="Kigali"/>
<link wikidata="Q581385" start="6559" end="6573" title="Toyota Coaster" label="Toyota Coaster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6614" end="6619" title="Ritco" label="Ritco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322696" start="8162" end="8190" title="Kigali International Airport" label="Kigali International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="8311" end="8316" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844" start="8318" end="8329" title="Brazzaville" label="Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="8331" end="8336" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870" start="8338" end="8345" title="Nairobi" label="Nairobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q211970" start="8347" end="8354" title="Entebbe" label="Entebbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624" start="8356" end="8367" title="Addis Ababa" label="Addis Ababa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854" start="8369" end="8378" title="Bujumbura" label="Bujumbura"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="8380" end="8392" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="8394" end="8403" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="8405" end="8413" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861" start="8418" end="8422" title="Doha" label="Doha"/>
<link wikidata="Q392542" start="8472" end="8480" title="RwandAir" label="RwandAir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724056" start="8552" end="8560" title="Bugesera District" label="Bugesera"/>
<link wikidata="Q821267" start="8730" end="8745" title="Kamembe Airport" label="Kamembe Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q782857" start="8771" end="8779" title="Cyangugu" label="Cyangugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215074" start="9837" end="9848" title="Lake Muhazi" label="Lake Muhazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="10041" end="10047" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327661" start="10050" end="10082" title="East African Railway Master Plan" label="East African Railway Master Plan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25654" wikidata="Q3395214" url="?curid=25654" title="Foreign relations of Rwanda">
<text>Rwanda has diplomatic relations with most members of the United Nations and with the Holy See.

==Accepting refugees==
Rwanda has accepted tens of thousands of refugees from neighboring African countries like Burundi, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Eritrea, Somalia and South Sudan. It has also accepted hundreds of African refugees from Israel and Afghan schoolgirls.

As of 2015, Rwanda hosted 75,000 Burundian refugees according to UNHCR. When credible reports surfaced that Rwanda recruited and trained Burundi refugees including children to remove Burundian President Nkurunziza, Rwanda announced to relocate Burundian refugees to third countries. 

Since September 2019, Rwanda has also taken in Libyan refugees and asylum-seekers, operating a refugee center at Gashora, Rwanda, which houses up to 700 refugees from eight African countries (Eritrea, Sudan, South Sudan, Somalia, Ethiopia, Nigeria, Chad and Cameroon) and is financed by UNHCR until 31 December 2023.

In 2021 Denmark signed a deal to establish an asylum center in Kigali, and since April 2022, the UK has sought to shift its asylum responsibilities, considering Rwanda a safe third country by offering 120 million pounds in economic development programs in return for accepting refugees.
==Diplomatic relations==
List of countries which Rwanda maintains diplomatic relations with:
==Bilateral relations==
Several west European and African nations, Canada, People&#x27;s Republic of China, Egypt, Libya, Russia, the Holy See, and the European Union maintain diplomatic missions in Kigali.

==See also==

* List of diplomatic missions in Rwanda
* List of diplomatic missions of Rwanda

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="57" end="71" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="85" end="93" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="209" end="216" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="222" end="250" title="Democratic Republic of Congo" label="Democratic Republic of Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="252" end="259" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="261" end="268" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q958" start="273" end="284" title="South Sudan" label="South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21405756" start="771" end="778" title="Gashora" label="Gashora"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="1423" end="1429" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1431" end="1462" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1464" end="1469" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="1471" end="1476" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="1478" end="1484" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="1490" end="1498" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1508" end="1522" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616524" start="1580" end="1617" title="List of diplomatic missions in Rwanda" label="List of diplomatic missions in Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601411" start="1620" end="1657" title="List of diplomatic missions of Rwanda" label="List of diplomatic missions of Rwanda"/>
</links>
</doc>
