<doc id="26741" wikidata="Q1754" url="?curid=26741" title="Stockholm">
<text>Stockholm (; ) is the capital and most populous city of Sweden, as well as the largest urban area in the Nordic countries. Approximately 
1 million people live in the municipality, with 1.6 million in the urban area, and 2.5 million in the metropolitan area. The city stretches across fourteen islands where Lake Mälaren flows into the Baltic Sea. Outside the city to the east, and along the coast, is the island chain of the Stockholm archipelago. The area has been settled since the Stone Age, in the 6th millennium BC, and was founded as a city in 1252 by Swedish statesman Birger Jarl. The city serves as the county seat of Stockholm County.

Stockholm is the cultural, media, political, and economic centre of Sweden. The Stockholm region alone accounts for over a third of the country&#x27;s GDP, and is among the top 10 regions in Europe by GDP per capita. Considered a global city, it is the largest in Scandinavia and the main centre for corporate headquarters in the Nordic region. The city is home to some of Europe&#x27;s top-ranking universities, such as the Karolinska Institute (medicine), KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm School of Economics and Stockholm University. It hosts the annual Nobel Prize ceremonies and banquet at the Stockholm Concert Hall and Stockholm City Hall. One of the city&#x27;s most prized museums, the Vasa Museum, is the most visited museum in Scandinavia. The Stockholm metro, opened in 1950, is well known for the decor of its stations; it has been called the longest art gallery in the world. The city was the host of the 1912 Summer Olympics, and has played host to several other international sports events since.

Stockholm is Sweden&#x27;s primary financial centre, one of the largest in Scandinavia, and hosts several of Sweden&#x27;s largest companies. Furthermore, the headquarters of most of Sweden&#x27;s largest banks are in Stockholm. Stockholm is one of Europe&#x27;s major tech centres; the city has sometimes been called Europe&#x27;s innovation hub. The Stockholm region has a GDP of around $180 billion, and Stockholm County has the highest GDP per capita of all counties in Sweden.

Stockholm is the seat of the Swedish government and most of its agencies, including the highest courts in the judiciary, and the official residences of the Swedish monarch and the Prime Minister. The government has its seat in the Rosenbad building, the Riksdag (Swedish parliament) is seated in the Parliament House, and the Prime Minister&#x27;s residence is adjacent at the Sager House. Stockholm Palace is the official residence and principal workplace of the Swedish monarch, while Drottningholm Palace in neighbouring Ekerö serves as the Royal Family&#x27;s private residence.

== History ==

Stockholm&#x27;s location appears in Norse sagas as Agnafit, and in Heimskringla in connection with the legendary king Agne. Birka, located near Stockholm, was one Sweden&#x27;s major trade centres during the Viking Age, and its restored remains are one of Stockholm County&#x27;s most-visited sites.

The earliest written mention of the name Stockholm dates from 1252, by which time the mines in Bergslagen made it an important site in the iron trade. The first part of the name () means log in Swedish, although it may also be connected to an old German word () meaning fortification. The second part of the name () means islet and is thought to refer to the islet Helgeandsholmen in central Stockholm. According to &quot;Erik&#x27;s Chronicle&quot; the city is said to have been founded by Birger Jarl to protect Sweden from sea invasions made by Karelians after the pillage of Sigtuna on Lake Mälaren in the summer of 1187.

Stockholm&#x27;s core, the present Old Town (Gamla Stan) was built on the central island next to Helgeandsholmen from the mid-13th century onward. The city originally rose to prominence as a result of the Baltic trade of the Hanseatic League. Stockholm developed strong economic and cultural linkages with Lübeck, Hamburg, Gdańsk (Danzig), Visby, Tallinn (Reval), and Riga during this time.

Stockholm&#x27;s oldest preserved charter, the &quot;Letter of Privilege from the Privy Council (&quot;&quot;)&quot;, was issued by the Privy Council of Sweden on 1 May 1436 as a reward for the city&#x27;s loyalty and service to the realm. The document granted Stockholm significant rights and freedoms, affirming its role as the political and economic centre of Sweden. It is regarded as marking the beginning of Stockholm&#x27;s status as the de facto capital of Sweden.

The strategic and economic importance of the city made Stockholm an important factor in relations between the rulers of the Kalmar Union and the Swedish anti-unionist movement in the fifteenth century and early sixteenth century. The Danish union monarch Christian II was able to enter the city in 1520 and on 8 November of that year, a massacre of opposition figures called the Stockholm Bloodbath took place and set off further uprisings that eventually led to the breakup of the Kalmar Union with the reattainment of Swedish independence. With the accession of Gustav Vasa in 1523 and the establishment of royal power, the population of Stockholm began to grow, reaching 10,000 by 1600.

The seventeenth century saw Sweden grow into a major European power, reflected in the development of the city of Stockholm. From 1610 to 1680 the population multiplied sixfold. In 1634, Stockholm became the official capital of the Swedish empire. Trading rules were also created that gave Stockholm an essential monopoly over trade between foreign merchants and other Swedish, Baltic and Scandinavian territories. In 1697, Tre Kronor Castle burned down and was replaced eventually by Stockholm Palace; the time of the Swedish Empire also saw several architectural modernisations of the city.

The beginning of the Swedish Empire saw a renaissance in the arts and sciences; the new queen, Christina, was a strong supporter of science and culture. Réne Descartes, one of the most prominent European philosophers of his time, died in Stockholm; he had been hosted by the queen for several years prior to his death. Inventors, like Christopher Polhem, moved to the city during the time of the Swedish Empire. Academics also spent much time in Stockholm, like Olaus Rudbeck, rector of the Uppsala University.

Throughout Sweden&#x27;s history, walls were created in Stockholm to defend the city from attacks. These defensive walls were modified throughout the 13th to the 16th century. In 1625, the Great Stockholm Fire of 1625 destroyed the southwestern section of Stadsholmen, an island in the centre of Stockholm. The amount of destruction led to the beginning of the demolition of the Stockholm walls. Today, most of the younger city walls cannot be found anywhere above ground. However, parts of the northern city walls are preserved in the modern Museum of Medieval Stockholm.

In 1710, a plague killed about 20,000 (36 percent) of the population. After the end of the Great Northern War the city stagnated; population growth halted and economic growth slowed. The city was in shock after having lost its place as the capital of a great power. However, Stockholm maintained its role as Sweden&#x27;s political centre and continued to develop as the country&#x27;s economic and cultural capital.

During the Age of Enlightenment in the late eighteenth century, the city flourished. The new monarch, Gustav III, proved an able and energetic regnant; his economic policies helped the Swedish economy develop, and his partially successful war against Russia restored some of Sweden&#x27;s international reputation. The king was an avid patron of the arts, and scientists and cultural figures flocked to Stockholm on a scale unprecedented since the reign of Queen Christina.

During this time, Carl Michael Bellman and Joseph Martin Kraus helped develop the city&#x27;s music, a process further accelerated by the founding of the Royal Swedish Opera. Various artists and writers became prominent, funded by the king and other cultural patrons like Carl Gustaf Tessin; the two aforementioned figures laid the base for Sweden&#x27;s Nationalmuseum at this time. Science also became prevalent; renowned figures like Carl Linnaeus and Anders Celsius spent time in Stockholm, and various research institutes, like the Stockholm Observatory, were founded.

The early nineteenth century saw a major economic decline of Stockholm and Sweden as a whole, but by the second half of the nineteenth century, Stockholm had regained its leading economic role. New industries emerged with industrialisation and Stockholm was transformed into an important trade and service centre as well as a key gateway point within Sweden. The population also grew dramatically during this time, mainly through immigration. At the end of the nineteenth century, less than 40% of the residents were Stockholm-born, with most migrants being from poorer rural Sweden; major settlement began to expand outside the historical city limits. The nineteenth century also saw the establishment of a number of scientific institutes and universities, including the Karolinska Institutet and KTH Royal Institute of Technology. The General Art and Industrial Exposition was held in 1897, drawing international attention. From 1887 to 1953 the Old Stockholm telephone tower was a landmark; originally built to link phone lines, it became redundant after these were buried, and it was later used for advertising before its demolition in the twentieth century. The early twentieth century also saw the creation of the Nobel Prizes, some of Stockholm&#x27;s most renowned institutions.

Stockholm became a modern and ethnically diverse city in the latter half of the 20th century. Many historical buildings were torn down during the modernist era, including substantial parts of the historical district of Klara (which caused major controversy), and replaced with modern architecture. However, in many other parts of Stockholm (such as in Gamla stan, Södermalm, Östermalm, Kungsholmen and Vasastan), many older buildings, blocks and streets built before the modernism and functionalism movements survived this era of demolition. Throughout the century, many industries shifted away from industrial activities into more high-tech and service industry areas, which still dominate the city&#x27;s economy today.

Stockholm&#x27;s metropolitan area has become one of the fastest-growing regions in Europe. In 2020 alone, Stockholm&#x27;s population increased by 1,477. As a result of this massive population growth, there has been a proposal to build densely packed high-rise buildings in the city centre connected by elevated walkways, though these have been opposed by several groups.

== Geography ==
=== Location ===
Stockholm is located on Sweden&#x27;s east coast at the 59th parallel north, where the freshwater Lake Mälaren—Sweden&#x27;s third-largest lake—flows out into the Baltic Sea. The central parts of the city consist of fourteen islands that are continuous with the Stockholm archipelago. The geographical city centre is situated on the water, in Riddarfjärden bay. Over 30% of the city area is made up of waterways and another 30% is made up of parks and green spaces.

Positioned at the eastern end of the Central Swedish lowland and near the Bergslagen region, the city&#x27;s location reflects the early orientation of Swedish trade toward the Baltic region.

Stockholm belongs to the Temperate deciduous forest biome, which means the climate is very similar to that of the far northeastern area of the United States and coastal Nova Scotia in Canada. The average annual temperature is . The average rainfall is per year. The deciduous forest has four distinct seasons, spring, summer, autumn, and winter. In the autumn the leaves change color. During the winter months, the trees lose their leaves.

For details about the other municipalities in the Stockholm area, see the pertinent articles. North of Stockholm Municipality: Järfälla, Solna, Täby, Sollentuna, Lidingö, Upplands Väsby, Österåker, Sigtuna, Sundbyberg, Danderyd, Vallentuna, Ekerö, Upplands-Bro, Vaxholm, and Norrtälje. South of Stockholm: Huddinge, Nacka, Botkyrka, Haninge, Tyresö, Värmdö, Södertälje, Salem, Nykvarn and Nynäshamn.

=== Stockholm Municipality ===
Stockholm Municipality is an administrative unit defined by geographical borders. The semi-official name for the municipality is &quot;City of Stockholm&quot; (&quot;Stockholms stad&quot; in Swedish). As a municipality, the City of Stockholm is subdivided into district councils, which carry responsibility for primary schools, social, leisure and cultural services within their respective areas. The municipality is usually described in terms of its three main parts: Innerstaden (Stockholm City Centre), Söderort (Southern Stockholm) and Västerort (Western Stockholm). The districts of these parts are:

==== Stockholm City Centre ====

* Gamla Stan
* Kungsholmen
* Norrmalm
* Södermalm
* Vasastan
* Östermalm
==== Söderort ====

* Enskede-Årsta-Vantör
* Farsta
* Hägersten-Liljeholmen
* Skarpnäck
* Skärholmen
* Älvsjö
==== Västerort ====

* Bromma
* Hässelby-Vällingby
* Rinkeby-Kista
* Spånga-Tensta

The modern centre Norrmalm (concentrated around the town square Sergels torg) is the largest shopping district in Sweden. It is the most central part of Stockholm in business and shopping.

=== Climate ===
Stockholm has a humid continental climate in the 0 °C isotherm (Köppen: &quot;Dfb&quot;) bordering on an oceanic climate (&quot;Cfb&quot;) in the -3 °C isotherm. Although winters are cold, average temperatures generally remain above 0 °C for much of the year. Summers are pleasantly warm, and precipitation occurs throughout the year.

Due to the city&#x27;s high northerly latitude, the length of the day varies widely from more than 18 hours around midsummer to only around 6 hours in late December. The nights from late May until mid-July are not completely dark even when cloudy. Stockholm has relatively mild weather compared to other locations at a similar latitude, or even farther south. With an average of 1900 hours of sunshine per year, it is also one of the sunniest cities in Northern Europe, receiving more sunshine than Paris, London and a few other major European cities of a more southerly latitude. Because of the urban heat island effect and the prevailing wind travelling overland rather than sea during summer months, Stockholm has the warmest July months of the Nordic capitals. Stockholm has an annual average snow cover between 75 and 100 days.

Despite its mild climate, Stockholm is located further north than parts of Canada that are above the Arctic tree line at sea level.

Summers average daytime high temperatures of and lows of around , but temperatures can reach on some days. Days above occur on average 1.55 days per year (1992–2011). Days between and are relatively common especially in July and August. Night-time lows of above are rare, and hot summer nights vary from . Winters generally bring cloudy weather with the most precipitation falling in December and January (as either rain or snow). The average winter temperatures range from , and occasionally drop below in the outskirts of the city. Spring and autumn are generally cool to mild.

The climate table below presents weather data from the years 1991–2020. According to ongoing measurements, the temperature has increased during the years 1991–2020 as compared with the last series, from 1961 to 1990. This increase averages about over all months. Warming is most pronounced during the winter months, with an increase of more than in January. For the 2002–2014 measurements some further increases have been found, although some months such as June have been relatively flat.

The highest temperature ever recorded in Stockholm was on 3 July 1811; the lowest was on 20 January 1814. The temperature has not dropped to below since 10 January 1987.

The warmest month ever recorded was July 2018 with a mean temperature of which is also the nationwide record.

Annual precipitation is with around 170 wet days and light to moderate rainfall throughout the year. The precipitation is not uniformly distributed throughout the year. The second half of the year receives 50% more than the first half. Snowfall occurs mainly from December through March. Snowfall may occasionally occur in late October as well as in April.

In Stockholm, the aurora borealis can occasionally be observed.

=== Daylight ===
Stockholm&#x27;s location just south of the 60th parallel north means that the number of daylight hours is relatively small during winter – about six hours – while in June and the first half of July, the nights are relatively short, with about 18 hours of daylight. Due to its eastern position within Sweden&#x27;s respective time zone, sunsets occur as early as 2:46 PM in mid-December. Around the summer solstice the sun never reaches further below the horizon than 7.3 degrees. This gives the sky a bright blue colour in summer once the sun has set because it does not get any darker than nautical twilight. Also, when looking straight up towards the zenith, few stars are visible after the sun has gone down. This is not to be confused with the midnight sun, which occurs north of the Arctic Circle, around 7 degrees farther north.

== Government ==

The Stockholm Municipal Council () is the name of the local assembly. Its 101 councillors are elected concurrently with general elections, held at the same time as the elections to the Riksdag and county councils. The Council convenes twice every month at Stockholm City Hall, and the meetings are open to the public. The matters on which the councillors decide have generally already been drafted and discussed by various boards and committees. Once decisions are referred for practical implementation, the employees of the City administrations and companies take over.

The elected majority has a Mayor and eight Vice Mayors. The Mayor and each majority Vice Mayor is the head of a department, with responsibility for a particular area of operation, such as City Planning. The opposition also has four Vice Mayors, but they hold no executive power. Together the Mayor and the 12 Vice Mayors form the Council of Mayors, and they prepare matters for the City Executive Board. The Mayor holds a special position among the Vice Mayors, chairing both the Council of Mayors and the City Executive Board.

The City Executive Board () is elected by the City Council and is equivalent to a cabinet. The City Executive Board renders an opinion in all matters decided by the council and bears the overall responsibility for follow-up, evaluation and execution of its decisions. The Board is also responsible for financial administration and long-term development. The City Executive Board consists of 13 members, who represent both the majority and the opposition. Its meetings are not open to the public.

Stockholm City Hall is one of the city&#x27;s key landmarks, built in the National Romantic Style at the beginning of the twentieth century. Hosting the Nobel Prizes and the government of the city of Stockholm, it is one of Sweden&#x27;s most important buildings.


== Economy ==
As the primary financial centre in Sweden, Stockholm is an influential hub for trade, finance and technology in Europe, and one of Scandinavia&#x27;s largest financial centres. The Stockholm region is the leading region in Sweden by both GDP and GDP per capita, and is amongst the ten wealthiest regions in the European Union when measured by the latter.

Many of Sweden&#x27;s largest companies are headquartered in the city; they are drawn by its central location, skilled workforce and preeminent financial sector. These companies include some of the Nordic region&#x27;s most valuable corporations, like Ericsson, which is one of the world&#x27;s largest telecommunications companies, or Atlas Copco, which is one of the world&#x27;s largest industrial companies; other large companies based in Stockholm include Electrolux, H&amp;M and Securitas AB. Some of the largest investment firms in Europe are headquartered in the city, including Investor AB and Nordstjernan; also headquartered in Stockholm is EQT AB.

Stockholm is one of continental Europe&#x27;s leading hubs for the technology industry; this influential industry is based in Kista, a suburb in northern Stockholm which is Europe&#x27;s largest Informations and Technology cluster. Stockholm has the second most unicorns per capita in the world, after Silicon Valley; the city also has one of the highest startup rates in Europe. Prominent startup technology companies in Stockholm include Mojang, Spotify and Klarna; the latter two either have been or are among the largest startup companies in the world.

Most of Sweden&#x27;s largest banks are headquartered in the city, including the SEB Group, Handelsbanken and Swedbank; Nordea had its headquarters in Stockholm until moving to Helsinki in 2018 for legal reasons involving the European Union. The Stockholm Stock Exchange, founded in 1863, is the largest stock exchange in the Nordic Countries measured by market capitalisation, listing numerous multinational Swedish companies.

Trade is a vital part of Stockholm&#x27;s economy; the city&#x27;s corporations are largely reliant on foreign consumers to supplement the small Swedish market. Stockholm is one of the Baltic Sea&#x27;s larger ports, hosting especially cruise ships and yachts. Most of Stockholm&#x27;s economy is based on export-oriented services, often towards larger, nearby European markets like Poland or Germany. Tourism is a major industry in Stockholm.

== Education ==


Research and higher education in the sciences started in Stockholm in the 18th century, with education in medicine and various research institutions such as the Stockholm Observatory. The medical education was eventually formalised in 1811 as Karolinska Institutet. KTH Royal Institute of Technology (&quot;Swedish: Kungliga Tekniska högskolan&quot;) was founded in 1827 and is Scandinavia&#x27;s largest higher education institute of technology with 13,000 students; it is Sweden&#x27;s foremost polytechnic, and spearheaded several governmental research projects in the twentieth century. Stockholm University, founded in 1878 with university status granted in 1960, has 52,000 students . It also incorporates historical institutions, such as the Observatory, the Swedish Museum of Natural History, as well as the botanical garden &quot;Bergianska trädgården&quot;. The Stockholm School of Economics, founded in 1909, is one of the few private institutions of higher education in Sweden, and is generally reckoned one of the most prestigious business schools in the world.

In the fine arts, educational institutions include the Royal College of Music, which has a history going back to the conservatory founded as part of the Royal Swedish Academy of Music in 1771, the Royal University College of Fine Arts, which has a similar historical association with the Royal Swedish Academy of Arts and a foundation date of 1735, and the Swedish National Academy of Mime and Acting, which is the continuation of the school of the Royal Dramatic Theatre, once attended by renowned actors like Greta Garbo. Other schools include the design school Konstfack, founded in 1844, the University College of Opera (founded in 1968 but with older roots), the University College of Dance, and the &quot;Stockholms Musikpedagogiska Institut&quot; (the University College of Music Education).

The Södertörn University was founded in 1995 as a multi-disciplinary institution for southern Metropolitan Stockholm, to balance the many institutions located in the northern part of the region. Other institutes of higher education include the Military Academy Karlberg, the world&#x27;s oldest military academy to remain in its original location, inaugurated in 1792 and housed in Karlberg Palace; there is also the Swedish Defence University, Ersta Sköndal University College, Swedish School of Sport and Health Sciences and the University College Stockholm.

The biggest complaints from students of higher education in Stockholm are the lack of student accommodations, the difficulty in finding other accommodations and the high rent.

== Demographics ==


The Stockholm region is home to around 22% of Sweden&#x27;s total population, and accounts for about 29% of its gross domestic product. The geographical notion of &quot;Stockholm&quot; has changed over time. By the turn of the 19th century, Stockholm largely consisted of the area today known as City Centre, roughly or one-fifth of the current municipal area. In the ensuing decades several other areas were incorporated (such as Brännkyrka Municipality in 1913, at which time it had 25,000 inhabitants, and Spånga in 1949). The municipal border was established in 1971; with the exception of Hansta, in 1982 purchased by Stockholm Municipality from Sollentuna Municipality and today a nature reserve.

The population was 984,748 in 2022 and is projected to reach 1,079,213 by 2030. Of the inhabitants, 482,982 were men and 492,569 women. The average age is 39 years; 40.1% of the population is between 20 and 44 years. The marimonial statistics are that 411,273 people, or 42.2% of the population, over the age 15 were unmarried; 268,291 people, or 27.5% of the population, were married; and 104,099 or 10.7% of the population, had been married but divorced.

As of December 2021, there were 252,750 foreign-born people in Stockholm, making up 25.8% of the population. Around 57.5% of them (143,167) immigrated to Sweden when they were at least 10 years old, and 109,213 (43.9%) of them were foreign citizens. The largest nationality groups among the foreign-born people were the Iraqis (16,137), followed by Finns (15,693), Iranians (12,329) and Poles (11,569). Of the population, 336,275 residents (34.4%) of Stockholm had a foreign-background.

Residents of Stockholm are known as Stockholmers (&quot;stockholmare&quot;). Languages spoken in Greater Stockholm outside of Swedish include Finnish, one of the official minority languages of Sweden; and English, as well as Albanian, Bosnian language, Neo-Aramaic (Sureth/Turoyo), Arabic, Turkish, Kurdish, Farsi, Somali, Dutch, Spanish, Serbian and Croatian.

Stockholm has been home to a significant Finnish-minority since the 13th century. At the end of the 15th century up to 20% of the population in Stockholm consisted of Finns. The has offered church services since the 16th century, and in 1725 the Finnish Church was opened. 74,000 people in Stockholm have a Finnish-background, which makes Stockholm home to the largest Finnish population in Sweden. Finnish, along with Meänkieli and the Sami languages have a protected minority status in Stockholm. This gives the right to use their language when contacting authorities, as well as the right to child and elderly care in their languages. Romani chib and Yiddish are also recognized minority languages, and have a strengthened right to their language in education.

The entire Stockholm metropolitan area, consisting of 26 municipalities, has a population of over 2.2 million, making it the most populous region in the Nordic countries. The Stockholm urban area, defined only for statistical purposes, had a total population of 1,630,738 in 2015. In the following municipalities some of the districts are contained within the Stockholm urban area, though not all:

===Religion===
The Swedish church consists of 27 parishes in Stockholm with almost 50 churches, but also a large number of churches belonging to the free church.

Stockholm has six mosques.

There are three active synagogues and a community of 4,300 members in Stockholm, which corresponds to 0.4% of Stockholm&#x27;s population. It is the largest Jewish community in Scandinavia.

== Culture ==
As the capital and largest city of Sweden, Stockholm is the primary centre for the country&#x27;s cultural life. The Swedish Royal Academies, founded by various monarchs after the sixteenth century, award several prestigious awards and serve as intellectual institutions for the country&#x27;s leading figures. The city also hosts several of Sweden&#x27;s architectural masterpieces; the Stockholm region is home to three World Heritage Sites – spots judged as invaluable places that belong to all of humanity: The Drottningholm Palace, Skogskyrkogården (The Woodland Cemetery) and Birka. In 1998, Stockholm was named European Capital of Culture.

=== Literature ===
Since its founding, Stockholm has been home to many authors of worldwide recognition; these include figures like August Strindberg and Astrid Lindgren, as well as other writers important to the development of Swedish literature, like Vilhelm Moberg or Olof von Dalin. Stockholm has an active literary life, as it hosts two of Europe&#x27;s most important literary institutions: the Swedish Academy and National Library of Sweden.

Literature in Stockholm began during the Viking Age, when numerous runestones were carved in the area due to its importance as a trading hub. However, Sweden&#x27;s literature at the time was primarily based in Götaland and Uppsala, as evidenced by the abundance of runestones in these areas and the settings of poems like Beowulf. The presence of the Church and University only served to further strengthen Uppsala&#x27;s role as Sweden&#x27;s literary centre throughout Christianisation and the Middle Ages.

The centralisation of royal power and relative secularism brought in the sixteenth century led to the rise of Stockholm in Sweden&#x27;s literature; this is due to several factors, including royal patronage in Stockholm and the relative decline of Uppsala University. The Bible was translated into Swedish during the reign of Gustav Vasa, and he drew several writers to his court due to his fondness for both music and literature.

Stockholm&#x27;s literature first began to flourish in the seventeenth century, with notable writers from the rest of Sweden moving to the city due to the wealth and patronage born from the spoils of the Swedish Empire. This process of cultural advancement continued into the eighteenth century, where the Gustavian era brought Stockholm&#x27;s literature to its peak. Carl Linnaeus&#x27;s scientific works were influential literary pieces, with August Strindberg describing Linnaeus as a &quot;poet who happened to become a naturalist&quot;. Another notable literary figure from this time is Carl Michael Bellman, with his unique gift for setting his poems to song; he is often considered the father of the Swedish ballad tradition.

The nineteenth and twentieth centuries were also a good time for the literature of Stockholm, with the rise of the Romantic and Realist movements, respectively. August Strindberg rose to prominence in the late nineteenth century with several important works; he is still considered one of Sweden&#x27;s finest writers. Astrid Lindgren, in the twentieth century, was famous for her children&#x27;s stories, while Vilhelm Moberg&#x27;s works are often considered national treasures in Sweden.

=== Architecture ===

Stockholm&#x27;s oldest section is Gamla Stan (Old Town), located on the original small islands of the city&#x27;s earliest settlements and still featuring the medieval street layout. Some notable buildings of Gamla Stan are the large German Church (&quot;Tyska kyrkan&quot;) and several mansions and palaces: the &quot;Riddarhuset&quot; (the House of Nobility), the Bonde Palace, the Tessin Palace and the Oxenstierna Palace.

The oldest building in Stockholm is Riddarholmen Church from the late 13th century. After a fire in 1697 when the original medieval castle was destroyed, Stockholm Palace was erected in a baroque style. Storkyrkan Cathedral, the episcopal seat of the Bishop of Stockholm, stands next to the castle. It was founded in the 13th century but is clad in a baroque exterior dating to the 1730-40s.

As early as the 15th century, the city had expanded outside of its original borders. Some pre-industrial, small-scale buildings from this era can still be found in Södermalm. Norrmalm, now the central part of the shopping district of Stockholm, was originally a separate city but was incorporated in Stockholm (now Old Town) during the early 17th century.

Stockholm has had a tradition of applying for building permits in order to erect a building from the early 18th century, with the oldest building permit from 1713. The building permit application tradition is still ongoing; as a consequence, it is possible to trace the continuous history of a newly built house three centuries into the past. Today the Stockholm City Building committee is in charge of the building permit process and their 1713–1978 archive is maintained by Stockholm City Archives. All drawings of old buildings from 1713 to 1874 are digitised and available through the Stockholms City Archives&#x27; website.

At the age of industrialisation and at the end of the 19th century and Stockholm grew rapidly, with plans and architecture inspired by the large cities of the continent such as Berlin and Vienna. Notable works of this time period include public buildings such as the Royal Swedish Opera and private developments such as the luxury housing developments on Strandvägen.

In the 20th century, a nationalistic push spurred a new architectural style inspired by medieval and renaissance ancestry as well as influences of the Jugend/Art Nouveau style. A key landmark of Stockholm, the Stockholm City Hall, was erected 1911–1923 by architect Ragnar Östberg. Other notable works of these times are the Stockholm Public Library by Gunnar Asplund and the World Heritage Site Skogskyrkogården by Asplund and celebrated architect Sigurd Lewerentz.

In the 1930s modernism characterised the development of the city as it grew. New residential areas sprang up such as the development on Gärdet while industrial development added to the growth, such as the KF manufacturing industries on Kvarnholmen located in the Nacka Municipality. In the 1950s, suburban development entered a new phase, that had already started in the early 1930s, with the introduction of the Stockholm metro. The modernist developments of Vällingby and Farsta were internationally praised. In the 1960s this suburban development continued but with the aesthetic of the times, the industrialised and mass-produced blocks of flats received considerable criticism.

At the same time that this suburban development was taking place, the most central areas of the inner city were being redesigned, known as &quot;Norrmalmsregleringen&quot;. Sergels Torg, with its five high-rise office towers was created in the 1960s, followed by the total clearance of large areas to make room for new development projects. The most notable buildings from this period include the ensemble of the House of Culture, City Theatre and the Riksbank at Sergels Torg, designed by architect Peter Celsing. Other celebrated works from the 1960s was S:t Görans Gymnasium (originally built as a school for women, the School of House work and Sewing) by Leonie Geisendorf.

The municipality appointed an official &quot;board of beauty&quot; called &quot;Skönhetsrådet&quot; in 1919 to protect and preserve the beauty of the city, still an active part of the city planning, and architecture debate in the city.

=== Music ===
As the cultural centre of Sweden, Stockholm hosts much of Sweden&#x27;s influential music industry; the city hosts a variety of musical institutions and many of Sweden&#x27;s most popular musicians come from Stockholm. Among these are world famous bands like ABBA, as well as more modern musicians like Tim Bergling, more commonly called Avicii. The most prestigious musical institutions in Stockholm include the Royal Swedish Opera and Royal Swedish Academy of Music, both founded in the late eighteenth century. Among Stockholm&#x27;s most influential musical figures are Carl Michael Bellman, Joseph Martin Kraus and Jenny Lind; the former two were both classical composers, while the latter was one of Europe&#x27;s most renowned opera singers.

Stockholm first became globally prominent in modern music in the twentieth century. The band ABBA, one of the most popular in history, first became famous in the 1970s, after which they dominated popular music for about a decade, before becoming inactive. Other popular bands and musicians formed in the twentieth century include Roxette and Kent, of which the former was most well known internationally while the latter remained popular in Sweden into the twenty-first century, when they ended the band in 2016.

In the twenty-first century, Stockholm has played host to several influential musicians. Max Martin, who began his career in the late twentieth century, is one of the world&#x27;s most influential songwriters; he remains based in Stockholm. Another popular musician was Tim Bergling, better known as Avicii, who became famous in 2013 for his electronic music; he committed suicide in 2018. Other popular modern musicians include Robyn, as well as Eurovision winners Måns Zelmerlöw and Loreen. Allsång på Skansen, Sweden&#x27;s most prominent music festival, is hosted in Stockholm.

=== Museums ===


Stockholm is one of the most crowded museum-cities in the world with around 100 museums, visited by millions of people every year.

The Vasa Museum () is a maritime museum on Djurgården which displays the only almost fully intact 17th century ship that has ever been salvaged, the 64-gun warship &quot;Vasa&quot; that sank on her maiden voyage in 1628.

The Nationalmuseum houses the largest collection of art in the country: 16,000 paintings and 30,000 objects of art handicraft. The collection dates back to the days of Gustav Vasa in the 16th century, and has since been expanded with works by artists such as Rembrandt, and Antoine Watteau, as well as constituting a main part of Sweden&#x27;s art heritage, manifested in the works of Alexander Roslin, Anders Zorn, Johan Tobias Sergel, Carl Larsson, Carl Fredrik Hill and Ernst Josephson. From the year 2013 to 2018 the museum was closed due to a restoration of the building. Moderna Museet (Museum of Modern Art) is Sweden&#x27;s national museum of modern art. It has works by noted modern artists such as Picasso and Salvador Dalí.

Skansen (in English: the Sconce) is a combined open-air museum and zoo, located on the island of Djurgården. It was founded in 1891 by Artur Hazelius (1833–1901) to show the way of life in the different parts of Sweden before the industrial era.

Other notable museums (in alphabetical order):
* , an interactive exhibit about the pop-group ABBA
* Swedish Army Museum, Swedish history, from 1500 to the present day with historical objects and realistic scenes
* Fotografiska, a contemporary museum of photography, art and culture
* Birka, The Viking City of Birka Swedish sites on the World Heritage List
* Livrustkammaren, the royal armoury, located at Stockholm Palace
* Maritime Museum (Stockholm), museum for naval history, merchant shipping and shipbuilding.
* Medelhavsmuseet, focused on the ancient cultures around the Mediterranean
* Millesgården, home of the sculptor Carl Milles and now a museum of his works
* Museum of Far Eastern Antiquities, exciting mix of art and culture from China, Japan, Korea, India and Southeast Asia
* Swedish National Museum of Science and Technology, Sweden&#x27;s largest museum of technology
* Nobel Museum, devoted to the Nobel Prize, Nobel laureates, and the founder of the prize, Alfred Nobel (1833–1896)
* Nordic Museum, dedicated to the cultural history and ethnography of Sweden
* Royal Coin Cabinet, dedicated to the history of money and economic history in general
* Skansen, The world&#x27;s first open-air museum with 150 historic buildings, zoo with Nordic wild and domestic animals
* Stockholm City Museum, a museum of 500 years of Sweden&#x27;s history
* Swedish History Museum magnificent medieval art and The History of Sweden exhibition which offers encounters
* Swedish Museum of Natural History, Sweden&#x27;s largest museum about new species and fossils of their predecessors in evolution.
* Toy Museum Stockholm a museum of toys and collectables

=== Art ===
Stockholm has a vibrant art scene with a number of internationally recognised art centres and commercial galleries. Amongst others, privately sponsored initiatives such as Bonniers Konsthall, Magasin 3, and state-supported institutions such as Tensta Konsthall and Index all show leading international and national artists. In the last few years, a gallery district has emerged around Hudiksvallsgatan where leading galleries such as Andréhn-Schiptjenko, Brändström &amp; Stene have located. Other important commercial galleries include Nordenhake, Milliken Gallery and Galleri Magnus Karlsson. Stockholm also hosts the Thiel Gallery, founded by financier Ernest Thiel in the early twentieth century. The City of Stockholm also has its own art gallery and museum, Liljevalchs konsthall, with a well visited spring salon every year with works of art from professionals and amateurs; the art showed every spring is sent in anonymously and picked by a committee.

=== Suburbs ===
The Stockholm suburbs are places with diverse cultural background. Some areas in the suburbs, including those of Skärholmen, Tensta, Jordbro, Fittja, Husby, Brandbergen, Rinkeby, Rissne, Kista, Hagsätra, Hässelby, Farsta, Rågsved, Flemingsberg, have high percentages of immigrants or second generation immigrants. These mainly come from the Middle East (Assyrian, Turks and Kurds) also Bosnians and Serbs, but there are also immigrants from Africa, Southeast Asia and Latin America. Other parts of the inner suburbs, such as Täby, Danderyd, Lidingö, Solna, Nacka and, as well as some of the suburbs mentioned above, have a majority of ethnic Swedes.

=== Theatre and music ===

Distinguished among Stockholm&#x27;s many theatres are the Royal Dramatic Theatre (&quot;Kungliga Dramatiska Teatern&quot;), one of Europe&#x27;s most renowned theatres, and the Royal Swedish Opera, inaugurated in 1773.

Other notable theatres are the Stockholm City Theatre (Stockholms stadsteater), the Peoples Opera (&quot;Folkoperan&quot;), the Modern Theatre of Dance (&quot;Moderna dansteatern&quot;), the China Theatre, the Göta Lejon Theatre, the Mosebacke Theatre, and the Oscar Theatre.

Premises for orchestral music and concerts include Stockholm Concert Hall where for example the yearly awarding ceremony for the Nobel prize is held, and The Berwald hall, home to the National Radio Orchestra.

Influential rappers Yung Lean and Bladee were born in and are currently based in Stockholm along with British-Swedish experimental artist &amp; designer Ecco2K.

Stockholm has hosted the Eurovision Song Contest three times, in 1975 at Stockholmsmässan, and in 2000 and 2016 at Globe Arena.

=== Amusement park ===
Gröna Lund is an amusement park located on the island of Djurgården. This amusement park has over 30 attractions and many restaurants. It is a popular tourist attraction and visited by thousands of people every day. It is open from the end of April to the middle of September. Gröna Lund also serves as a concert venue.

=== Media ===

Stockholm is the media centre of Sweden. It has four nationwide daily newspapers and is also the central location of the publicly funded radio (SR) and television (SVT). In addition, all other major television channels have their base in Stockholm, such as: TV3, TV4 and TV6. All major magazines are also located to Stockholm, as are the largest literature publisher, the Bonnier group. The world&#x27;s best-selling video game &quot;Minecraft&quot; was created in Stockholm by Markus &#x27;Notch&#x27; Persson in 2009, and its company Mojang is headquartered there.

=== Sports ===


The most popular spectator sports are football and ice hockey. The three most popular football clubs in Stockholm are AIK, Djurgårdens IF and Hammarby IF, who all play in the first tier, Allsvenskan. AIK play at Sweden&#x27;s national stadium for football, Strawberry Arena in Solna, with a capacity of 54,329. The 2017 UEFA Europa League Final was played on 24 May between AFC Ajax and Manchester United at this arena. Manchester United won the trophy after a 2–0 victory.

Djurgårdens IF and Hammarby play at Tele2 Arena in Johanneshov, with a capacity of 30,000 spectators.

All three clubs are multi-sport clubs, which have ice hockey teams; AIK and Djurgårdens IF play in the second tier and Hammarby in the third tier, as well as teams in bandy, basketball, floorball and other sports, including individual sports.

Historically, the city was the host of the 1912 Summer Olympics. From those days stem the Stockholms Olympiastadion which has since hosted numerous sports events, notably football and athletics. Other major sports arenas are Strawberry Arena, the new national football stadium, Avicii Arena (colloquially called Globen), a multi-sport arena and one of the largest spherical buildings in the world and the nearby indoor arena Hovet.

Besides the 1912 Summer Olympics, Stockholm hosted the 1956 Summer Olympics Equestrian Games and the UEFA Euro 1992. The city was also second runner up in the 2004 Summer Olympics bids. Stockholm hosted the 1958 FIFA World Cup. Stockholm recently bid jointly with Åre for the 2026 Winter Olympics but lost out to the joint bid of Milan/Cortina d&#x27;Ampezzo, Italy, if awarded it would have been the second city to host both Summer and Winter Olympics after Beijing and for the 2026 Winter Paralympics and with Åre it would have also be to host all three winter event including Winter Olympic Games, Winter Paralympic Games and the Special Olympics World Winter Games in which Åre would have host in 2021 along with Östersund, however Sweden pulled out host the Special Olympic World Winter Games 2021 due to lack of funding instead it moved to Kazan, Russia and was delayed to 2022. Stockholm first bid for the Winter Olympics for 2022 Winter Olympics, but withdrew its bid in 2014 due to financial matters.

Stockholm also hosted all but one of the Nordic Games, a winter multi-sport event that predated the Winter Olympics.

In 2015, the Stockholms Kungar Rugby league club was formed. They are Stockholm&#x27;s first Rugby league team and will play in Sweden&#x27;s National Rugby league championship.

Every year Stockholm is host to the ÖTILLÖ Swimrun World Championship.

Stockholm has hosted the Stockholm Open, an ATP World Tour 250 series professional tennis tournament annually since 1969. Each year since 1995, the tournament has been hosted at the Kungliga tennishallen.

=== Cuisine ===
Dating back to at least the 1350s, Storkällaren or Rådhuskällaren is Stockholm&#x27;s oldest known place of business. Swedish 1700s composer and entertainer Carl Michael Bellman was a frequent visitor to the city&#x27;s taverns, inns and wine cellars. In his poems, Bellman mentioned 113 taverns and inns in and around Stockholm, 30 of which were located in the Gamla Stan.

In 2016, there were 3,315 pubs, cafes and restaurants in the municipality of Stockholm. Among the most famous and acclaimed is the restaurant Operakällaren.

In Stockholm and its surroundings, only two historic eateries remain operating in unbroken succession and in the same location: Stallmästaregården in Solna, dating back to the mid-17th century, and Den Gyldene Freden in Gamla Stan, located at the same address since 1722. &quot;Freden&quot; may thus be the world&#x27;s oldest continuously existing city pub in the same location.

=== Yearly events and festivals ===

* Stockholm Jazz Festival is one of Sweden&#x27;s oldest festivals. The festival takes place at Skeppsholmen in July.
* Stockholm Early Music Festival, the largest international event for historical music in the Nordic countries. First week in June since 2002.
* The Stockholm Culture Festival () is a free recurring cultural festival in August, which is held by the City of Stockholm. Runs in parallel with We Are Stockholm.
* We Are Stockholm is a free youth festival people between 13 and 19 years. Runs in parallel with the Stockholm Culture Festival in August and is held by the City of Stockholm. Between 2001 and 2013, the festival went by the name Ung08.
* Stockholm Pride is the largest LGBT Pride event in the Nordic countries and takes place in the last week of July every year. The Stockholm Pride festival always ends with a parade and in 2007, 50,000 people marched with the parade and about 500,000 watched.
* The Stockholm Marathon takes place on a Saturday in early June each year.
* The Nobel Banquet takes place at Stockholm City Hall every year on 10 December.
* The Stockholm Water Festival () was a popular summer festival held annually in Stockholm between 1991 and 1999.
* Manifestation, a yearly ecumenical Christian festival with up to 25,000 participants.
* Summerburst Music festival
* The Stockholm International Film Festival is an annual film festival held in Stockholm each year since 1990.

== Environment ==

=== Green city with a national urban park ===

Stockholm is one of the cleanest capitals in the world. The city was granted the 2010 European Green Capital Award by the EU Commission; this was Europe&#x27;s first &quot;green capital&quot;. Applicant cities were evaluated in several ways: climate change, local transport, public green areas, air quality, noise, waste, water consumption, waste water treatment, sustainable utilisation of land, biodiversity and environmental management. Out of 35 participant cities, eight finalists were chosen: Stockholm, Amsterdam, Bristol, Copenhagen, Freiburg, Hamburg, Münster, and Oslo. Some of the reasons why Stockholm won the 2010 European Green Capital Award were: its integrated administrative system, which ensures that environmental aspects are considered in budgets, operational planning, reporting, and monitoring; its cut in carbon dioxide emissions by 25% per capita in ten years; and its decision towards being fossil fuel free by 2050. Stockholm has long demonstrated concern for the environment. The city&#x27;s environmental program is the fifth since the first one was established in the mid-1970s. In 2011, Stockholm passed the title of European Green Capital to Hamburg, Germany.

==== Role model ====
At the beginning of 2010, Stockholm launched the program Professional Study Visits in order to share the city&#x27;s green best practices. The program provides visitors with the opportunity to learn how to address issues such as waste management, urban planning, carbon dioxide emissions, and sustainable and efficient transportation system, among others.

According to the European Cities Monitor 2010, Stockholm is the best city in terms of freedom from pollution. Surrounded by 219 nature reserves, Stockholm has around 1,000 green spaces, which corresponds to 30% of the city&#x27;s area. Founded in 1995, the Royal National City Park is the world&#x27;s first legally protected &quot;national urban park&quot;. For a description of the formation process, value assets and implementation of the legal protection of The Royal National Urban Park, see Schantz 2006 The water in Stockholm is so clean that people can dive and fish in the centre of the city. The waters of downtown Stockholm serve as spawning grounds for multiple fish species including trout and salmon, though human intervention is needed to keep populations up. Regarding emissions, the government&#x27;s target is that Stockholm will be free before 2050.

=== Air quality ===
Stockholm used to have problematic levels of particulates (PM10) due to studded winter tires, but by the 2010s they were below limits, after street-specific bans. Nitrogen oxides emitted by diesel vehicles were a problem in the 2010s, but by 2021 they were again below limits, after electric cars had started to replace diesel-driven ones, and pollution regulations for lorries had tightened. As of 2021, the pollutant that exceeds limits is ozone, due to global pollution. In 2021 the average levels for urban background (roof of Torkel Knutssonsgatan on Södermalm) were: NO2 9.7 μg/m3, PM10 9.5 μg/m3, PM2.5 5.1 μg/m3, soot 0.36 μg/m3, ultrafine particles 6100/cm3, SO2 0.4 μg/m3, ozone 53 μg/m3. For urban street level (the densely trafficked Hornsgatan on Södermalm) the average levels were: NO2 23 μg/m3, PM10 17 μg/m3, PM2.5 6.0 μg/m3, soot 0.55 μg/m3.

== Transport ==
=== Public transportation ===

Stockholm has an extensive public transport system. It consists of the Stockholm Metro (), which consist of three colour-coded main systems (green, red and blue) with seven lines (10, 11, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19); the Stockholm commuter rail () which runs on the state-owned railroads on six lines (40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 48); four light rail/tramway lines (7, 12, 21, and 22); the 891 mm narrow-gauge railway Roslagsbanan, on three lines (27, 28, 29) in the northeastern part; the local railway Saltsjöbanan, on two lines (25, 26) in the southeastern part; a large number of bus lines, and the inner-city Djurgården ferry. The overwhelming majority of the land-based public transport in Stockholm County (save for the airport buses/airport express trains and other few commercially viable bus lines) is organized under the common umbrella of Storstockholms Lokaltrafik (SL), an wholly owned by Stockholm County Council. Since the 1990s, the operation and maintenance of the SL public transport services are contracted out to independent companies bidding for contracts, such as MTR, which operate the Metro. The archipelago boat traffic is handled by Waxholmsbolaget, which is also wholly owned by the County Council.
SL has a common ticket system in the entire Stockholm County, which allows for easy travel between different modes of transport. The tickets are of two main types, single ticket and travel cards, both allowing for unlimited travel with SL in the entire Stockholm County for the duration of the ticket validity. On 1 April 2007, a zone system (A, B, C) and price system was introduced. Single tickets were available in forms of cash ticket, individual unit pre-paid tickets, pre-paid ticket slips of 8, SMS-ticket and machine ticket. Cash tickets bought at the point of travel were the most expensive and pre-paid tickets slips of 8 are the cheapest. A single ticket costs SEK 32 with the card and SEK 45 without and is valid for 75 minutes. The duration of the travel card validity depended on the exact type; they were available from 24 hours up to a year. As of 2018, a 30-day card costs SEK 860. Tickets of all these types were available with reduced prices for students and persons under 20 and over 65 years of age. On 9 January 2017, the zone system was removed, and the cost of the tickets was increased.

==== The City Line Project ====

With an estimated cost of SEK 16.8 billion (January 2007 price level), which equals 2.44 billion US dollars, the City Line, an environmentally certified project, comprises a -long commuter train tunnel (in rock and water) beneath Stockholm, with two new stations (Stockholm City and Stockholm Odenplan), and a -long railway bridge at Årsta. The City Line was built by the Swedish Transport Administration in co-operation with the City of Stockholm, Stockholm County Council, and Stockholm Transport, SL. As Stockholm Central Station is overloaded, the purpose of this project was to double the city&#x27;s track capacity and improve service efficiency. Operations began in July 2017.

Between Riddarholmen and Söder Mälarstrand, the City Line runs through a submerged concrete tunnel. As a green project, the City Line includes the purification of waste water; noise reduction through sound-attenuating tracks; the use of synthetic diesel, which provides users with clean air; and the recycling of excavated rocks.

=== Roads ===

Stockholm is at the junction of the European routes E4, E18 and E20. A half-completed motorway ring road exists on the south, west and north sides of the City Centre. The northern section of the ring road, Norra Länken, opened for traffic in 2015 while the final subsea eastern section is being discussed as a future project. A bypass motorway for traffic between Northern and Southern Sweden, Förbifart Stockholm, is being built. The many islands and waterways make extensions of the road system both complicated and expensive, and new motorways are often built as systems of tunnels and bridges.

==== Congestion charges ====

Stockholm has a congestion pricing system, the Stockholm congestion tax, in use on a permanent basis since 1 August 2007, after having had a seven-month trial period in the first half of 2006. The City Centre is within the congestion tax zone. All the entrances and exits of this area have unmanned control points operating with automatic number plate recognition. All vehicles entering or exiting the congestion tax affected area, with a few exceptions, have to pay 10–20 SEK (1.09–2.18 EUR, 1.49–2.98 USD) depending on the time of day between 06:30 and 18:29. The maximum tax amount per vehicle per day is SEK 60 (EUR 6.53). Payment is done by various means within 14 days after one has passed one of the control points; one cannot pay at the control points.

After the trial period was over, consultative referendums were held in Stockholm Municipality and several other municipalities in Stockholm County. The then-reigning government (Persson Cabinet) stated that they would only take into consideration the results of the referendum in Stockholm Municipality. The opposition parties (Alliance for Sweden) stated that if they were to form a cabinet after the general election—which was held the same day as the congestion tax referendums—they would take into consideration the referendums held in several of the other municipalities in Stockholm County as well. The results of the referendums were that the Stockholm Municipality voted for the congestion tax, while the other municipalities voted against it. The opposition parties won the general election and a few days before they formed government (Reinfeldt Cabinet) they announced that the congestion tax would be reintroduced in Stockholm, but that the revenue would go entirely to road construction in and around Stockholm. During the trial period and according to the agenda of the previous government the revenue went entirely to public transport.

=== Ferries ===

Stockholm has regular ferry lines to Helsinki and Turku in Finland (commonly called &quot;Finlandsfärjan&quot;); Mariehamn, Åland; Tallinn, Estonia; Riga, Latvia, and to Saint Petersburg in Russia. The large Stockholm archipelago is served by the archipelago boats of Waxholmsbolaget (owned and subsidized by Stockholm County Council). Additionally, there are many for-profit private companies offering tours and regular service in the archipelago.

=== City bikes ===
Between April and October, during the warmer months, it is possible to rent Stockholm City Bikes by purchasing a bike card online or through retailers. Cards allow users to rent bikes from any Stockholm City Bikes stand spread across the city and return them in any stand. There are two types of cards: the Season Card (valid from 1 April to 31 October) and the 3-day card. When their validity runs out they can be reactivated and are therefore reusable. Bikes can be used for up to three hours per loan and can be rented from Monday to Sunday from 6 am to 10 pm. These bikes have unfortunately not been a huge success because of people throwing them into the water or destroying them. Although the city bikes are not the only victims of this, e-scooters get similar treatment.

=== Airports ===

* International and domestic:
** Stockholm Arlanda Airport is the largest and busiest airport in Sweden with 27 million passengers in 2017. It is located about north of Stockholm and serves as a hub for Scandinavian Airlines.
** Stockholm Bromma Airport is located about west of Stockholm, also serves as a hub for BRA (Braathens Regional Airlines).
* Only international:
** Stockholm Skavsta Airport is located south of Stockholm. It is located away from Södermanland County capital Nyköping.
** Stockholm Västerås Airport is located west of Stockholm, in the city of Västerås.

The &quot;Arlanda Express&quot; airport rail link runs between Arlanda Airport and Stockholm Central Station. With a journey of 20 minutes, the train ride is the fastest way of travelling to the city centre. Arlanda Central Station is also served by commuter, regional and intercity trains.

Additionally, there are also bus lines, Flygbussarna, that run between central Stockholm and all the airports.

 there are no airports specifically for general aviation in the Stockholm area.

=== Inter-city trains ===

Stockholm Central Station has train connections to many Swedish cities as well as to Oslo, Norway, Copenhagen, Denmark and Hamburg, Germany. The popular X 2000 service to Gothenburg takes three hours. Most of the trains are run by SJ AB.

== International rankings ==
Stockholm often performs well in international rankings, some of which are mentioned below:
*In the book &quot;The Ultimate Guide to International Marathons&quot; (1997), written by Dennis Craythorn and Rich Hanna, Stockholm Marathon is ranked as the best marathon in the world.
* In the 2006 European Innovation Scoreboard, prepared by the Maastricht Economic Research Institute on Innovation and Technology (MERIT) and the Joint Research Centre&#x27;s Institute for the Protection and the Security of the Citizen of the European Commission, Stockholm was ranked as the most innovative city in Europe.
* In the 2008 World Knowledge Competitiveness Index, published by the Centre for International Competitiveness, Stockholm was ranked as the sixth most competitive region in the world and the most competitive region outside the United States.
* In the 2006 European Regional Growth Index (E-REGI), published by Jones Lang LaSalle, Stockholm was ranked fifth on the list of European cities with the strongest GDP growth forecast. Stockholm was ranked first in Scandinavia and second outside Central and Eastern Europe.
* In the 2007 European Cities Monitor, published by Cushman &amp; Wakefield, Stockholm was ranked as the best Nordic city to locate a business. In the same report, Stockholm was ranked first in Europe in terms of freedom from pollution.
* In a 2007 survey performed by the environmental economist Matthew Kahn for the &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot; magazine, Stockholm was ranked first on its list of the &quot;greenest&quot; and most &quot;livable&quot; cities in the world.
* In a 2008 survey published by &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot; magazine, Stockholm was ranked fourth in the world in its list of the &quot;world&#x27;s top ten honest cities&quot;.
* In a 2008 survey published by the &quot;National Geographic Traveler&quot; magazine, Gamla Stan (the Old Town) in Stockholm was ranked sixth on its list of rated historic places.
* In a 2008 survey published by the &quot;Foreign Policy&quot; magazine, Stockholm was ranked twenty-fourth on its list of the world&#x27;s most global cities.
* In 2009 Stockholm was awarded the title as European Green Capital 2010, as the first Green capital ever in the European Green Capital Award scheme.
* In 2013, Stockholm was named the 8th most competitive city in the world by the Economist Intelligence Unit.
*In 2016 Stockholm was one of the cities with the most unicorn companies in the world.
*In 2019 Stockholm was awarded the World Smart City Award in the city category for its leadership of the European Smart Cities and Communities project GrowSmarter.

== Twin cities and towns ==
Stockholm does not have any twin cities.

== See also ==

* Holmium—a chemical element named after Stockholm
* List of people from Stockholm
* Outline of Stockholm
* Ports of the Baltic Sea
* Stockholm syndrome

== References ==
== External links ==

* Stockholm—official website
* Stockholm Visitors Board—the official visitors&#x27; guide
* Selma Lagerlöf&#x27;s account of the history of Stockholm, in Ch. VII of &quot;The Wonderful Adventures of Nils&quot;
* Tunnelbana Karta 2023 – Tunnelbanan Stockholm</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="0" end="9" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="22" end="29" title="Capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q12813115" start="34" end="52" title="List of urban areas in Sweden by population" label="most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="56" end="62" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796203" start="79" end="121" title="List of urban areas in the Nordic countries" label="largest urban area in the Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q506250" start="167" end="179" title="Stockholm Municipality" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q94385" start="205" end="215" title="Stockholm urban area" label="urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349072" start="240" end="257" title="Metropolitan Stockholm" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q184492" start="308" end="320" title="Mälaren" label="Lake Mälaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="336" end="346" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q764547" start="426" end="447" title="Stockholm archipelago" label="Stockholm archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="485" end="494" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q316828" start="577" end="588" title="Birger Jarl" label="Birger Jarl"/>
<link wikidata="Q104231" start="628" end="644" title="Stockholm County" label="Stockholm County"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="798" end="801" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="838" end="844" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q108977" start="848" end="862" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal) per capita" label="GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q208511" start="877" end="888" title="global city" label="global city"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="911" end="922" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530704" start="947" end="969" title="corporate headquarters" label="corporate headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q219564" start="1072" end="1092" title="Karolinska Institute" label="Karolinska Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q854280" start="1105" end="1138" title="KTH Royal Institute of Technology" label="KTH Royal Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061504" start="1140" end="1169" title="Stockholm School of Economics" label="Stockholm School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q221645" start="1174" end="1194" title="Stockholm University" label="Stockholm University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="1216" end="1227" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q653773" start="1258" end="1280" title="Stockholm Concert Hall" label="Stockholm Concert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q648483" start="1285" end="1304" title="Stockholm City Hall" label="Stockholm City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q901371" start="1354" end="1365" title="Vasa Museum" label="Vasa Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q272926" start="1414" end="1429" title="Stockholm metro" label="Stockholm metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8118" start="1578" end="1598" title="1912 Summer Olympics" label="1912 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066984" start="1708" end="1724" title="financial centre" label="financial centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q60519010" start="2105" end="2127" title="List of Swedish counties by GDP" label="highest GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q200547" start="2135" end="2153" title="Counties of Sweden" label="counties in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q930729" start="2185" end="2203" title="Government of Sweden" label="Swedish government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122645" start="2216" end="2228" title="Government agencies in Sweden" label="its agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q21076392" start="2266" end="2275" title="Judiciary of Sweden" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q481289" start="2285" end="2303" title="official residence" label="official residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q26796319" start="2312" end="2327" title="Monarchy of Sweden" label="Swedish monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q687075" start="2336" end="2350" title="Prime Minister of Sweden" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q744615" start="2387" end="2395" title="Rosenbad" label="Rosenbad"/>
<link wikidata="Q272930" start="2410" end="2417" title="Riksdag" label="Riksdag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101073" start="2456" end="2472" title="Parliament House, Stockholm" label="Parliament House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886105" start="2533" end="2544" title="Sager House" label="Sager House"/>
<link wikidata="Q750444" start="2546" end="2562" title="Stockholm Palace" label="Stockholm Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q208559" start="2643" end="2663" title="Drottningholm Palace" label="Drottningholm Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q492614" start="2680" end="2685" title="Ekerö Municipality" label="Ekerö"/>
<link wikidata="Q289564" start="2700" end="2712" title="Swedish Royal Family" label="Royal Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q180494" start="2792" end="2803" title="Saga" label="Norse sagas"/>
<link wikidata="Q939342" start="2807" end="2814" title="Agnafit" label="Agnafit"/>
<link wikidata="Q215806" start="2823" end="2835" title="Heimskringla" label="Heimskringla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436711" start="2874" end="2878" title="Agne" label="Agne"/>
<link wikidata="Q208177" start="2880" end="2885" title="Birka" label="Birka"/>
<link wikidata="Q213649" start="2964" end="2974" title="Viking Age" label="Viking Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q104231" start="3012" end="3028" title="Stockholm County" label="Stockholm County"/>
<link wikidata="Q820245" start="3152" end="3162" title="Bergslagen" label="Bergslagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="3327" end="3340" title="fortification" label="fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q916039" start="3422" end="3437" title="Helgeandsholmen" label="Helgeandsholmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987885" start="3479" end="3500" title="Erik&amp;#x27;s Chronicle" label="Erik&amp;#x27;s Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q316828" start="3548" end="3559" title="Birger Jarl" label="Birger Jarl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069921" start="3605" end="3614" title="Karelia (historical province of Finland)" label="Karelians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183470" start="3625" end="3643" title="Sigtuna" label="pillage of Sigtuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q579854" start="3729" end="3739" title="Gamla stan" label="Gamla Stan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="3909" end="3925" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843" start="3990" end="3996" title="Lübeck" label="Lübeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="3998" end="4005" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="4007" end="4013" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q54757" start="4024" end="4029" title="Visby" label="Visby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="4031" end="4038" title="Tallinn" label="Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="4052" end="4056" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q727002" start="4110" end="4117" title="charter" label="charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419403" start="4212" end="4235" title="Privy Council of Sweden" label="Privy Council of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="4521" end="4529" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="4530" end="4547" title="capital of Sweden" label="capital of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q62623" start="4674" end="4686" title="Kalmar Union" label="Kalmar Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q154460" start="4805" end="4817" title="Christian II of Denmark" label="Christian II"/>
<link wikidata="Q846876" start="4929" end="4948" title="Stockholm Bloodbath" label="Stockholm Bloodbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q52947" start="5114" end="5125" title="Gustav I of Sweden" label="Gustav Vasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="5629" end="5640" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q147009" start="5664" end="5681" title="Tre Kronor (castle)" label="Tre Kronor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q750444" start="5725" end="5741" title="Stockholm Palace" label="Stockholm Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="5759" end="5773" title="Swedish Empire" label="Swedish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q52937" start="5929" end="5938" title="Christina, Queen of Sweden" label="Christina"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="5987" end="6001" title="René Descartes" label="Réne Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q353693" start="6169" end="6187" title="Christopher Polhem" label="Christopher Polhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q350198" start="6296" end="6309" title="Olaus Rudbeck" label="Olaus Rudbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q185246" start="6325" end="6343" title="Uppsala University" label="Uppsala University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963240" start="6380" end="6385" title="Walls of Stockholm" label="walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q10681143" start="6535" end="6563" title="Great Stockholm Fire of 1625" label="Great Stockholm Fire of 1625"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284547" start="6602" end="6613" title="Stadsholmen" label="Stadsholmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632115" start="6889" end="6917" title="Museum of Medieval Stockholm" label="Museum of Medieval Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q133780" start="6931" end="6937" title="Plague (disease)" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599700" start="6938" end="6957" title="Great Northern War plague outbreak" label="killed about 20,000"/>
<link wikidata="Q151616" start="7011" end="7029" title="Great Northern War" label="Great Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="7173" end="7184" title="great power" label="great power"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="7349" end="7369" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q52930" start="7440" end="7450" title="Gustav III" label="Gustav III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455200" start="7523" end="7538" title="Economy of Sweden" label="Swedish economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q870196" start="7577" end="7595" title="Russo-Swedish War (1788–1790)" label="war against Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q52937" start="7795" end="7810" title="Christina, Queen of Sweden" label="Queen Christina"/>
<link wikidata="Q312498" start="7831" end="7851" title="Carl Michael Bellman" label="Carl Michael Bellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q453272" start="7856" end="7875" title="Joseph Martin Kraus" label="Joseph Martin Kraus"/>
<link wikidata="Q254283" start="7967" end="7986" title="Royal Swedish Opera" label="Royal Swedish Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038496" start="8085" end="8103" title="Carl Gustaf Tessin" label="Carl Gustaf Tessin"/>
<link wikidata="Q842858" start="8168" end="8182" title="Nationalmuseum" label="Nationalmuseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="8250" end="8263" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81130" start="8268" end="8282" title="Anders Celsius" label="Anders Celsius"/>
<link wikidata="Q681497" start="8350" end="8371" title="Stockholm Observatory" label="Stockholm Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="8818" end="8829" title="immigration" label="immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q219564" start="9160" end="9181" title="Karolinska Institutet" label="Karolinska Institutet"/>
<link wikidata="Q854280" start="9186" end="9219" title="KTH Royal Institute of Technology" label="KTH Royal Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505471" start="9225" end="9262" title="General Art and Industrial Exposition of Stockholm (1897)" label="General Art and Industrial Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q10692276" start="9336" end="9365" title="Old Stockholm telephone tower" label="Old Stockholm telephone tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="9608" end="9619" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="9822" end="9831" title="modernism" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346476" start="9895" end="9900" title="Klara (Stockholm)" label="Klara"/>
<link wikidata="Q579854" start="10028" end="10038" title="Gamla stan" label="Gamla stan"/>
<link wikidata="Q740149" start="10040" end="10049" title="Södermalm" label="Södermalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q298489" start="10051" end="10060" title="Östermalm" label="Östermalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q666729" start="10062" end="10073" title="Kungsholmen" label="Kungsholmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646335" start="10078" end="10086" title="Vasastan, Stockholm" label="Vasastan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47942" start="10161" end="10174" title="functionalism (architecture)" label="functionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q184492" start="10904" end="10916" title="Lake Mälaren" label="Lake Mälaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q764547" start="11068" end="11089" title="Stockholm archipelago" label="Stockholm archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q965439" start="11149" end="11162" title="Riddarfjärden" label="Riddarfjärden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438571" start="11310" end="11333" title="Central Swedish lowland" label="Central Swedish lowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q820245" start="11347" end="11357" title="Bergslagen" label="Bergslagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556311" start="11491" end="11517" title="Temperate deciduous forest" label="Temperate deciduous forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="11609" end="11622" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="11635" end="11646" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="11650" end="11656" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q301259" start="12034" end="12042" title="Järfälla Municipality" label="Järfälla"/>
<link wikidata="Q109010" start="12044" end="12049" title="Solna Municipality" label="Solna"/>
<link wikidata="Q493066" start="12051" end="12055" title="Täby Municipality" label="Täby"/>
<link wikidata="Q503746" start="12057" end="12067" title="Sollentuna Municipality" label="Sollentuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120654" start="12069" end="12076" title="Lidingö Municipality" label="Lidingö"/>
<link wikidata="Q499425" start="12078" end="12092" title="Upplands Väsby Municipality" label="Upplands Väsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q117728" start="12094" end="12103" title="Österåker Municipality" label="Österåker"/>
<link wikidata="Q216915" start="12105" end="12112" title="Sigtuna Municipality" label="Sigtuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q972564" start="12114" end="12124" title="Sundbyberg Municipality" label="Sundbyberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q113679" start="12126" end="12134" title="Danderyd Municipality" label="Danderyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q501526" start="12136" end="12146" title="Vallentuna Municipality" label="Vallentuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q492614" start="12148" end="12153" title="Ekerö Municipality" label="Ekerö"/>
<link wikidata="Q113673" start="12155" end="12167" title="Upplands-Bro Municipality" label="Upplands-Bro"/>
<link wikidata="Q500090" start="12169" end="12176" title="Vaxholm Municipality" label="Vaxholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q214048" start="12182" end="12191" title="Norrtälje Municipality" label="Norrtälje"/>
<link wikidata="Q492575" start="12213" end="12221" title="Huddinge Municipality" label="Huddinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q946647" start="12223" end="12228" title="Nacka Municipality" label="Nacka"/>
<link wikidata="Q113718" start="12230" end="12238" title="Botkyrka Municipality" label="Botkyrka"/>
<link wikidata="Q113692" start="12240" end="12247" title="Haninge Municipality" label="Haninge"/>
<link wikidata="Q113730" start="12249" end="12255" title="Tyresö Municipality" label="Tyresö"/>
<link wikidata="Q493841" start="12257" end="12263" title="Värmdö Municipality" label="Värmdö"/>
<link wikidata="Q516336" start="12265" end="12275" title="Södertälje Municipality" label="Södertälje"/>
<link wikidata="Q516080" start="12277" end="12282" title="Salem Municipality" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q499460" start="12284" end="12291" title="Nykvarn Municipality" label="Nykvarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q505090" start="12296" end="12305" title="Nynäshamn Municipality" label="Nynäshamn"/>
<link wikidata="Q922489" start="12821" end="12842" title="Stockholm City Centre" label="Stockholm City Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q856671" start="12845" end="12853" title="Söderort" label="Söderort"/>
<link wikidata="Q713613" start="12879" end="12888" title="Västerort" label="Västerort"/>
<link wikidata="Q579854" start="12980" end="12990" title="Gamla Stan" label="Gamla Stan"/>
<link wikidata="Q862618" start="12993" end="13004" title="Kungsholmen (borough)" label="Kungsholmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q862144" start="13007" end="13015" title="Norrmalm (borough)" label="Norrmalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q860681" start="13018" end="13027" title="Södermalm (borough)" label="Södermalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646335" start="13030" end="13038" title="Vasastan, Stockholm" label="Vasastan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12904658" start="13041" end="13050" title="Östermalm (borough)" label="Östermalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q606458" start="13073" end="13093" title="Enskede-Årsta-Vantör" label="Enskede-Årsta-Vantör"/>
<link wikidata="Q861854" start="13096" end="13102" title="Farsta (borough)" label="Farsta"/>
<link wikidata="Q686593" start="13105" end="13126" title="Hägersten-Liljeholmen" label="Hägersten-Liljeholmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q779963" start="13129" end="13138" title="Skarpnäck (borough)" label="Skarpnäck"/>
<link wikidata="Q858040" start="13141" end="13151" title="Skärholmen (borough)" label="Skärholmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q860675" start="13154" end="13160" title="Älvsjö (borough)" label="Älvsjö"/>
<link wikidata="Q10436033" start="13184" end="13190" title="Bromma" label="Bromma"/>
<link wikidata="Q861336" start="13193" end="13211" title="Hässelby-Vällingby" label="Hässelby-Vällingby"/>
<link wikidata="Q861329" start="13214" end="13227" title="Rinkeby-Kista" label="Rinkeby-Kista"/>
<link wikidata="Q861644" start="13230" end="13243" title="Spånga-Tensta" label="Spånga-Tensta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026676" start="13263" end="13271" title="Norrmalm (proper)" label="Norrmalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q844426" start="13309" end="13321" title="Sergels torg" label="Sergels torg"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="13359" end="13365" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="13467" end="13492" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="13515" end="13521" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="13556" end="13571" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q215712" start="14383" end="14400" title="urban heat island" label="urban heat island"/>
<link wikidata="Q207762" start="14729" end="14738" title="tree line" label="tree line"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="16484" end="16499" title="aurora borealis" label="aurora borealis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603898" start="16947" end="16962" title="summer solstice" label="summer solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q43261" start="17003" end="17010" title="horizon" label="horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q164160" start="17140" end="17157" title="nautical twilight" label="nautical twilight"/>
<link wikidata="Q82806" start="17202" end="17208" title="zenith" label="zenith"/>
<link wikidata="Q774621" start="17297" end="17309" title="midnight sun" label="midnight sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q176609" start="17337" end="17350" title="Arctic Circle" label="Arctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263267" start="17417" end="17434" title="Municipal council (Sweden)" label="Municipal Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735285" start="17523" end="17540" title="Elections in Sweden" label="general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q272930" start="17588" end="17595" title="Riksdag" label="Riksdag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754161" start="17600" end="17615" title="County councils of Sweden" label="county councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q648483" start="17659" end="17678" title="Stockholm City Hall" label="Stockholm City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q640506" start="18586" end="18593" title="Cabinet (government)" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q648483" start="19001" end="19020" title="Stockholm City Hall" label="Stockholm City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077702" start="19075" end="19098" title="National Romantic style" label="National Romantic Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="19393" end="19399" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="19592" end="19606" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="19835" end="19848" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic region"/>
<link wikidata="Q52618" start="19889" end="19897" title="Ericsson" label="Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q757164" start="19973" end="19984" title="Atlas Copco" label="Atlas Copco"/>
<link wikidata="Q505922" start="20098" end="20108" title="Electrolux" label="Electrolux"/>
<link wikidata="Q188326" start="20110" end="20117" title="H&amp;amp;M" label="H&amp;amp;M"/>
<link wikidata="Q662174" start="20122" end="20134" title="Securitas AB" label="Securitas AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671804" start="20224" end="20235" title="Investor AB" label="Investor AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7050878" start="20240" end="20252" title="Nordstjernan" label="Nordstjernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275733" start="20289" end="20295" title="EQT AB" label="EQT AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245744" start="20424" end="20429" title="Kista" label="Kista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129295" start="20738" end="20744" title="Mojang Studios" label="Mojang"/>
<link wikidata="Q689141" start="20746" end="20753" title="Spotify" label="Spotify"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165072" start="20758" end="20764" title="Klarna" label="Klarna"/>
<link wikidata="Q975655" start="20937" end="20946" title="SEB Group" label="SEB Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421630" start="20948" end="20961" title="Handelsbanken" label="Handelsbanken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145493" start="20966" end="20974" title="Swedbank" label="Swedbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123823" start="20976" end="20982" title="Nordea" label="Nordea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="21033" end="21041" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019992" start="21102" end="21126" title="Nasdaq Stockholm" label="Stockholm Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q681497" start="21909" end="21930" title="Stockholm Observatory" label="Stockholm Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q219564" start="21991" end="22011" title="Karolinska Institute" label="Karolinska Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q854280" start="22014" end="22047" title="KTH Royal Institute of Technology" label="KTH Royal Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q221645" start="22339" end="22359" title="Stockholm University" label="Stockholm University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420103" start="22514" end="22547" title="Swedish Museum of Natural History" label="Swedish Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q819811" start="22587" end="22608" title="Bergianska trädgården" label="Bergianska trädgården"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061504" start="22620" end="22649" title="Stockholm School of Economics" label="Stockholm School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q219625" start="22831" end="22839" title="fine art" label="fine art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796144" start="22879" end="22901" title="Royal College of Music, Stockholm" label="Royal College of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541450" start="22977" end="23007" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Music" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355352" start="23021" end="23058" title="Royal Institute of Art" label="Royal University College of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q167920" start="23112" end="23141" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Arts" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813336" start="23181" end="23224" title="Swedish National Academy of Mime and Acting" label="Swedish National Academy of Mime and Acting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140265" start="23273" end="23295" title="Royal Dramatic Theatre" label="Royal Dramatic Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443" start="23335" end="23346" title="Greta Garbo" label="Greta Garbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782926" start="23388" end="23397" title="Konstfack" label="Konstfack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320013" start="23420" end="23447" title="University College of Opera" label="University College of Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393363" start="23492" end="23519" title="University of Dance and Circus" label="University College of Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618074" start="23535" end="23571" title="Stockholms Musikpedagogiska Institut" label="Stockholms Musikpedagogiska Institut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110979" start="23628" end="23648" title="Södertörn University" label="Södertörn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349072" start="23718" end="23740" title="Metropolitan Stockholm" label="Metropolitan Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467768" start="23868" end="23893" title="Military Academy Karlberg" label="Military Academy Karlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q335491" start="24006" end="24021" title="Karlberg Palace" label="Karlberg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654779" start="24041" end="24067" title="Swedish Defence University" label="Swedish Defence University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358076" start="24069" end="24101" title="Ersta Sköndal University College" label="Ersta Sköndal University College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558323" start="24103" end="24146" title="Swedish School of Sport and Health Sciences" label="Swedish School of Sport and Health Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q3652398" start="24155" end="24183" title="University College Stockholm" label="University College Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="24496" end="24518" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q4981807" start="24815" end="24825" title="Brännkyrka" label="Brännkyrka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581833" start="24893" end="24899" title="Spånga" label="Spånga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567862" start="25866" end="25872" title="Iraqis" label="Iraqis"/>
<link wikidata="Q170284" start="25895" end="25900" title="Finns" label="Finns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="25933" end="25938" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869253" start="26196" end="26233" title="official minority languages of Sweden" label="official minority languages of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="26259" end="26267" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303" start="26269" end="26285" title="Bosnian language" label="Bosnian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414422" start="26287" end="26298" title="Neo-Aramaic" label="Neo-Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29440" start="26300" end="26306" title="Sureth" label="Sureth"/>
<link wikidata="Q34040" start="26307" end="26313" title="Turoyo" label="Turoyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="26316" end="26322" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="26324" end="26331" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q36368" start="26333" end="26340" title="Kurdish language" label="Kurdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="26342" end="26347" title="Farsi" label="Farsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13275" start="26349" end="26355" title="Somali language" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="26357" end="26362" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="26364" end="26371" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="26373" end="26380" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="26385" end="26393" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q749418" start="26437" end="26453" title="Sweden Finns" label="Finnish-minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357115" start="26642" end="26656" title="Finnish Church, Stockholm" label="Finnish Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="26795" end="26802" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13357" start="26815" end="26824" title="Meänkieli" label="Meänkieli"/>
<link wikidata="Q56463" start="26833" end="26847" title="Sami languages" label="Sami languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q13201" start="27034" end="27045" title="Romani language" label="Romani chib"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="27050" end="27057" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349072" start="27172" end="27199" title="Stockholm metropolitan area" label="Stockholm metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="27314" end="27330" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q94385" start="27336" end="27356" title="Stockholm urban area" label="Stockholm urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q127448" start="27459" end="27473" title="Municipalities of Sweden" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q876775" start="27606" end="27630" title="Diocese of Stockholm (Church of Sweden)" label="27 parishes in Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="27928" end="27939" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310653" start="28073" end="28096" title="Swedish Royal Academies" label="Swedish Royal Academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="28378" end="28397" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q208559" start="28471" end="28491" title="Drottningholm Palace" label="Drottningholm Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q213988" start="28493" end="28509" title="Skogskyrkogården" label="Skogskyrkogården"/>
<link wikidata="Q208177" start="28538" end="28543" title="Birka" label="Birka"/>
<link wikidata="Q129372" start="28574" end="28601" title="European Capital of Culture" label="European Capital of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7724" start="28736" end="28753" title="August Strindberg" label="August Strindberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q55767" start="28758" end="28773" title="Astrid Lindgren" label="Astrid Lindgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q365406" start="28857" end="28871" title="Vilhelm Moberg" label="Vilhelm Moberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373367" start="28875" end="28889" title="Olof von Dalin" label="Olof von Dalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207360" start="29005" end="29020" title="Swedish Academy" label="Swedish Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q953058" start="29025" end="29051" title="National Library of Sweden" label="National Library of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q201694" start="29265" end="29273" title="Götaland" label="Götaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25286" start="29278" end="29285" title="Uppsala" label="Uppsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q48328" start="29377" end="29384" title="Beowulf" label="Beowulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q749243" start="29406" end="29412" title="Church of Sweden" label="Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q185246" start="29417" end="29427" title="Uppsala University" label="University"/>
<link wikidata="Q52947" start="29891" end="29902" title="Gustav I of Sweden" label="Gustav Vasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="30201" end="30215" title="Swedish Empire" label="Swedish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="30366" end="30379" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q312498" start="30590" end="30610" title="Carl Michael Bellman" label="Carl Michael Bellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="30847" end="30855" title="Romanticism" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q667661" start="30860" end="30867" title="Literary realism" label="Realist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="31406" end="31414" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164087" start="31481" end="31494" title="German Church, Stockholm" label="German Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547268" start="31566" end="31577" title="Swedish House of Nobility" label="Riddarhuset"/>
<link wikidata="Q892231" start="31613" end="31625" title="Bonde Palace" label="Bonde Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q783848" start="31631" end="31644" title="Tessin Palace" label="Tessin Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q403404" start="31653" end="31671" title="Axel Oxenstierna palace" label="Oxenstierna Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q657118" start="31710" end="31729" title="Riddarholmen Church" label="Riddarholmen Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q750444" start="31828" end="31844" title="Stockholm Palace" label="Stockholm Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="31862" end="31869" title="Baroque architecture" label="baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133075" start="31877" end="31887" title="Storkyrkan" label="Storkyrkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q740149" start="32231" end="32240" title="Södermalm" label="Södermalm"/>
<link wikidata="" start="32900" end="32923" title=":sv:Stockholms stadsarkiv" label="Stockholm City Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="33231" end="33237" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="33242" end="33248" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q254283" start="33321" end="33340" title="Royal Swedish Opera" label="Royal Swedish Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512169" start="33409" end="33420" title="Strandvägen" label="Strandvägen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="33574" end="33580" title="Art Nouveau" label="Jugend"/>
<link wikidata="Q944344" start="33689" end="33703" title="Ragnar Östberg" label="Ragnar Östberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246991" start="33748" end="33772" title="Stockholm Public Library" label="Stockholm Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q312070" start="33776" end="33790" title="Gunnar Asplund" label="Gunnar Asplund"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="33799" end="33818" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q213988" start="33819" end="33835" title="Skogskyrkogården" label="Skogskyrkogården"/>
<link wikidata="Q312070" start="33839" end="33846" title="Gunnar Asplund" label="Asplund"/>
<link wikidata="Q550245" start="33872" end="33888" title="Sigurd Lewerentz" label="Sigurd Lewerentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781556" start="34027" end="34033" title="Gärdet" label="Gärdet"/>
<link wikidata="Q272926" start="34304" end="34319" title="Stockholm metro" label="Stockholm metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559389" start="34351" end="34360" title="Vällingby" label="Vällingby"/>
<link wikidata="Q153305" start="34365" end="34371" title="Farsta" label="Farsta"/>
<link wikidata="Q842000" start="34720" end="34740" title="Redevelopment of Norrmalm" label="Norrmalmsregleringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q844426" start="34748" end="34760" title="Sergels Torg" label="Sergels Torg"/>
<link wikidata="Q204298" start="34988" end="35004" title="The House of Culture (Stockholm)" label="House of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q119095404" start="35006" end="35018" title="Stockholm City Theatre" label="City Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q564652" start="35027" end="35035" title="Sveriges Riksbank" label="Riksbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q352843" start="35075" end="35088" title="Peter Celsing" label="Peter Celsing"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35132" end="35152" title=":sv:S:t Görans gymnasium" label="S:t Görans Gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879491" start="35234" end="35251" title="Léonie Geisendorf" label="Leonie Geisendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617999" start="35334" end="35347" title="Stockholm Beauty Council" label="Skönhetsrådet"/>
<link wikidata="Q846784" start="35577" end="35603" title="Music of Sweden" label="influential music industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="35764" end="35768" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q505476" start="35843" end="35849" title="Avicii" label="Avicii"/>
<link wikidata="Q254283" start="35918" end="35937" title="Royal Swedish Opera" label="Royal Swedish Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541450" start="35942" end="35972" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Music" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q312498" start="36079" end="36099" title="Carl Michael Bellman" label="Carl Michael Bellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q453272" start="36101" end="36120" title="Joseph Martin Kraus" label="Joseph Martin Kraus"/>
<link wikidata="Q231345" start="36125" end="36135" title="Jenny Lind" label="Jenny Lind"/>
<link wikidata="Q173790" start="36585" end="36592" title="Roxette" label="Roxette"/>
<link wikidata="Q648786" start="36597" end="36601" title="Kent (band)" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q318223" start="36858" end="36868" title="Max Martin" label="Max Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q229445" start="37198" end="37203" title="Robyn" label="Robyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q372460" start="37235" end="37249" title="Måns Zelmerlöw" label="Måns Zelmerlöw"/>
<link wikidata="Q483376" start="37254" end="37260" title="Loreen" label="Loreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757014" start="37262" end="37280" title="Allsång på Skansen" label="Allsång på Skansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q901371" start="37506" end="37517" title="Vasa Museum" label="Vasa Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863818" start="37526" end="37541" title="maritime museum" label="maritime museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q831527" start="37545" end="37555" title="Djurgården" label="Djurgården"/>
<link wikidata="Q11446" start="37613" end="37617" title="ship" label="ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q219821" start="37672" end="37676" title="Vasa (ship)" label="Vasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q842858" start="37728" end="37742" title="Nationalmuseum" label="Nationalmuseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="37983" end="37992" title="Rembrandt" label="Rembrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q183221" start="37998" end="38013" title="Jean-Antoine Watteau" label="Antoine Watteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q315102" start="38109" end="38125" title="Alexander Roslin" label="Alexander Roslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q206820" start="38127" end="38138" title="Anders Zorn" label="Anders Zorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q924618" start="38140" end="38159" title="Johan Tobias Sergel" label="Johan Tobias Sergel"/>
<link wikidata="Q187310" start="38161" end="38173" title="Carl Larsson" label="Carl Larsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q858483" start="38175" end="38192" title="Carl Fredrik Hill" label="Carl Fredrik Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q709853" start="38197" end="38212" title="Ernst Josephson" label="Ernst Josephson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274511" start="38301" end="38315" title="Moderna Museet" label="Moderna Museet"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="38375" end="38385" title="modern art" label="modern art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="38432" end="38439" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="38444" end="38457" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q725108" start="38460" end="38467" title="Skansen" label="Skansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q91203" start="38485" end="38491" title="Sconce (fortification)" label="Sconce"/>
<link wikidata="Q756102" start="38507" end="38522" title="open-air museum" label="open-air museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q43501" start="38527" end="38530" title="zoo" label="zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q831527" start="38557" end="38567" title="Djurgården" label="Djurgården"/>
<link wikidata="Q549109" start="38595" end="38609" title="Artur Hazelius" label="Artur Hazelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q193556" start="38653" end="38678" title="Provinces of Sweden" label="different parts of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="38801" end="38805" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q690002" start="38808" end="38827" title="Swedish Army Museum" label="Swedish Army Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439649" start="38922" end="38934" title="Fotografiska" label="Fotografiska"/>
<link wikidata="Q208177" start="38992" end="38997" title="Birka" label="Birka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636176" start="39067" end="39082" title="Livrustkammaren" label="Livrustkammaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q750444" start="39114" end="39130" title="Stockholm Palace" label="Stockholm Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647895" start="39133" end="39160" title="Maritime Museum (Stockholm)" label="Maritime Museum (Stockholm)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331646" start="39226" end="39241" title="Medelhavsmuseet" label="Medelhavsmuseet"/>
<link wikidata="Q667094" start="39302" end="39314" title="Millesgården" label="Millesgården"/>
<link wikidata="Q298289" start="39381" end="39414" title="Museum of Far Eastern Antiquities" label="Museum of Far Eastern Antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="39453" end="39458" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="39460" end="39465" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="39467" end="39472" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="39474" end="39479" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="39484" end="39498" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q177550" start="39501" end="39550" title="Swedish National Museum of Science and Technology" label="Swedish National Museum of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="39584" end="39594" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968711" start="39597" end="39609" title="Nobel Museum" label="Nobel Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="39626" end="39637" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q339619" start="39639" end="39654" title="List of Nobel laureates" label="Nobel laureates"/>
<link wikidata="Q23810" start="39686" end="39698" title="Alfred Nobel" label="Alfred Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142142" start="39713" end="39726" title="Nordic Museum" label="Nordic Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750428" start="39790" end="39808" title="Royal Coin Cabinet" label="Royal Coin Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q47398" start="39848" end="39864" title="economic history" label="economic history"/>
<link wikidata="Q725108" start="39878" end="39885" title="Skansen" label="Skansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933896" start="39999" end="40020" title="Stockholm City Museum" label="Stockholm City Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726607" start="40071" end="40093" title="Swedish History Museum" label="Swedish History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420103" start="40182" end="40215" title="Swedish Museum of Natural History" label="Swedish Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132770" start="40314" end="40334" title="Toy Museum Stockholm" label="Toy Museum Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q892825" start="40554" end="40562" title="Bonnier Group" label="Bonniers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700727" start="40626" end="40642" title="Tensta Konsthall" label="Tensta Konsthall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859638" start="40931" end="40947" title="Milliken Gallery" label="Milliken Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q252259" start="41002" end="41015" title="Thiel Gallery" label="Thiel Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356542" start="41038" end="41050" title="Ernest Thiel" label="Ernest Thiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640397" start="41146" end="41167" title="Liljevalchs konsthall" label="Liljevalchs konsthall"/>
<link wikidata="Q500923" start="41472" end="41482" title="Skärholmen" label="Skärholmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q642080" start="41484" end="41490" title="Tensta" label="Tensta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703720" start="41492" end="41499" title="Jordbro" label="Jordbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455513" start="41501" end="41507" title="Fittja" label="Fittja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565140" start="41509" end="41514" title="Husby, Stockholm" label="Husby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956603" start="41516" end="41527" title="Brandbergen" label="Brandbergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575195" start="41529" end="41536" title="Rinkeby" label="Rinkeby"/>
<link wikidata="Q10655832" start="41538" end="41544" title="Rissne" label="Rissne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245744" start="41546" end="41551" title="Kista" label="Kista"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305157" start="41553" end="41561" title="Hagsätra" label="Hagsätra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5963259" start="41563" end="41571" title="Hässelby" label="Hässelby"/>
<link wikidata="Q861854" start="41573" end="41579" title="Farsta (borough)" label="Farsta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783480" start="41581" end="41588" title="Rågsved" label="Rågsved"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117115" start="41590" end="41602" title="Flemingsberg" label="Flemingsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="41700" end="41711" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="41713" end="41721" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="41723" end="41728" title="Turkish people" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223" start="41733" end="41738" title="Kurds" label="Kurds"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="41808" end="41822" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="41827" end="41840" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q165192" start="42001" end="42007" title="Swedes" label="Swedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140265" start="42096" end="42118" title="Royal Dramatic Theatre" label="Royal Dramatic Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q254283" start="42215" end="42234" title="Royal Swedish Opera" label="Royal Swedish Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q119095404" start="42289" end="42311" title="Stockholm City Theatre" label="Stockholm City Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464597" start="42363" end="42373" title="Folkoperan" label="Folkoperan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073615" start="42449" end="42462" title="Chinateatern" label="China Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124568" start="42468" end="42478" title="Göta Lejon" label="Göta Lejon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915592" start="42492" end="42501" title="Mosebacke" label="Mosebacke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439887" start="42519" end="42532" title="Oscarsteatern" label="Oscar Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q653773" start="42586" end="42608" title="Stockholm Concert Hall" label="Stockholm Concert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q829222" start="42689" end="42705" title="Berwald Hall" label="The Berwald hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q15281410" start="42766" end="42775" title="Yung Lean" label="Yung Lean"/>
<link wikidata="Q55433897" start="42780" end="42786" title="Bladee" label="Bladee"/>
<link wikidata="Q84323645" start="42899" end="42905" title="Ecco2K" label="Ecco2K"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="42933" end="42956" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935333" start="42981" end="42997" title="Stockholmsmässan" label="Stockholmsmässan"/>
<link wikidata="Q32926" start="43023" end="43034" title="Globe Arena" label="Globe Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q260304" start="43060" end="43070" title="Gröna Lund" label="Gröna Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q831527" start="43117" end="43127" title="Djurgården" label="Djurgården"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543058" start="43540" end="43542" title="Sveriges Radio" label="SR"/>
<link wikidata="Q215363" start="43560" end="43563" title="Sveriges Television" label="SVT"/>
<link wikidata="Q943681" start="43654" end="43657" title="TV3 (Viasat)" label="TV3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500487" start="43659" end="43662" title="TV4 Group" label="TV4"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065418" start="43667" end="43670" title="TV6 (Sweden)" label="TV6"/>
<link wikidata="Q892825" start="43768" end="43781" title="Bonnier Group" label="Bonnier group"/>
<link wikidata="Q49740" start="43830" end="43839" title="Minecraft" label="Minecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q266224" start="43874" end="43906" title="Markus Persson" label="Markus &amp;#x27;Notch&amp;#x27; Persson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129295" start="43932" end="43938" title="Mojang" label="Mojang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="44019" end="44027" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="44032" end="44042" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q221602" start="44099" end="44102" title="AIK Fotboll" label="AIK"/>
<link wikidata="Q622430" start="44104" end="44118" title="Djurgårdens IF Fotboll" label="Djurgårdens IF"/>
<link wikidata="Q460724" start="44123" end="44134" title="Hammarby Fotboll" label="Hammarby IF"/>
<link wikidata="Q202243" start="44168" end="44179" title="Allsvenskan" label="Allsvenskan"/>
<link wikidata="Q221602" start="44181" end="44184" title="AIK Fotboll" label="AIK"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634155" start="44207" end="44236" title="List of national stadiums" label="national stadium for football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138684" start="44238" end="44254" title="Strawberry Arena" label="Strawberry Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q109010" start="44258" end="44263" title="Solna Municipality" label="Solna"/>
<link wikidata="Q20650323" start="44296" end="44325" title="2017 UEFA Europa League Final" label="2017 UEFA Europa League Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645566" start="44475" end="44483" title="Hammarby IF" label="Hammarby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701834" start="44492" end="44503" title="Tele2 Arena" label="Tele2 Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756084" start="44507" end="44518" title="Johanneshov" label="Johanneshov"/>
<link wikidata="Q59583" start="44627" end="44630" title="AIK IF" label="AIK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232297" start="44635" end="44649" title="Djurgårdens IF Hockey" label="Djurgårdens IF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519755" start="44658" end="44673" title="HockeyAllsvenskan" label="the second tier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888469" start="44690" end="44704" title="Hockeyettan" label="the third tier"/>
<link wikidata="Q183018" start="44726" end="44731" title="bandy" label="bandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="44733" end="44743" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q206763" start="44745" end="44754" title="floorball" label="floorball"/>
<link wikidata="Q8118" start="44846" end="44866" title="1912 Summer Olympics" label="1912 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q727078" start="44893" end="44918" title="Stockholm Olympic Stadium" label="Stockholms Olympiastadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138684" start="45028" end="45044" title="Strawberry Arena" label="Strawberry Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q32926" start="45081" end="45093" title="Avicii Arena" label="Avicii Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q304362" start="45228" end="45233" title="Hovet" label="Hovet"/>
<link wikidata="Q909448" start="45291" end="45328" title="Equestrian at the 1956 Summer Olympics" label="1956 Summer Olympics Equestrian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q161810" start="45337" end="45351" title="UEFA Euro 1992" label="UEFA Euro 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904255" start="45395" end="45420" title="Bids for the 2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Summer Olympics bids"/>
<link wikidata="Q132533" start="45443" end="45462" title="1958 FIFA World Cup" label="1958 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q271138" start="45500" end="45503" title="Åre" label="Åre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630399" start="45512" end="45532" title="2026 Winter Olympics" label="2026 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="45566" end="45571" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41158" start="45572" end="45594" title="Cortina d&amp;#x27;Ampezzo" label="Cortina d&amp;#x27;Ampezzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="45596" end="45601" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="45695" end="45702" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q64823101" start="45715" end="45738" title="2026 Winter Paralympics" label="2026 Winter Paralympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q271138" start="45748" end="45751" title="Åre" label="Åre"/>
<link wikidata="Q82414" start="45815" end="45835" title="Winter Olympic Games" label="Winter Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317976" start="45837" end="45860" title="Winter Paralympic Games" label="Winter Paralympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q15056133" start="45869" end="45904" title="Special Olympics World Games" label="Special Olympics World Winter Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q271138" start="45914" end="45917" title="Åre" label="Åre"/>
<link wikidata="Q26515" start="45953" end="45962" title="Östersund" label="Östersund"/>
<link wikidata="Q900" start="46082" end="46087" title="Kazan" label="Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="46089" end="46095" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193074" start="46169" end="46189" title="2022 Winter Olympics" label="2022 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186629" start="46288" end="46300" title="Nordic Games" label="Nordic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q167170" start="46311" end="46328" title="multi-sport event" label="multi-sport event"/>
<link wikidata="Q82414" start="46347" end="46362" title="Winter Olympic Games" label="Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="46396" end="46408" title="Rugby league" label="Rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078911" start="46580" end="46586" title="Ötillö" label="ÖTILLÖ"/>
<link wikidata="Q299745" start="46641" end="46655" title="Stockholm Open" label="Stockholm Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q300017" start="46660" end="46685" title="ATP World Tour 250 series" label="ATP World Tour 250 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="46699" end="46705" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369172" start="46798" end="46819" title="Kungliga tennishallen" label="Kungliga tennishallen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46873" end="46885" title="Storkällaren" label="Storkällaren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46889" end="46903" title="Rådhuskällaren" label="Rådhuskällaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="46946" end="46954" title="business" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="46970" end="46978" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q55619322" start="46983" end="46994" title="entertainer" label="entertainer"/>
<link wikidata="Q312498" start="46995" end="47015" title="Carl Michael Bellman" label="Carl Michael Bellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q154250" start="47058" end="47064" title="tavern" label="tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q256020" start="47067" end="47070" title="inn" label="inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q22995" start="47076" end="47087" title="wine cellar" label="wine cellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="47097" end="47102" title="Poetry" label="poems"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="47239" end="47242" title="pub" label="pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q30022" start="47245" end="47250" title="Coffeehouse" label="cafes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707" start="47255" end="47265" title="restaurant" label="restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q10610464" start="47355" end="47368" title="Operakällaren" label="Operakällaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707" start="47424" end="47432" title="eateries" label="eateries"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677442" start="47499" end="47517" title="Stallmästaregården" label="Stallmästaregården"/>
<link wikidata="Q109010" start="47521" end="47526" title="Solna Municipality" label="Solna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256462" start="47569" end="47587" title="Den gyldene freden" label="Den Gyldene Freden"/>
<link wikidata="Q319608" start="47623" end="47630" title="address" label="address"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618021" start="47791" end="47814" title="Stockholm Jazz Festival" label="Stockholm Jazz Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q849086" start="47885" end="47897" title="Skeppsholmen" label="Skeppsholmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4442796" start="47909" end="47939" title="Stockholm Early Music Festival" label="Stockholm Early Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48056" end="48082" title="Stockholm Culture Festival" label="Stockholm Culture Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q10709483" start="48217" end="48233" title="We Are Sthlm" label="We Are Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645579" start="48454" end="48469" title="Stockholm Pride" label="Stockholm Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q51406" start="48485" end="48495" title="LGBT Pride" label="LGBT Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477977" start="48718" end="48736" title="Stockholm Marathon" label="Stockholm Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="48794" end="48807" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Banquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q648483" start="48823" end="48842" title="Stockholm City Hall" label="Stockholm City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618050" start="48876" end="48900" title="Stockholm Water Festival" label="Stockholm Water Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q132241" start="48925" end="48933" title="festival" label="festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49074" end="49100" title="Summerburst" label="Summerburst Music festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q158428" start="49103" end="49144" title="Stockholm International Film Festival" label="The Stockholm International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q686681" start="49365" end="49393" title="European Green Capital Award" label="European Green Capital Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="49401" end="49414" title="European Commission" label="EU Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="49789" end="49798" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="49800" end="49807" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="49809" end="49819" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833" start="49821" end="49829" title="Freiburg im Breisgau" label="Freiburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742" start="49840" end="49847" title="Münster" label="Münster"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="49853" end="49857" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796166" start="51106" end="51130" title="Royal National City Park" label="Royal National City Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q207895" start="52312" end="52315" title="Nitrogen dioxide" label="NO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="52327" end="52331" title="Particulates" label="PM10"/>
<link wikidata="Q13174856" start="52360" end="52364" title="soot" label="soot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880535" start="52377" end="52395" title="ultrafine particle" label="ultrafine particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="52407" end="52410" title="Sulfur dioxide" label="SO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q36933" start="52422" end="52427" title="ozone" label="ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="52673" end="52689" title="public transport" label="public transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q272926" start="52717" end="52732" title="Stockholm Metro" label="Stockholm Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q211653" start="52859" end="52882" title="Stockholm commuter rail" label="Stockholm commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992118" start="52970" end="52994" title="Trams in Stockholm" label="light rail/tramway lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138075" start="52996" end="52997" title="Spårväg City" label="7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759931" start="52999" end="53001" title="Nockebybanan" label="12"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432090" start="53003" end="53005" title="Lidingöbanan" label="21"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760190" start="53011" end="53013" title="Tvärbanan" label="22"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146992" start="53020" end="53026" title="Swedish three foot gauge railways" label="891 mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="53027" end="53047" title="narrow-gauge railway" label="narrow-gauge railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q54313" start="53048" end="53060" title="Roslagsbanan" label="Roslagsbanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754353" start="53134" end="53146" title="Saltsjöbanan" label="Saltsjöbanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796598" start="53244" end="53260" title="Djurgården ferry" label="Djurgården ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q731921" start="53371" end="53393" title="Arlanda Express" label="airport express trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q970452" start="53481" end="53507" title="Storstockholms Lokaltrafik" label="Storstockholms Lokaltrafik"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233188" start="53533" end="53557" title="Stockholm County Council" label="Stockholm County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479375" start="53717" end="53720" title="MTR Corporation" label="MTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975717" start="53790" end="53805" title="Waxholmsbolaget" label="Waxholmsbolaget"/>
<link wikidata="Q186086" start="54039" end="54050" title="travel card" label="travel card"/>
<link wikidata="Q867717" start="55116" end="55125" title="Stockholm City Line" label="City Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q830484" start="55337" end="55342" title="Enskede-Årsta" label="Årsta"/>
<link wikidata="Q54315" start="55510" end="55535" title="Stockholm Central Station" label="Stockholm Central Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q904462" start="55696" end="55708" title="Riddarholmen" label="Riddarholmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q106123" start="56070" end="56085" title="International E-road network" label="European routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q782249" start="56086" end="56088" title="European route E4" label="E4"/>
<link wikidata="Q945810" start="56090" end="56093" title="European route E18" label="E18"/>
<link wikidata="Q987346" start="56098" end="56101" title="European route E20" label="E20"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153945" start="56105" end="56138" title="Stockholm Ring Road" label="half-completed motorway ring road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356453" start="56428" end="56447" title="Förbifart Stockholm" label="Förbifart Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q13743387" start="56679" end="56697" title="congestion pricing" label="congestion pricing"/>
<link wikidata="Q518031" start="56992" end="57026" title="automatic number plate recognition" label="automatic number plate recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q122922" start="57136" end="57139" title="Swedish krona" label="SEK"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="57151" end="57154" title="Euro" label="EUR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="57166" end="57169" title="United States dollar" label="USD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570330" start="57603" end="57618" title="Persson Cabinet" label="Persson Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q506250" start="57705" end="57727" title="Stockholm Municipality" label="Stockholm Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324668" start="57753" end="57772" title="Alliance (Sweden)" label="Alliance for Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324608" start="57827" end="57843" title="2006 Swedish general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q104231" start="58004" end="58020" title="Stockholm County" label="Stockholm County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046743" start="58271" end="58288" title="Reinfeldt Cabinet" label="Reinfeldt Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="58631" end="58639" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q38511" start="58644" end="58649" title="Turku" label="Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852727" start="58684" end="58698" title="Baltic Sea cruiseferries" label="Finlandsfärjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48329" start="58707" end="58716" title="Mariehamn" label="Mariehamn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689" start="58718" end="58723" title="Åland" label="Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="58725" end="58732" title="Tallinn" label="Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="58764" end="58780" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q764547" start="58802" end="58823" title="Stockholm archipelago" label="Stockholm archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975717" start="58862" end="58877" title="Waxholmsbolaget" label="Waxholmsbolaget"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618000" start="59139" end="59159" title="Stockholm City Bikes" label="Stockholm City Bikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399970" start="59807" end="59817" title="Motorized scooter" label="e-scooters"/>
<link wikidata="Q223499" start="59893" end="59918" title="Stockholm Arlanda Airport" label="Stockholm Arlanda Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q187854" start="60063" end="60084" title="Scandinavian Airlines" label="Scandinavian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q29863" start="60089" end="60113" title="Stockholm Bromma Airport" label="Stockholm Bromma Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q27917033" start="60175" end="60178" title="Braathens Regional Airlines" label="BRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q664946" start="60235" end="60260" title="Stockholm Skavsta Airport" label="Stockholm Skavsta Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q106915" start="60316" end="60335" title="Södermanland County" label="Södermanland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q54356" start="60344" end="60352" title="Nyköping" label="Nyköping"/>
<link wikidata="Q29864" start="60357" end="60383" title="Stockholm Västerås Airport" label="Stockholm Västerås Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q25412" start="60429" end="60437" title="Västerås" label="Västerås"/>
<link wikidata="Q731921" start="60450" end="60465" title="Arlanda Express" label="Arlanda Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192191" start="60472" end="60489" title="airport rail link" label="airport rail link"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792097" start="60503" end="60518" title="Arlanda North Station" label="Arlanda Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q54315" start="60523" end="60548" title="Stockholm Central Station" label="Stockholm Central Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q17265752" start="60648" end="60671" title="Arlanda Central Station" label="Arlanda Central Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q775247" start="60772" end="60784" title="Flygbussarna" label="Flygbussarna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="60884" end="60900" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q54315" start="60952" end="60977" title="Stockholm Central Station" label="Stockholm Central Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410317" start="61037" end="61049" title="Oslo Central Station" label="Oslo, Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495052" start="61051" end="61070" title="Copenhagen Central Station" label="Copenhagen, Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456" start="61075" end="61091" title="Hamburg Hauptbahnhof" label="Hamburg, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q112905" start="61105" end="61111" title="X 2000" label="X 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="61123" end="61133" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8301325" start="61183" end="61188" title="SJ AB" label="SJ AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477977" start="61435" end="61453" title="Stockholm Marathon" label="Stockholm Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40244" start="61476" end="61484" title="marathon" label="marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="61513" end="61543" title="European Innovation Scoreboard" label="European Innovation Scoreboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865412" start="61561" end="61628" title="Maastricht Economic Research Institute on Innovation and Technology" label="Maastricht Economic Research Institute on Innovation and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500915" start="61645" end="61666" title="Joint Research Centre" label="Joint Research Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319545" start="61674" end="61734" title="Institute for the Protection and the Security of the Citizen" label="Institute for the Protection and the Security of the Citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="61742" end="61761" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q174165" start="61796" end="61806" title="innovation" label="innovative"/>
<link wikidata="Q319676" start="61974" end="61985" title="Competition (companies)" label="competitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703389" start="62133" end="62151" title="JLL (company)" label="Jones Lang LaSalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="62230" end="62233" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146061" start="62392" end="62415" title="Cushman &amp;amp; Wakefield" label="Cushman &amp;amp; Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="62566" end="62575" title="pollution" label="pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790763" start="62637" end="62649" title="Matthew Kahn" label="Matthew Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q371820" start="62664" end="62684" title="Reader&amp;#x27;s Digest" label="Reader&amp;#x27;s Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655904" start="63043" end="63071" title="National Geographic Traveler" label="National Geographic Traveler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063573" start="63224" end="63238" title="Foreign Policy" label="Foreign Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q686681" start="63455" end="63483" title="European Green Capital Award" label="European Green Capital Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063288" start="63573" end="63600" title="Economist Intelligence Unit" label="Economist Intelligence Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q20983877" start="63657" end="63674" title="Unicorn (finance)" label="unicorn companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846" start="63942" end="63949" title="Holmium" label="Holmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864173" start="63993" end="64022" title="List of people from Stockholm" label="List of people from Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q55628158" start="64025" end="64045" title="Outline of Stockholm" label="Outline of Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q615062" start="64048" end="64071" title="Ports of the Baltic Sea" label="Ports of the Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q180242" start="64074" end="64092" title="Stockholm syndrome" label="Stockholm syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q44519" start="64225" end="64239" title="Selma Lagerlöf" label="Selma Lagerlöf"/>
<link wikidata="Q726254" start="64304" end="64336" title="The Wonderful Adventures of Nils" label="The Wonderful Adventures of Nils"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="26742" wikidata="Q856075" url="?curid=26742" title="Stamp collecting">
<text>Stamp collecting is the collecting of postage stamps and related objects. It is an area of philately, which is the study (or combined study and collection) of stamps. It has been one of the world&#x27;s most popular hobbies since the late nineteenth century with the rapid growth of the postal service, as a stream of new stamps was produced by countries that sought to advertise their distinctiveness through their stamps.

== Collecting ==

Stamp collecting is generally accepted as one of the areas that make up the wider subject of philately, which is the study of stamps. A philatelist may, but does not have to, collect stamps. It is not uncommon for the term &quot;philatelist&quot; to be used to mean a stamp collector. Many casual stamp collectors accumulate stamps for sheer enjoyment and relaxation without worrying about details. The creation of a large or comprehensive collection, however, generally requires some philatelic knowledge and will usually contain areas of philatelic studies.

Postage stamps are often collected for their historical value and geographical aspects and also for the many subjects depicted on them, ranging from ships, horses, and birds to kings, queens and presidents.

Sales of postage stamps are an important source of income for some countries whose stamp issues may exceed their postal needs, but have designs that appeal to many stamp collectors.

== History ==
It has been suggested that John Bourke, Receiver General of Stamp Dues in Ireland, was the first collector. In 1774, he assembled a book of the existing embossed revenue stamps, ranging in value from 6 pounds to half a penny, as well as the hand stamped charge marks that were used with them. His collection is preserved in the Royal Irish Academy, Dublin.

Postage stamp collecting began at the same time that stamps were first issued, and by 1860 thousands of collectors and stamp dealers were appearing around the world as this new study and hobby spread across Europe, European colonies, the United States and other parts of the world.

The first postage stamp, the Penny Black, was issued by Britain in May 1840 and pictured a young Queen Victoria. It was produced without perforations (imperforate) and consequently had to be cut from the sheet with scissors in order to be used. While unused examples of the Penny Black are quite scarce, used examples are quite common, and may be purchased for $20 to $200, depending upon condition.

People started to collect stamps almost immediately. One of the earliest and most notable was John Edward Gray. In 1862, Gray stated that he &quot;began to collect postage stamps shortly after the system was established and before it had become a rage&quot;.

Female stamp collectors date from the earliest days of postage stamp collecting. One of the earliest was Adelaide Lucy Fenton who wrote articles in the 1860s for the journal &quot;The Philatelist&quot; under the name Herbert Camoens.

As the hobby and study of stamps began to grow, stamp albums and stamp related literature began to surface, and by the early 1880s publishers like Stanley Gibbons made a business out of this advent.

Children and teenagers were early collectors of stamps in the 1860s and 1870s. Many adults dismissed it as a childish pursuit but later many of those same collectors, as adults, began to systematically study the available postage stamps and publish books about them. Some stamps, such as the triangular issues of the Cape of Good Hope, have become legendary.

By the early 2000s, stamp collecting was seen to be in decline as the digital world surpassed traditional hobbies even though by 2013, &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; estimated the global number of stamp collectors was around 60 million. However, the hobby&#x27;s unexpected appeal for a millennial audience was observed in a 2020 article for &quot;The Guardian&quot;.

== Equipment ==
A few basic items of equipment are recommended for proper stamp collection. Stamp tongs help to handle stamps safely, a magnifying glass helps in viewing fine details and an album is a convenient way to store stamps. The stamps need to be attached to the pages of the album in some way, and stamp hinges are a cheap and simple way to do this. However, hinging stamps can damage them, thus reducing their value; today many collectors prefer more expensive &quot;hingeless mounts&quot;. Issued in various sizes, these are clear, chemically neutral thin plastic holders that open to receive stamps and are gummed on the back so that they stick to album pages. Another alternative is a stockbook, where the stamps drop into clear pockets without the need for a mount. Stamps should be stored away from light, heat and moisture or they will be damaged.

Stamps can be displayed according to the collector&#x27;s wishes, by country, topic, or even by size, which can create a display pleasing to the eye. There are no rules and it is entirely a matter for the individual collector to decide. Albums can be commercially purchased, downloaded or created by the collector. In the latter cases, using acid free paper provides better long-term stamp protection.

== Acquiring stamps ==
The main ways of acquiring stamps are through retail market stamp dealers who have online websites, or post on eBay or other forums, and conduct local stamp show dealer &quot;bourse&quot; events. The way to buy wholesale is to attend auctions and there are many auction companies around the world that offer regular auctions, most lots sold at one advance over the underbidder no matter what the price. These are called unreserved auctions. Reserved auctions are the same except a minimum price or &quot;reserve&quot; is set to ensure the stamp does not sell below this level. If during the auction there are no bidders for the lot at the reserve price then the lot will be left unsold in the auction.

Buying at auction takes knowing the market and what stamps are worth at both a wholesale market level and what they can be then sold for in a retail market. Stamp values are heavily skewed to quality. The same stamp can sell for drastically different prices due to quality. The most sought after stamps are those that are fresh, have white non-toned paper, have no hidden faults like hidden creases or thins, do not have any repairs and have not been regummed with fraudulent gum. Stamp pricing is also based on the look of the stamp, and the stamp that has an image that is very well centered will sell well. Mint (not used) full original gum stamps that have never been hinged will always sell for premiums. It is important to have certificates for rare and high quality stamps to certify they are fault free and genuine in all respects. Foundations like the Vincent Graves Greene are well respected for certifying Canadian stamps. They check for hidden faults like creases, tears and thins as well as lightened cancellations, repairs, reperforated perforations and re-applied (regummed) fake gum.

Stamp list pricing is set in various stamp catalogues. For US and Canada stamps the standard catalogue is the Scott catalogue using Scott numbers. For Canadian stamps there is a specialized catalogue called the Unitrade (which reflects more accurately the actual values of the stamps vs the Scott catalogue values), and for Great Britain and Commonwealth stamps most collectors use Stanley Gibbons catalogues. Typically stamps will sell at auction for a range of 10–30% of catalogue list price, but if the stamp is of the very top quality then the sell price may exceed the catalogue list price. As with many collectables with no inherent value, sell pricing is set by the market bidding on the item at the time.

Many collectors also ask their family and friends to save stamps for them from their mail. Although the stamps received by major businesses and those kept by elderly relatives may be of international and historical interest, the stamps received from family members are often of the definitive sort. Definitives seem mundane but, considering their variety of colours, watermarks, paper differences, perforations and printing errors, they can fill many pages in a collection. Introducing either variety or specific focus to a collection can require the purchasing of stamps, either from a dealer or online. Online stamp collector clubs often contain a platform for buying/selling and trading. Large numbers of relatively recent stamps, often still attached to fragments or envelopes, may be obtained cheaply and easily. Rare and old stamps can also be obtained, but these can be very expensive.
Duplicate stamps are those a collector already has and are not required, therefore, to fill a gap in a collection. Duplicate stamps can be sold or traded, so they are an important medium of exchange among collectors.

Many dealers sell stamps through the Internet while others have neighborhood shops which are among the best resources for beginning and intermediate collectors. Some dealers also jointly set up week-end stamp markets called &quot;bourses&quot; that move around a region from week to week. One of the most well known bourses is the Carré Marigny in Paris. They also meet collectors at regional exhibitions and stamp shows.

== Collecting specialties ==
A worldwide collection would be enormous, running to thousands of volumes, and would be incredibly expensive to acquire. Many consider that Count Philipp von Ferrary&#x27;s collection at the beginning of the 20th century was the most complete ever formed. Many collectors limit their collecting to particular countries, certain time periods or particular subjects (called &quot;topicals&quot;) like birds or aircraft.

Some of the more popular collecting areas include:
* Postage stamps – particular countries and/or time periods
** Airmail stamps – stamps may be required for airmail, which is typically more expensive and has special postage rates.
** Commemorative stamps – stamps to commemorate events, anniversaries, etc., on sale for a limited time.
** Definitive stamps – the most common type of stamps
** Postage due stamps are special stamps applied by a post office to mail bearing insufficient postage. The stamps were issued in several denominations to make up different amounts due.

* Topical stamp collecting – many collectors choose to organize their philatelic collection on the theme of the stamps, covers, or postmarks. Popular topical themes are animals, dogs, cats, butterflies, birds, flowers, art, sports, Olympics, maps, Disney, scouting, space, ships, Americana (topics relating to the US), stamps on stamps, famous people, chess, Chinese new year, and many others.
** Birds on stamps
** Cats on stamps 
** Coffees on stamps
** Ships on stamps
** Insects on stamps
** People on stamps
** Stamps on stamps
* Postal stationery – includes government-issued postal cards, aerograms, letter card, wrappers, envelopes, etc., that usually have an imprinted stamp.
* Sheets
** Sheetlets – this is a format that is now issued regularly by postal administrations. Instead of issuing stamps in large sheets of 40, 100 or even 200 stamps, smaller sheetlets with 20 to 24 stamps are issued with a large selvedge area which may incorporate part of the stamp design or theme.
** Souvenir sheets – many postal services sometimes release stamps in a format that look like a sheet with a big picture. Various parts of the picture can be torn out and used as postage stamps. See example with 10 stamps in one picture. (Souvenir sheets should be distinguished from souvenir cards, which are souvenirs of a philatelic meeting or exhibition but are not valid for postage.)
** Miniature sheet – is very similar to a souvenir sheet, being in a sheetlet with a single or a number of stamps embedded in it.
** Corner blocks or plate blocks – compose a block of stamps from one of the four corners of the stamp sheet. Collectors usually opt for a block of four stamps, complete with the selvage area which will sometimes have the printing details on it.
** Coil strips – Pairs or more of stamps from rolls, premium ones showing the plate number or a &quot;coil line pair&quot; which shows the seam between the edges of the plate.
* Revenue stamps – stamps issued to pay taxes.
** Federal Duck Stamps (stamps for duck hunting licenses, mainly U.S. with some other countries such as Canada and New Zealand)
* First day cover (FDCs) – envelopes with stamps attached and canceled on the first day that the stamp was issued. Most modern FDCs bear designs, called &quot;cachets&quot;, related to the theme of the stamp issued.
* Maximum cards – these are postcards where the stamp is on the same side as the picture and they have a close connection.
* Souvenir pages – with first day canceled stamps on a page describing all design, printing and issuing details. These are similar to first day covers except that they are issued as printed sheets of paper instead of envelopes, and the specification of the stamp is printed by the official source. See picture of first souvenir page in the US.
* Cinderella stamps – stamp-like labels that are not valid for postage.
* Postmarks or postal markings in general.

== Organizations ==

There are thousands of organizations for collectors: local stamp clubs, special-interest groups, and national organizations. Most nations have a national collectors&#x27; organization, including the American Philatelic Society (APS) in the United States; the Royal Philatelic Society London and Philatelic Traders Society in United Kingdom; and the Royal Philatelic Society of Canada. The Internet has greatly expanded the availability of information and made it easier to obtain stamps and other philatelic material. The American Topical Association is now a part of the APS and promotes thematic collecting as well as encouraging sub-groups of numerous topics. The Collectors Club, often referred to as the Collectors Club of New York, is a private club and philatelic society in New York City. Founded in 1896, it is one of the oldest existing philatelic societies in the United States. This club like many others has made the transition to Zoom virtual meetings due to Covid and has decided to keep the forum for the future as membership and attendance at club events has grown substantially since they have made their meetings accessible via the internet.

Stamp clubs and philatelic societies can add a social aspect to stamp collecting and provide a forum where novices can meet experienced collectors. Although such organizations are often advertised in stamp magazines and online, the relatively small number of collectors – especially outside urban areas – means that a club may be difficult to set up and sustain. The Internet partially solves this problem, as the association of collectors online is not limited by geographical distance. For this reason, many highly specific stamp clubs have been established on the Web, with international membership.

Organizations such as the Cinderella Stamp Club (UK) retain hundreds of members interested in a specific aspect of collecting. Social organizations, such as the Lions Club and Rotary International, have also formed stamp collecting groups specific to those stamps that are issued from many countries worldwide that display the organization&#x27;s logo.

== Rare stamps ==
Rare stamps are often old and many have interesting stories attached to them. Some include:
* British Guiana 1c magenta is the world&#x27;s most famous and valuable rare stamp.
*Canada 12d Penny Black
*Canada 2c Large Queen on laid paper
*Hawaiian Missionary Issue
* United States &quot;Inverted Jenny&quot; (which is actually a printing error)
* United States &quot;1-cent Z grill&quot;
*United States One Dollar Trans-Mississippi Issue &quot;Cattle in the Storm&quot; – widely considered to be America&#x27;s Most Beautiful Stamp
* The Three-Skilling Yellow of Sweden was sold for CHF 2.88 million (then about $2,300,000) in 1996 and again for an undisclosed amount in 2010.
* Mauritius &quot;Post Office&quot; issue. David Feldman sold a Blue Mauritius stamp for CHF 1,610,000 (approx. $1.1 million) in 1993. An orange stamp was sold for CHF 1,725,000 (approx $1.2 million) in 1993.
* British Penny Red plate 77

Early stamps of the United States are known as classics. Collectors are able to establish the exact position of a stamp on the original sheet of 200 stamps. Rare stamps are often expertized.

== Catalogues ==

Stamp catalogues are the primary tool used by serious collectors to organize their collections, and for the identification and valuation of stamps. Most stamp shops have stamp catalogues available for purchase. A few catalogues are offered online, either free or for a fee. There are hundreds of different catalogues, most specializing in particular countries or periods. Collector clubs tend to provide free catalogues to their members.

== Notable collectors ==

The stamp collection assembled by French-Austrian aristocrat Philipp von Ferrary (1850–1917) at the beginning of the 20th century is widely considered the most complete stamp collection ever formed (or likely to be formed). It included, for example, all of the rare stamps described above that had been issued by 1917. However, as Ferrary was an Austrian citizen, the collection was broken up and sold by the French government after the First World War, as war reparations.

The Tapling Collection of postage stamps was donated to the British Museum from the estate of Thomas Tapling in 1891. It currently forms the Tapling Collection in the Philatelic Collections of the British Library.

Several European monarchs were keen stamp collectors, including King George V of the United Kingdom and King Carol II of Romania. King George V possessed one of the most valuable stamp collections in the world and became President of the Royal Philatelic Society. His collection was passed on to Queen Elizabeth II who, while not a serious philatelist, has a collection of British and Commonwealth first day covers which she started in 1952.

U.S. President Franklin Delano Roosevelt was a stamp collector; he designed several American commemorative stamps during his term. Late in life Ayn Rand renewed her childhood interest in stamps and became an enthusiastic collector. Several entertainment and sport personalities have been known to be collectors. Freddie Mercury, lead singer of the band Queen, collected stamps as a child. His childhood stamp album is in the collection of the British Postal Museum &amp; Archive. John Lennon of The Beatles was a childhood stamp collector. His stamp album is held by the National Postal Museum.

Former world chess champion Anatoly Karpov has amassed a huge stamp collection over the decades, led by stamps from Belgium and Belgian Congo, that has been estimated to be worth $15 million.

==Stamp societies==

* American Philatelic Society
* Baltimore Philatelic Society
* Chicago Philatelic Society
* Hawaiian Philatelic Society
* New Haven Philatelic Society
* Polonus Philatelic Society
* Sacramento Philatelic Society
* U.S. Philatelic Classics Society

== See also ==
* 

== References ==
==Sources==
* Free download here.

== Further reading ==
*Klug, Janet. &quot;Guide to Stamp Collecting&quot;. Smithsonian/Collins. (Children&#x27;s/Young Adult)
*Watson, James. &quot;How to start Stamp Collecting&quot;. London; Stanley Gibbons. (Adult beginner)
*Phillips, Stanley. &quot;Stamp Collecting: A guide to modern philately&quot;. Revised edition. London: Stanley Gibbons, 1983. (Adult beginner, more detailed but a little out of date)

== External links ==

*LearnAboutStamps.com A resource for stamp collectors
*Stamp Community A stamp collector forum
*Caring for stamps and postal history British Postal Museum &amp; Archive Information Sheet
*Philatelic Dictionary English – German – French
*StampNews.com Provides updates on new stamp issues and stamp collecting from around the world.
*&quot;Stamp Story&quot;, a 1955 information film about stamp collecting.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q856075" start="0" end="16" title="Stamp collecting" label="Stamp collecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q208165" start="24" end="34" title="collecting" label="collecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="38" end="51" title="postage stamp" label="postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q131026" start="91" end="100" title="philately" label="philately"/>
<link wikidata="Q47728" start="216" end="223" title="hobbies" label="hobbies"/>
<link wikidata="Q49845" start="287" end="301" title="mail" label="postal service"/>
<link wikidata="Q131026" start="536" end="545" title="philately" label="philately"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="1483" end="1490" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q699462" start="1571" end="1584" title="revenue stamp" label="revenue stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q110587" start="1737" end="1756" title="Royal Irish Academy" label="Royal Irish Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="1758" end="1764" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1974" end="1980" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2005" end="2018" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q107701" start="2079" end="2090" title="Penny Black" label="Penny Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2106" end="2113" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="2147" end="2161" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508510" start="2187" end="2198" title="perforation" label="perforation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191963" start="2545" end="2561" title="John Edward Gray" label="John Edward Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681744" start="2816" end="2836" title="Adelaide Lucy Fenton" label="Adelaide Lucy Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938876" start="3093" end="3108" title="Stanley Gibbons" label="Stanley Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="3463" end="3480" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="3647" end="3670" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="3859" end="3871" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q58024" start="5282" end="5286" title="eBay" label="eBay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342494" start="7584" end="7595" title="collectable" label="collectable"/>
<link wikidata="Q43065" start="8056" end="8065" title="watermark" label="watermark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233769" start="8068" end="8073" title="postage stamp paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046841" start="9131" end="9144" title="Carré Marigny" label="Carré Marigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q44105" start="9398" end="9417" title="Philipp von Ferrary" label="Philipp von Ferrary"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="9724" end="9737" title="Postage stamp" label="Postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069049" start="9785" end="9798" title="Airmail stamp" label="Airmail stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621307" start="9829" end="9836" title="airmail" label="airmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756502" start="9906" end="9925" title="Commemorative stamp" label="Commemorative stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002873" start="10011" end="10027" title="Definitive stamp" label="Definitive stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q922737" start="10065" end="10076" title="Postage due" label="Postage due"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070579" start="10200" end="10213" title="Denomination (postage stamp)" label="denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q939473" start="10251" end="10275" title="Topical stamp collecting" label="Topical stamp collecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q10407789" start="10608" end="10624" title="Chinese new year stamps" label="Chinese new year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111064" start="10646" end="10661" title="Birds on stamps" label="Birds on stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q115728638" start="10684" end="10701" title="Coffee stamp" label="Coffees on stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037285" start="10724" end="10741" title="Insects on stamps" label="Insects on stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817543" start="10745" end="10761" title="People on stamps" label="People on stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q856075" start="10765" end="10781" title="Stamps on stamps" label="Stamps on stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493772" start="10784" end="10801" title="Postal stationery" label="Postal stationery"/>
<link wikidata="Q192425" start="10831" end="10843" title="postcard" label="postal cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q381491" start="10845" end="10853" title="aerogram" label="aerogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533632" start="10856" end="10867" title="letter card" label="letter card"/>
<link wikidata="Q443177" start="10869" end="10877" title="Wrapper (philately)" label="wrappers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563656" start="10917" end="10932" title="imprinted stamp" label="imprinted stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q20668043" start="10936" end="10942" title="Sheet of stamps" label="Sheets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302786" start="11007" end="11028" title="postal administration" label="postal administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q521461" start="11241" end="11255" title="Souvenir sheet" label="Souvenir sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q521461" start="11631" end="11646" title="Miniature sheet" label="Miniature sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900199" start="11778" end="11789" title="plate block" label="plate block"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11937" end="11944" title="Selvage#In printing and philately" label="selvage"/>
<link wikidata="Q914936" start="12007" end="12011" title="Coil stamp" label="Coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q699462" start="12182" end="12195" title="Revenue stamp" label="Revenue stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312916" start="12230" end="12248" title="Federal Duck Stamp" label="Federal Duck Stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q825187" start="12357" end="12372" title="First day cover" label="First day cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015986" start="12514" end="12520" title="cachet" label="cachet"/>
<link wikidata="Q822544" start="12573" end="12586" title="Maximaphily" label="Maximum cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000976" start="13040" end="13056" title="Cinderella stamp" label="Cinderella stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194406" start="13112" end="13120" title="Postmark" label="Postmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098680" start="13125" end="13139" title="postal marking" label="postal marking"/>
<link wikidata="Q466034" start="13374" end="13401" title="American Philatelic Society" label="American Philatelic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="13415" end="13428" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446009" start="13434" end="13465" title="Royal Philatelic Society London" label="Royal Philatelic Society London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182960" start="13470" end="13496" title="Philatelic Traders Society" label="Philatelic Traders Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q645808" start="13524" end="13558" title="Royal Philatelic Society of Canada" label="Royal Philatelic Society of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745257" start="13697" end="13725" title="American Topical Association" label="American Topical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120444" start="14967" end="14993" title="Cinderella Stamp Club (UK)" label="Cinderella Stamp Club (UK)"/>
<link wikidata="Q270029" start="15102" end="15112" title="Lions Clubs International" label="Lions Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q109179" start="15117" end="15137" title="Rotary International" label="Rotary International"/>
<link wikidata="Q919333" start="15407" end="15432" title="British Guiana 1c magenta" label="British Guiana 1c magenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16718898" start="15491" end="15513" title="Canada 12d black" label="Canada 12d Penny Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q4091846" start="15515" end="15550" title="Canada 2c Large Queen on laid paper" label="Canada 2c Large Queen on laid paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987855" start="15552" end="15577" title="Hawaiian Missionaries (stamps)" label="Hawaiian Missionary Issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500082" start="15600" end="15614" title="Inverted Jenny" label="Inverted Jenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149736" start="15680" end="15694" title="Z Grill" label="1-cent Z grill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987698" start="15757" end="15776" title="Western Cattle in Storm" label="Cattle in the Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q920616" start="15847" end="15850" title="Treskilling Yellow" label="The"/>
<link wikidata="Q920616" start="15851" end="15872" title="Treskilling yellow" label="Three-Skilling Yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344" start="15896" end="15899" title="Swiss franc" label="CHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q977313" start="15992" end="16025" title="Mauritius &amp;quot;Post Office&amp;quot;" label="Mauritius &amp;quot;Post Office&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174405" start="16033" end="16046" title="David Feldman (philatelist)" label="David Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q977313" start="16054" end="16068" title="Mauritius &amp;quot;Post Office&amp;quot;" label="Blue Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344" start="16079" end="16082" title="Swiss franc" label="CHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344" start="16154" end="16157" title="Swiss franc" label="CHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636946" start="16209" end="16218" title="Penny Red" label="Penny Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885391" start="16249" end="16262" title="Postage stamps and postal history of the United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q840622" start="16408" end="16418" title="Philatelic expertisation" label="expertized"/>
<link wikidata="Q854459" start="16439" end="16454" title="Stamp catalogue" label="Stamp catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q44105" start="16965" end="16984" title="Philipp von Ferrary" label="Philipp von Ferrary"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="17405" end="17418" title="postage stamp" label="postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="17439" end="17453" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794360" start="17473" end="17487" title="Thomas Tapling" label="Thomas Tapling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684710" start="17520" end="17538" title="Tapling Collection" label="Tapling Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q4483745" start="17546" end="17591" title="Philatelic Collections of the British Library" label="Philatelic Collections of the British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="17658" end="17671" title="King George V" label="King George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="17703" end="17722" title="Carol II of Romania" label="Carol II of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446009" start="17832" end="17856" title="Royal Philatelic Society" label="Royal Philatelic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="17890" end="17908" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="18052" end="18077" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin Delano Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q132524" start="18181" end="18189" title="Ayn Rand" label="Ayn Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q15869" start="18349" end="18364" title="Freddie Mercury" label="Freddie Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="18390" end="18395" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520122" start="18480" end="18515" title="British Postal Museum &amp;amp; Archive" label="British Postal Museum &amp;amp; Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="18517" end="18528" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="18532" end="18543" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q144900" start="18608" end="18630" title="National Postal Museum" label="National Postal Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q190042" start="18640" end="18660" title="world chess champion" label="world chess champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q131674" start="18661" end="18675" title="Anatoly Karpov" label="Anatoly Karpov"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="18749" end="18756" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q213510" start="18761" end="18774" title="Belgian Congo" label="Belgian Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q466034" start="18849" end="18876" title="American Philatelic Society" label="American Philatelic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852908" start="18879" end="18907" title="Baltimore Philatelic Society" label="Baltimore Philatelic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095734" start="18910" end="18936" title="Chicago Philatelic Society" label="Chicago Philatelic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4131006" start="18939" end="18966" title="Hawaiian Philatelic Society" label="Hawaiian Philatelic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q126126558" start="18969" end="18997" title="New Haven Philatelic Society" label="New Haven Philatelic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225959" start="19000" end="19026" title="Polonus Philatelic Society" label="Polonus Philatelic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128214" start="19029" end="19058" title="Sacramento Philatelic Society" label="Sacramento Philatelic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863278" start="19061" end="19093" title="U.S. Philatelic Classics Society" label="U.S. Philatelic Classics Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599868" start="19394" end="19411" title="Stanley Phillips" label="Phillips, Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938876" start="19497" end="19512" title="Stanley Gibbons" label="Stanley Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520122" start="19733" end="19768" title="British Postal Museum &amp;amp; Archive" label="British Postal Museum &amp;amp; Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="26743" wikidata="Q9215" url="?curid=26743" title="Sigmund Freud">
<text>Sigmund Freud ( ; ; born Sigismund Schlomo Freud; 6 May 1856 – 23 September 1939) was an Austrian neurologist and the founder of psychoanalysis, a clinical method for evaluating and treating pathologies seen as originating from conflicts in the psyche, through dialogue between patient and psychoanalyst, and the distinctive theory of mind and human agency derived from it.

Freud was born to Galician Jewish parents in the Moravian town of Freiberg, in the Austrian Empire. He qualified as a doctor of medicine in 1881 at the University of Vienna. Upon completing his habilitation in 1885, he was appointed a docent in neuropathology and became an affiliated professor in 1902. Freud lived and worked in Vienna having set up his clinical practice there in 1886. Following the German annexation of Austria in March 1938, Freud left Austria to escape Nazi persecution. He died in exile in the United Kingdom in 1939.

In founding psychoanalysis, Freud developed therapeutic techniques such as the use of free association and discovered transference, establishing its central role in the analytic process. Freud&#x27;s redefinition of sexuality to include its infantile forms led him to formulate the Oedipus complex as the central tenet of psychoanalytical theory. His analysis of dreams as wish-fulfilments provided him with models for the clinical analysis of symptom formation and the underlying mechanisms of repression. On this basis, Freud elaborated his theory of the unconscious and went on to develop a model of psychic structure comprising id, ego and super-ego. Freud postulated the existence of libido, sexualised energy with which mental processes and structures are invested and which generates erotic attachments, and a death drive, the source of compulsive repetition, hate, aggression, and neurotic guilt. In his later work, Freud developed a wide-ranging interpretation and critique of religion and culture.

Though in overall decline as a diagnostic and clinical practice, psychoanalysis remains influential within psychology, psychiatry, psychotherapy, and across the humanities. It thus continues to generate extensive and highly contested debate concerning its therapeutic efficacy, its scientific status, and whether it advances or hinders the feminist cause. Nonetheless, Freud&#x27;s work has suffused contemporary Western thought and popular culture. 1940 poetic tribute to Freud describes him as having created &quot;a whole climate of opinion / under whom we conduct our different lives&quot;.

==Biography==

=== Early life and education ===

Sigmund Freud was born to Ashkenazi Jewish parents in the Moravian town of Freiberg, in the Austrian Empire (in Czech Příbor, now Czech Republic), the first of eight children. Both of his parents were from Galicia. His father, Jakob Freud, a wool merchant, had two sons, Emanuel and Philipp, by his first marriage. Jakob&#x27;s family were Hasidic Jews and, although Jakob himself had moved away from the tradition, he came to be known for his Torah study. He and Freud&#x27;s mother, Amalia Nathansohn, who was 20 years younger and his third wife, were married by Rabbi Isaac Noah Mannheimer on 29 July 1855. They were struggling financially and living in a rented room, in a locksmith&#x27;s house at Schlossergasse 117 when their son Sigmund was born. He was born with a caul, which his mother saw as a positive omen for the boy&#x27;s future.

In 1859, the Freud family left Freiberg. Freud&#x27;s half-brothers immigrated to Manchester, England, parting him from the &quot;inseparable&quot; playmate of his early childhood, Emanuel&#x27;s son, John. Jakob Freud took his wife and two children (Freud&#x27;s sister, Anna, was born in 1858; a brother, Julius born in 1857, had died in infancy) firstly to Leipzig and then in 1860 to Vienna where four sisters and a brother were born: Rosa (b. 1860), Marie (b. 1861), Adolfine (b. 1862), Paula (b. 1864), Alexander (b. 1866). In 1865, the nine-year-old Freud entered the , a prominent high school. He proved to be an outstanding pupil and graduated from the Matura in 1873 with honors. He loved literature and was proficient in German, French, Italian, Spanish, English, Hebrew, Latin and Greek.

Freud entered the University of Vienna at age 17. He had planned to study law, but joined the medical faculty at the university, where his studies included philosophy under Franz Brentano, physiology under Ernst Brücke, and zoology under Darwinist professor Carl Claus. In 1876, Freud spent four weeks at Claus&#x27;s zoological research station in Trieste, dissecting hundreds of eels in an inconclusive search for their male reproductive organs. In 1877, Freud moved to Ernst Brücke&#x27;s physiology laboratory where he spent six years comparing the brains of humans with those of other vertebrates such as frogs, lampreys as well as also invertebrates, for example crayfish. His research work on the biology of nervous tissue proved seminal for the subsequent discovery of the neuron in the 1890s. Freud&#x27;s research work was interrupted in 1879 by the obligation to undertake a year&#x27;s compulsory military service. The lengthy downtimes enabled him to complete a commission to translate four essays from John Stuart Mill&#x27;s collected works. He graduated with an MD in March 1881.

===Early career and marriage===
In 1882 Freud began his medical career at Vienna General Hospital. His research work in cerebral anatomy led to the publication in 1884 of an influential paper on the palliative effects of cocaine, and his work on aphasia would form the basis of his first book &quot;On Aphasia: A Critical Study&quot;, published in 1891. Over a three-year period, Freud worked in various departments of the hospital. His time spent in Theodor Meynert&#x27;s psychiatric clinic and as a locum in a local asylum led to an increased interest in clinical work. His substantial body of published research led to his appointment as a university lecturer or docent in neuropathology in 1885, a non-salaried post but one which entitled him to give lectures at the University of Vienna.

In 1886 Freud resigned his hospital post and entered private practice specializing in &quot;nervous disorders&quot;. The same year he married Martha Bernays, the granddaughter of Isaac Bernays, a chief rabbi in Hamburg. Freud was, as an atheist, dismayed at the requirement in Austria for a Jewish religious ceremony and briefly considered, before dismissing, the prospect of joining the Protestant &#x27;Confession&#x27; to avoid one. A civil ceremony for Bernays and Freud took place on 13 September and a religious ceremony took place the following day, with Freud having been hastily tutored in the Hebrew prayers. The Freuds had six children: Mathilde (b. 1887), Jean-Martin (b. 1889), Oliver (b. 1891), Ernst (b. 1892), Sophie (b. 1893), and Anna (b. 1895). From 1891 until they left Vienna in 1938, Freud and his family lived in an apartment at Berggasse 19, near Innere Stadt.

On 8 December 1897 Freud was initiated into the German Jewish cultural association B&#x27;nai B&#x27;rith, to which he remained linked for all his life. Freud gave a speech on the interpretation of dreams, which had an enthusiastic reception. It anticipated the book of the same name, which was published for the first time two years later.
In 1896, Minna Bernays, Martha Freud&#x27;s sister, became a permanent member of the Freud household after the death of her fiancé. The close relationship she formed with Freud led to rumours, started by Carl Jung, of an affair. The discovery of a Swiss hotel guest-book entry for 13 August 1898, signed by Freud whilst travelling with his sister-in-law, has been presented as evidence of the affair.

Freud began smoking tobacco at age 24; initially a cigarette smoker, he became a cigar smoker. He believed smoking enhanced his capacity to work and that he could exercise self-control in moderating it. Despite health warnings from colleague Wilhelm Fliess, he remained a smoker, eventually developing buccal cancer. Freud suggested to Fliess in 1897 that addictions, including that to tobacco, were substitutes for masturbation, &quot;the one great habit.&quot;

Freud had greatly admired his philosophy tutor, Franz Brentano, who was known for his theories of perception and introspection. Brentano discussed the possible existence of the unconscious mind in his &quot;Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint&quot; (1874). Although Brentano denied its existence, his discussion of the unconscious probably helped introduce Freud to the concept. Freud owned and made use of Charles Darwin&#x27;s major evolutionary writings and was also influenced by Eduard von Hartmann&#x27;s &quot;The Philosophy of the Unconscious&quot; (1869). Other texts of importance to Freud were by Fechner and Herbart, with the latter&#x27;s &quot;Psychology as Science&quot; arguably considered to be of underrated significance in this respect. Freud also drew on the work of Theodor Lipps, who was one of the main contemporary theorists of the concepts of the unconscious and empathy.

Though Freud was reluctant to associate his psychoanalytic insights with prior philosophical theories, attention has been drawn to analogies between his work and that of both Schopenhauer and Nietzsche. In 1908, Freud said that he occasionally read Nietzsche, and was strongly fascinated by his writings, but did not study him, because he found Nietzsche&#x27;s &quot;intuitive insights&quot; resembled too much his own work at the time, and also because he was overwhelmed by the &quot;wealth of ideas&quot; he encountered when he read Nietzsche. Freud sometimes would deny the influence of Nietzsche&#x27;s ideas. One historian quotes Peter L. Rudnytsky, who says that based on Freud&#x27;s correspondence with his adolescent friend Eduard Silberstein, Freud read Nietzsche&#x27;s &quot;The Birth of Tragedy&quot; and probably the first two of the &quot;Untimely Meditations&quot; when he was seventeen. Freud bought Nietzsche&#x27;s collected works in 1900; telling Wilhelm Fliess that he hoped to find in Nietzsche&#x27;s works &quot;the words for much that remains mute in me.&quot; Later, he said he had not yet opened them. Freud came to treat Nietzsche&#x27;s writings, according to Peter Gay, &quot;as texts to be resisted far more than to be studied.&quot; His interest in philosophy declined after he decided on a career in neurology.

Freud read William Shakespeare in English; his understanding of human psychology may have been partially derived from Shakespeare&#x27;s plays.

Freud&#x27;s Jewish origins and his allegiance to his secular Jewish identity were of significant influence in the formation of his intellectual and moral outlook, especially concerning his intellectual non-conformism, as he pointed out in his &quot;Autobiographical Study&quot;. They would also have a substantial effect on the content of psychoanalytic ideas, particularly in respect of their common concerns with depth interpretation and &quot;the bounding of desire by law&quot;.

===Relationship with Fliess===

During the formative period of his work, Freud valued and came to rely on the intellectual and emotional support of his friend Wilhelm Fliess, a Berlin-based ear, nose, and throat specialist whom he had first met in 1887. Both men saw themselves as isolated from the prevailing clinical and theoretical mainstream because of their ambitions to develop radical new theories of sexuality. Fliess developed highly eccentric theories of human biorhythms and a nasogenital connection which are today considered pseudoscientific. He shared Freud&#x27;s views on the importance of certain aspects of sexuality – masturbation, coitus interruptus, and the use of condoms – in the etiology of what was then called the &quot;actual neuroses,&quot; primarily neurasthenia and certain physically manifested anxiety symptoms. They maintained an extensive correspondence from which Freud drew on Fliess&#x27;s speculations on infantile sexuality and bisexuality to elaborate and revise his own ideas. His first attempt at a systematic theory of the mind, his &quot;Project for a Scientific Psychology&quot;, was developed as a metapsychology with Fliess as interlocutor. However, Freud&#x27;s efforts to build a bridge between neurology and psychology were eventually abandoned after they had reached an impasse, as his letters to Fliess reveal, though some ideas of the &quot;Project&quot; were to be taken up again in the concluding chapter of &quot;The Interpretation of Dreams&quot;.

Freud had Fliess repeatedly operate on his nose and sinuses to treat &quot;nasal reflex neurosis&quot;, and subsequently referred his patient Emma Eckstein to him. According to Freud, her history of symptoms included severe leg pains with consequent restricted mobility, as well as stomach and menstrual pains. These pains were, according to Fliess&#x27;s theories, caused by habitual masturbation which, as the tissue of the nose and genitalia were linked, was curable by removal of part of the middle turbinate. Fliess&#x27;s surgery proved disastrous, resulting in profuse, recurrent nasal bleeding; he had left a half-metre of gauze in Eckstein&#x27;s nasal cavity whose subsequent removal left her permanently disfigured. At first, though aware of Fliess&#x27;s culpability and regarding the remedial surgery in horror, Freud could bring himself only to intimate delicately in his correspondence with Fliess the nature of his disastrous role, and in subsequent letters maintained a tactful silence on the matter or else returned to the face-saving topic of Eckstein&#x27;s hysteria. Freud ultimately, in light of Eckstein&#x27;s history of adolescent self-cutting and irregular nasal (and menstrual) bleeding, concluded that Fliess was &quot;completely without blame&quot;, as Eckstein&#x27;s post-operative haemorrhages were hysterical &quot;wish-bleedings&quot; linked to &quot;an old wish to be loved in her illness&quot; and triggered as a means of &quot;rearousing [Freud&#x27;s] affection&quot;. Eckstein nonetheless continued her analysis with Freud. She was restored to full mobility and went on to practice psychoanalysis herself.

Freud, who had called Fliess &quot;the Kepler of biology&quot;, later concluded that a combination of a homoerotic attachment and the residue of his &quot;specifically Jewish mysticism&quot; lay behind his loyalty to his Jewish friend and his consequent overestimation of both his theoretical and clinical work. Their friendship came to an acrimonious end with Fliess angry at Freud&#x27;s unwillingness to endorse his general theory of sexual periodicity and accusing him of collusion in the plagiarism of his work. After Fliess failed to respond to Freud&#x27;s offer of collaboration over the publication of his &quot;Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality&quot; in 1906, their relationship came to an end.

===Development of psychoanalysis===

In October 1885, Freud went to Paris on a three-month fellowship to study with Jean-Martin Charcot, a renowned neurologist who was conducting scientific research into hypnosis. He was later to recall the experience of this stay as catalytic in turning him toward the practice of medical psychopathology and away from a less financially promising career in neurology research. Charcot specialized in the study of hysteria and susceptibility to hypnosis, which he frequently demonstrated with patients on stage in front of an audience.

Once he had set up in private practice in Vienna in 1886, Freud began using hypnosis in his clinical work. He adopted the approach of his friend and collaborator, Josef Breuer, in a type of hypnosis that was different from the French methods he had studied, in that it did not use suggestion. The treatment of one particular patient of Breuer&#x27;s proved to be transformative for Freud&#x27;s clinical practice. Described as Anna O., she was invited to talk about her symptoms while under hypnosis (she would coin the phrase &quot;talking cure&quot;). Her symptoms became reduced in severity as she retrieved memories of traumatic incidents associated with their onset.

The inconsistent results of Freud&#x27;s early clinical work eventually led him to abandon hypnosis, having concluded that more consistent and effective symptom relief could be achieved by encouraging patients to talk freely, without censorship or inhibition, about whatever ideas or memories occurred to them. He called this procedure &quot;free association&quot;. In conjunction with this, Freud found that patients&#x27; dreams could be fruitfully analyzed to reveal the complex structuring of unconscious material and to demonstrate the psychic action of repression which, he had concluded, underlay symptom formation. By 1896 he was using the term &quot;psychoanalysis&quot; to refer to his new clinical method and the theories on which it was based.

Freud&#x27;s development of these new theories took place during a period in which he experienced heart irregularities, disturbing dreams and periods of depression, a &quot;neurasthenia&quot; which he linked to the death of his father in 1896 and which prompted a &quot;self-analysis&quot; of his own dreams and memories of childhood. His explorations of his feelings of hostility to his father and rivalrous jealousy over his mother&#x27;s affections led him to fundamentally revise his theory of the origin of the neuroses.

Based on his early clinical work, Freud postulated that unconscious memories of sexual molestation in early childhood were a necessary precondition for psychoneuroses (hysteria and obsessional neurosis), a formulation now known as Freud&#x27;s seduction theory. In the light of his self-analysis, Freud abandoned the theory that every neurosis can be traced back to the effects of infantile sexual abuse, now arguing that infantile sexual scenarios still had a causative function, but it did not matter whether they were real or imagined and that in either case, they became pathogenic only when acting as repressed memories.

This transition from the theory of infantile sexual trauma as a general explanation of how all neuroses originate to one that presupposes autonomous infantile sexuality provided the basis for Freud&#x27;s subsequent formulation of the theory of the Oedipus complex.

Freud described the evolution of his clinical method and set out his theory of the psychogenetic origins of hysteria, demonstrated in several case histories, in &quot;Studies on Hysteria&quot; published in 1895 (co-authored with Josef Breuer). In 1899, he published &quot;The Interpretation of Dreams&quot; in which, following a critical review of existing theory, Freud gives detailed interpretations of his own and his patients&#x27; dreams in terms of wish-fulfillments made subject to the repression and censorship of the &quot;dream-work&quot;. He then sets out the theoretical model of mental structure (the unconscious, pre-conscious and conscious) on which this account is based. An abridged version, &quot;On Dreams&quot;, was published in 1901. In works that would win him a more general readership, Freud applied his theories outside the clinical setting in &quot;The Psychopathology of Everyday Life&quot; (1901) and &quot;Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious&quot; (1905). In &quot;Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality&quot;, published in 1905, Freud elaborates his theory of infantile sexuality, describing its &quot;polymorphous perverse&quot; forms and the functioning of the &quot;drives&quot;, to which it gives rise, in the formation of sexual identity. The same year he published &quot;Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria&quot;, which became one of his more famous and controversial case studies. Known as the &#x27;Dora&#x27; case study, for Freud it was illustrative of hysteria as a symptom and contributed to his understanding of the importance of transference as a clinical phenomena. In other of his early case studies Freud set out to describe the symptomatology of obsessional neurosis in the case of the Rat man, and phobia in the case of Little Hans.

===Early followers===

In 1902, Freud, at last, realised his long-standing ambition to be made a university professor. The title &quot;professor extraordinarius&quot; was important to Freud for the recognition and prestige it conferred, there being no salary or teaching duties attached to the post (he would be granted the enhanced status of &quot;professor ordinarius&quot; in 1920). Despite support from the university, his appointment had been blocked in successive years by the political authorities and it was secured only with the intervention of an influential ex-patient, Baroness Marie Ferstel, who (supposedly) had to bribe the minister of education with a valuable painting.

Freud continued with the regular series of lectures on his work which, since the mid-1880s as a docent of Vienna University, he had been delivering to small audiences every Saturday evening at the lecture hall of the university&#x27;s psychiatric clinic. From the autumn of 1902, a number of Viennese physicians who had expressed interest in Freud&#x27;s work were invited to meet at his apartment every Wednesday afternoon to discuss issues relating to psychology and neuropathology. This group was called the Wednesday Psychological Society (&quot;Psychologische Mittwochs-Gesellschaft&quot;) and it marked the beginnings of the worldwide psychoanalytic movement. 

Freud founded this discussion group at the suggestion of the physician Wilhelm Stekel. Stekel had studied medicine; his conversion to psychoanalysis is variously attributed to his successful treatment by Freud for a sexual problem or as a result of his reading &quot;The Interpretation of Dreams&quot;, to which he subsequently gave a positive review in the Viennese daily newspaper &quot;Neues Wiener Tagblatt&quot;.
The other three original members whom Freud invited to attend, Alfred Adler, Max Kahane, and Rudolf Reitler, were also physicians and all five were Jewish by birth. Both Kahane and Reitler were childhood friends of Freud who had gone to university with him and kept abreast of Freud&#x27;s developing ideas by attending his Saturday evening lectures. In 1901, Kahane, who first introduced Stekel to Freud&#x27;s work, had opened an out-patient psychotherapy institute of which he was the director in Vienna. In the same year, his medical textbook, &quot;Outline of Internal Medicine for Students and Practicing Physicians&quot;, was published. In it, he provided an outline of Freud&#x27;s psychoanalytic method. Kahane broke with Freud and left the Wednesday Psychological Society in 1907 for unknown reasons and in 1923 committed suicide. Reitler was the director of an establishment providing thermal cures in Dorotheergasse which had been founded in 1901. He died prematurely in 1917. Adler, regarded as the most formidable intellect among the early Freud circle, was a socialist who in 1898 had written a health manual for the tailoring trade. He was particularly interested in the potential social impact of psychiatry.

Max Graf, a Viennese musicologist and father of &quot;Little Hans&quot;, who had first encountered Freud in 1900 and joined the Wednesday group soon after its initial inception, described the ritual and atmosphere of the early meetings of the society:


By 1906, the group had grown to sixteen members, including Otto Rank, who was employed as the group&#x27;s paid secretary. In the same year, Freud began a correspondence with Carl Gustav Jung who was by then already an academically acclaimed researcher into word-association and the Galvanic Skin Response, and a lecturer at Zurich University, although still only an assistant to Eugen Bleuler at the Burghölzli Mental Hospital in Zürich. In March 1907, Jung and Ludwig Binswanger, also a Swiss psychiatrist, travelled to Vienna to visit Freud and attend the discussion group. Thereafter, they established a small psychoanalytic group in Zürich. In 1908, reflecting its growing institutional status, the Wednesday group was reconstituted as the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society with Freud as president, a position he relinquished in 1910 in favor of Adler in the hope of neutralizing his increasingly critical standpoint.

The first woman member, Margarete Hilferding, joined the Society in 1910 and the following year she was joined by Tatiana Rosenthal and Sabina Spielrein who were both Russian psychiatrists and graduates of the Zürich University medical school. Before the completion of her studies, Spielrein had been a patient of Jung at the Burghölzli and the clinical and personal details of their relationship became the subject of an extensive correspondence between Freud and Jung. Both women would go on to make important contributions to the work of the Russian Psychoanalytic Society founded in 1910.

Freud&#x27;s early followers met together formally for the first time at the Hotel Bristol, Salzburg on 27 April 1908. This meeting, which was retrospectively deemed to be the first International Psychoanalytic Congress, was convened at the suggestion of Ernest Jones, then a London-based neurologist who had discovered Freud&#x27;s writings and begun applying psychoanalytic methods in his clinical work. Jones had met Jung at a conference the previous year and they met up again in Zürich to organize the Congress. There were, as Jones records, &quot;forty-two present, half of whom were or became practising analysts.&quot; In addition to Jones and the Viennese and Zürich contingents accompanying Freud and Jung, also present and notable for their subsequent importance in the psychoanalytic movement were Karl Abraham and Max Eitingon from Berlin, Sándor Ferenczi from Budapest and the New York-based Abraham Brill.

Important decisions were taken at the Congress to advance the impact of Freud&#x27;s work. A journal, the &quot;Jahrbuch für psychoanalytische und psychopathologische Forschungen&quot;, was launched in 1909 under the editorship of Jung. This was followed in 1910 by the monthly &quot;Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse&quot; edited by Adler and Stekel, in 1911 by &quot;Imago&quot;, a journal devoted to the application of psychoanalysis to the field of cultural and literary studies edited by Rank and in 1913 by the &quot;Internationale Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse&quot;, also edited by Rank. Plans for an international association of psychoanalysts were put in place and these were implemented at the Nuremberg Congress of 1910 where Jung was elected, with Freud&#x27;s support, as its first president.

Freud turned to Brill and Jones to further his ambition to spread the psychoanalytic cause in the English-speaking world. Both were invited to Vienna following the Salzburg Congress and a division of labour was agreed with Brill given the translation rights for Freud&#x27;s works, and Jones, who was to take up a post at the University of Toronto later in the year, tasked with establishing a platform for Freudian ideas in North American academic and medical life. Jones&#x27;s advocacy prepared the way for Freud&#x27;s visit to the United States, accompanied by Jung and Ferenczi, in September 1909 at the invitation of Stanley Hall, president of Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts, where he gave five lectures on psychoanalysis.

The event, at which Freud was awarded an Honorary Doctorate, marked the first public recognition of Freud&#x27;s work and attracted widespread media interest. Freud&#x27;s audience included the distinguished neurologist and psychiatrist James Jackson Putnam, Professor of Diseases of the Nervous System at Harvard, who invited Freud to his country retreat where they held extensive discussions over a period of four days. Putnam&#x27;s subsequent public endorsement of Freud&#x27;s work represented a significant breakthrough for the psychoanalytic cause in the United States. When Putnam and Jones organised the founding of the American Psychoanalytic Association in May 1911 they were elected president and secretary respectively. Brill founded the New York Psychoanalytic Society the same year. His English translations of Freud&#x27;s work began to appear from 1909.

====Resignations from the IPA====
Some of Freud&#x27;s followers subsequently withdrew from the International Psychoanalytical Association (IPA) and founded their own schools.

From 1909, Adler&#x27;s views on topics such as neurosis began to differ markedly from those held by Freud. As Adler&#x27;s position appeared increasingly incompatible with Freudianism, a series of confrontations between their respective viewpoints took place at the meetings of the Viennese Psychoanalytic Society in January and February 1911. In February 1911, Adler, then the president of the society, resigned his position. At this time, Stekel also resigned from his position as vice president of the society. Adler finally left the Freudian group altogether in June 1911 to form his own organization with nine other members who had also resigned from the group. This new formation was initially called &quot;Society for Free Psychoanalysis&quot; but it was soon renamed the &quot;Society for Individual Psychology&quot;. In the period after World War I, Adler became increasingly associated with a psychological position he devised called individual psychology.

In 1912, Jung published &quot;Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido&quot; (published in English in 1916 as &quot;Psychology of the Unconscious&quot;) making it clear that his views were taking a direction quite different from those of Freud. To distinguish his system from psychoanalysis, Jung called it analytical psychology. Anticipating the final breakdown of the relationship between Freud and Jung, Ernest Jones initiated the formation of a Secret Committee of loyalists charged with safeguarding the theoretical coherence and institutional legacy of the psychoanalytic movement. Formed in the autumn of 1912, the Committee comprised Freud, Jones, Abraham, Ferenczi, Rank, and Hanns Sachs. Max Eitingon joined the Committee in 1919. Each member pledged himself not to make any public departure from the fundamental tenets of psychoanalytic theory before he had discussed his views with the others. After this development, Jung recognised that his position was untenable and resigned as editor of the &quot;Jahrbuch&quot; and then as president of the IPA in April 1914. The Zürich branch of the IPA withdrew from membership the following July.

Later the same year, Freud published a paper entitled &quot;&quot;, the German original being first published in the &quot;Jahrbuch&quot;, giving his view on the birth and evolution of the psychoanalytic movement and the withdrawal of Adler and Jung from it.

The final defection from Freud&#x27;s inner circle occurred following the publication in 1924 of Rank&#x27;s &quot;The Trauma of Birth&quot; which other members of the Committee read as, in effect, abandoning the Oedipus Complex as the central tenet of psychoanalytic theory. Abraham and Jones became increasingly forceful critics of Rank and though he and Freud were reluctant to end their close and long-standing relationship the break finally came in 1926 when Rank resigned from his official posts in the IPA and left Vienna for Paris. His place on the committee was taken by Anna Freud. Rank eventually settled in the United States where his revisions of Freudian theory were to influence a new generation of therapists uncomfortable with the orthodoxies of the IPA.

===Early psychoanalytic movement===

After the founding of the IPA in 1910, an international network of psychoanalytical societies, training institutes, and clinics became well established and a regular schedule of biannual Congresses commenced after the end of World War I to coordinate their activities and as a forum for presenting papers on clinical and theoretical topics.

Abraham and Eitingon founded the Berlin Psychoanalytic Society in 1910 and then the Berlin Psychoanalytic Institute and the Poliklinik in 1920. The Poliklinik&#x27;s innovations of free treatment, and child analysis, and the Berlin Institute&#x27;s standardisation of psychoanalytic training had a major influence on the wider psychoanalytic movement. In 1927, Ernst Simmel founded the Schloss Tegel Sanatorium on the outskirts of Berlin, the first such establishment to provide psychoanalytic treatment in an institutional framework. Freud organised a fund to help finance its activities and his architect son, Ernst, was commissioned to refurbish the building. It was forced to close in 1931 for economic reasons.

The 1910 Moscow Psychoanalytic Society became the Russian Psychoanalytic Society and Institute in 1922. Freud&#x27;s Russian followers were the first to benefit from translations of his work, the 1904 Russian translation of &quot;The Interpretation of Dreams&quot; appearing nine years before Brill&#x27;s English edition. The Russian Institute was unique in receiving state support for its activities, including publication of translations of Freud&#x27;s works. Support was abruptly annulled in 1924, when Joseph Stalin came to power, after which psychoanalysis was denounced on ideological grounds.

After helping found the American Psychoanalytic Association in 1911, Ernest Jones returned to Britain from Canada in 1913 and founded the London Psychoanalytic Society. In 1919, he dissolved this organisation and, with its core membership purged of Jungian adherents, founded the British Psychoanalytical Society, serving as its president until 1944. The Institute of Psychoanalysis was established in 1924 and the London Clinic of Psychoanalysis was established in 1926, both under Jones&#x27;s directorship.

The Vienna Ambulatorium (Clinic) was established in 1922 and the Vienna Psychoanalytic Institute was founded in 1924 under the directorship of Helene Deutsch. Ferenczi founded the Budapest Psychoanalytic Institute in 1913 and a clinic in 1929.

Psychoanalytic societies and institutes were established in Switzerland (1919), France (1926), Italy (1932), the Netherlands (1933), Norway (1933), and in Palestine (Jerusalem, 1933) by Eitingon, who had fled Berlin after Adolf Hitler came to power. The New York Psychoanalytic Institute was founded in 1931.

The 1922 Berlin Congress was the last Freud attended. By this time his speech had become seriously impaired by the prosthetic device he needed as a result of a series of operations on his cancerous jaw. He kept abreast of developments through regular correspondence with his principal followers and via the circular letters and meetings of the Secret Committee which he continued to attend.

The Committee continued to function until 1927 by which time institutional developments within the IPA, such as the establishment of the International Training Commission, had addressed concerns about the transmission of psychoanalytic theory and practice. There remained, however, significant differences over the issue of lay analysis – i.e. the acceptance of non-medically qualified candidates for psychoanalytic training. Freud set out his case in favour in 1926 in his &quot;The Question of Lay Analysis&quot;. He was resolutely opposed by the American societies who expressed concerns over professional standards and the risk of litigation (though child analysts were made exempt). These concerns were also shared by some of his European colleagues. Eventually, an agreement was reached allowing societies autonomy in setting criteria for candidature.

In 1930, Freud received the Goethe Prize in recognition of his contributions to psychology and German literary culture.

===Patients===
Freud used pseudonyms in his case histories. Some patients known by pseudonyms were Cäcilie M. (Anna von Lieben); Dora (Ida Bauer, 1882–1945); Frau Emmy von N. (Fanny Moser); Fräulein Elisabeth von R. (Ilona Weiss); Fräulein Katharina (Aurelia Kronich); Fräulein Lucy R.; Little Hans (Herbert Graf, 1903–1973); Rat Man (Ernst Lanzer); Enos Fingy (Joshua Wild); and Wolf Man (Sergei Pankejeff). Other famous patients included Prince Pedro Augusto of Brazil; H.D.; Emma Eckstein; Gustav Mahler, with whom Freud had only a single, extended consultation; Princess Marie Bonaparte; Edith Banfield Jackson; and Albert Hirst.

===Cancer===
In 1917, Freud noticed a painful lesion on the roof of his mouth, but, after it receded, did not seek medical attention. By February 1923, the growth had spread, which was when Freud identified it as either leukoplakia or epithelioma brought on by his smoking habit. Reluctant to give up smoking, he initially kept his symptoms a secret. Freud later consulted the dermatologist Maximilian Steiner, who advised him to quit smoking while minimizing the lesion&#x27;s implications. Shortly after, Freud met with Felix Deutsch, who was also reluctant to tell Freud that the growth was cancerous. He, too, described it as an instance of leukoplakia. Both men told Freud to give up smoking, and Deutsch told him to seek surgical treatment. Freud was treated by Marcus Hajek, a rhinologist whose competence he had previously questioned. Hajek performed an unnecessary cosmetic surgery in his clinic&#x27;s outpatient department. Freud bled during and after the operation and may narrowly have escaped death. At a subsequent visit Deutsch saw that further surgery would be required but did not tell Freud he had cancer because he was worried that Freud might commit suicide.

=== Escape from Nazism ===

In January 1933, the Nazi Party took control of Germany, and Freud&#x27;s books were prominent among those they burned. Freud remarked to Ernest Jones: &quot;What progress we are making. In the Middle Ages they would have burned me. Now, they are content with burning my books.&quot; Freud underestimated the growing Nazi threat and remained determined to stay in Vienna, even following the Anschluss of 13 March 1938 and the outbreaks of violent antisemitism that ensued. Jones, the then president of the International Psychoanalytical Association (IPA), flew into Vienna on 15 March determined to get Freud to change his mind and seek exile in Britain. This prospect and the shock of the arrest and interrogation of Anna Freud by the Gestapo finally convinced Freud it was time to leave. Jones left for London the following week with a list provided by Freud of the party of émigrés for whom immigration permits would be required. Back in London, Jones used his personal acquaintance with the Home Secretary, Sir Samuel Hoare, to expedite the granting of permits. There were seventeen in all, and work permits were provided where relevant. Jones also used his influence in scientific circles, persuading the president of the Royal Society, Sir William Bragg, to write to the Foreign Secretary Lord Halifax, requesting to good effect that diplomatic pressure be applied in Berlin and Vienna on Freud&#x27;s behalf. Freud also had support from American diplomats, notably his ex-patient and American ambassador to France, William Bullitt. Bullitt alerted U.S. President Roosevelt to the increased dangers facing the Freuds, resulting in the American consul-general in Vienna, John Cooper Wiley, arranging regular monitoring of Berggasse 19. He also intervened by phone during the Gestapo interrogation of Anna Freud.

The departure from Vienna began in stages throughout April and May 1938. Freud&#x27;s grandson, Ernst Halberstadt, and Freud&#x27;s son Martin&#x27;s wife and children left for Paris in April. Freud&#x27;s sister-in-law, Minna Bernays, left for London on 5 May, Martin Freud the following week and Freud&#x27;s daughter Mathilde and her husband, Robert Hollitscher, on 24 May.

By the end of the month, arrangements for Freud&#x27;s own departure for London had become stalled, mired in a legally tortuous and financially extortionate process of negotiation with the Nazi authorities. Under regulations imposed on the Jewish population by the Nazis, a &quot;Kommissar&quot; was appointed to manage Freud&#x27;s assets and those of the IPA. Freud was allocated to Dr Anton Sauerwald, who had studied chemistry at Vienna University under Professor Josef Herzig, an old friend of Freud&#x27;s. Sauerwald read Freud&#x27;s books to further learn about him and became sympathetic. Though required to disclose details of all Freud&#x27;s bank accounts to his superiors and to arrange the destruction of the historic library of books housed at the IPA, Sauerwald did neither. Instead, he removed evidence of Freud&#x27;s foreign bank accounts to his own safe-keeping and arranged the storage of the IPA library in the Austrian National Library, where it remained until the end of the war.


Though Sauerwald&#x27;s intervention lessened the financial burden of the &quot;Reich&quot; Flight Tax on Freud&#x27;s declared assets, other substantial charges were levied concerning the debts of the IPA and the valuable collection of antiquities Freud possessed. Unable to access his own accounts, Freud turned to Princess Marie Bonaparte, the most eminent and wealthy of his French followers, who had travelled to Vienna to offer her support, and it was she who made the necessary funds available. This allowed Sauerwald to sign the necessary exit visas for Freud, his wife Martha, and daughter Anna. They left Vienna on the Orient Express on 4 June, accompanied by their housekeeper and a doctor, arriving in Paris the following day, where they stayed as guests of Marie Bonaparte, before travelling overnight to London, arriving at London Victoria station on 6 June.

Among those soon to call on Freud in London to pay their respects were Salvador Dalí, Stefan Zweig, Leonard and Virginia Woolf, and H. G. Wells. Representatives of the Royal Society called with the Society&#x27;s Charter for Freud, who had been elected a Foreign Member in 1936, to sign himself into membership. Marie Bonaparte arrived near the end of June to discuss the fate of Freud&#x27;s four elderly sisters in Vienna. Her subsequent attempts to get them exit visas failed; they all were murdered in Nazi concentration camps.

In early 1939, Sauerwald arrived in London in mysterious circumstances, where he met Freud&#x27;s brother Alexander. He was tried and imprisoned in 1945 by an Austrian court for his activities as a Nazi Party official. Responding to a plea from his wife, Anna Freud wrote to confirm that Sauerwald &quot;used his office as our appointed commissar in such a manner as to protect my father&quot;. Her intervention helped secure his release in 1947.

The Freud&#x27;s new family home was established in Hampstead at 20 Maresfield Gardens in September 1938. Freud&#x27;s architect son, Ernst, designed modifications of the building including the installation of an electric lift. The study and library areas were arranged to create the atmosphere and visual impression of Freud&#x27;s Vienna consulting rooms. He continued to see patients there until the terminal stages of his illness. He also worked on his last books, &quot;Moses and Monotheism&quot;, published in German in 1938 and in English the following year and the uncompleted &quot;An Outline of Psychoanalysis&quot;, which was published posthumously.

===Death===

By mid-September 1939, Freud&#x27;s cancer of the jaw was causing him increasingly severe pain and had been declared inoperable. The last book he read, Balzac&#x27;s &quot;La Peau de chagrin&quot;, prompted reflections on his own increasing frailty, and a few days later he turned to his doctor, friend, and fellow refugee, Max Schur, reminding him that they had previously discussed the terminal stages of his illness: &quot;Schur, you remember our &#x27;contract&#x27; not to leave me in the lurch when the time had come. Now it is nothing but torture and makes no sense.&quot; When Schur replied that he had not forgotten, Freud said, &quot;I thank you,&quot; and then, &quot;Talk it over with Anna, and if she thinks it&#x27;s right, then make an end of it.&quot; Anna Freud wanted to postpone her father&#x27;s death, but Schur convinced her it was pointless to keep him alive; on 21 and 22 September, he administered doses of morphine that resulted in Freud&#x27;s death at around 3 am on 23 September 1939. However, discrepancies in the accounts Schur gave of his role in Freud&#x27;s final hours led to inconsistencies between Freud&#x27;s main biographers. A revised account proposes that Schur was absent from Freud&#x27;s deathbed when a third and final dose of morphine was administered by Dr. Josephine Stross, a colleague of Anna Freud, leading to Freud&#x27;s death at around midnight on 23 September 1939.

Three days after his death, Freud&#x27;s body was cremated at Golders Green Crematorium, with Harrods acting as funeral directors, on the instructions of his son, Ernst. Funeral orations were given by Ernest Jones and the Austrian author Stefan Zweig. Freud&#x27;s ashes were later placed in a corner of the crematorium&#x27;s Ernest George Columbarium on a plinth designed by his son, Ernst, in a sealed ancient Greek bell krater painted with Dionysian scenes that Freud had received as a gift from Marie Bonaparte, and which he had kept in his study in Vienna for many years. After his wife, Martha, died in 1951, her ashes were also placed in the urn.

==Ideas==

===Early work===
Freud began his study of medicine at the University of Vienna in 1873. He took almost nine years to finish due to his interest in neurophysiological research, specifically investigation of the sexual anatomy of eels and the physiology of the fish nervous system, and because of his interest in studying philosophy with Franz Brentano. He entered private practice in neurology for financial reasons, receiving his M.D. in 1881 at the age of 25. Amongst his principal concerns in the 1880s was the anatomy of the brain, specifically the medulla oblongata. He intervened in the important debates about aphasia with his monograph of 1891, &quot;Zur Auffassung der Aphasien&quot;, in which he coined the term agnosia and counselled against a too locationist view of the explanation of neurological deficits. Like his contemporary Eugen Bleuler, he emphasized brain function rather than brain structure.

Freud was also an early researcher in the field of cerebral palsy, which was then known as &quot;cerebral paralysis&quot;. He published several medical papers on the topic and showed that the disease existed long before other researchers of the period began to study it. He suggested that William John Little, the man who first identified cerebral palsy, was wrong about lack of oxygen during birth being a cause. Instead, he suggested that complications in birth were a symptom.

The origin of Freud&#x27;s early work with psychoanalysis can be linked to Josef Breuer. Freud credited Breuer with opening the way to the discovery of the psychoanalytical method by his treatment of the case of Anna O. In November 1880, Breuer was called in to treat a highly intelligent 21-year-old woman (Bertha Pappenheim) for a persistent cough and hallucinations that he diagnosed as hysterical. He found that while nursing her dying father, she had developed some transitory symptoms, including visual disorders and paralysis and contractures of limbs, which he also diagnosed as hysterical. Breuer began to see his patient almost every day as the symptoms increased and became more persistent, and observed that she entered states of &quot;absence&quot;. He found that when, with his encouragement, she told fantasy stories in her evening states of &quot;absence&quot; her condition improved, and most of her symptoms had disappeared by April 1881. Following the death of her father in that month her condition deteriorated. Breuer recorded that some of the symptoms eventually remitted spontaneously and that full recovery was achieved by inducing her to recall events that had precipitated the occurrence of a specific symptom. In the years immediately following Breuer&#x27;s treatment, Anna O. spent three short periods in sanatoria with the diagnosis &quot;hysteria&quot; with &quot;somatic symptoms&quot;, and some authors have challenged Breuer&#x27;s published account of a cure. Richard Skues rejects this interpretation, which he sees as stemming from both Freudian and anti-psychoanalytical revisionism — revisionism that regards both Breuer&#x27;s narrative of the case as unreliable and his treatment of Anna O. as a failure.

===Seduction theory===

In the early 1890s, Freud used a form of treatment based on the one that Breuer had described to him, modified by what he called his &quot;pressure technique&quot; and his newly developed analytic technique of interpretation and reconstruction. According to Freud&#x27;s later accounts of this period, as a result of his use of this procedure, most of his patients in the mid-1890s reported early childhood sexual abuse. He believed these accounts, which he used as the basis for his seduction theory, but then he came to believe that some of them were fantasies. He explained these at first as having the function of &quot;fending off&quot; memories of infantile masturbation, but in later years he wrote that they represented Oedipal fantasies, stemming from innate drives that are sexual and destructive in nature.

Another version of events focuses on Freud&#x27;s proposing that unconscious memories of infantile sexual abuse were at the root of the psychoneuroses in letters to Fliess in October 1895, before he reported that he had actually discovered such abuse among his patients. In the first half of 1896, Freud published three papers, which led to his seduction theory, stating that he had uncovered, in all of his current patients, deeply repressed memories of sexual abuse in early childhood. In these papers, Freud recorded that his patients were not consciously aware of these memories, and must therefore be present as &quot;unconscious memories&quot; if they were to result in hysterical symptoms or obsessional neurosis. The patients were subjected to considerable pressure to &quot;reproduce&quot; infantile sexual abuse &quot;scenes&quot; that Freud was convinced had been repressed into the unconscious. Patients were generally unconvinced that their experiences of Freud&#x27;s clinical procedure indicated actual sexual abuse. He reported that even after a supposed &quot;reproduction&quot; of sexual scenes the patients assured him emphatically of their disbelief.

As well as his pressure technique, Freud&#x27;s clinical procedures involved analytic inference and the symbolic interpretation of symptoms to trace back to memories of infantile sexual abuse. His claim of one hundred percent confirmation of his theory only served to reinforce previously expressed reservations from his colleagues about the validity of findings obtained through his suggestive techniques. Freud subsequently showed inconsistency as to whether his seduction theory was still compatible with his later findings. In an addendum to &quot;The Aetiology of Hysteria&quot; he stated: &quot;All this is true [the sexual abuse of children], but it must be remembered that at the time I wrote it I had not yet freed myself from my overvaluation of reality and my low valuation of phantasy&quot;. Some years later Freud explicitly rejected the claim of his colleague Ferenczi that his patients&#x27; reports of sexual molestation were actual memories instead of fantasies, and he tried to dissuade Ferenczi from making his views public. Karin Ahbel-Rappe concludes that &quot;Freud marked out and started down a trail of investigation into the nature of the experience of infantile incest and its impact on the human psyche, and then abandoned this direction for the most part.&quot;

===Cocaine===
As a medical researcher, Freud was an early user and proponent of cocaine as a stimulant as well as analgesic. He believed that cocaine was a cure for many mental and physical problems, and in his 1884 paper &quot;On Coca&quot; he extolled its virtues. Between 1883 and 1887 he wrote several articles recommending medical applications, including its use as an antidepressant. He narrowly missed out on obtaining scientific priority for discovering its anesthetic properties of which he was aware but had mentioned only in passing. (Karl Koller, a colleague of Freud&#x27;s in Vienna, received that distinction in 1884 after reporting to a medical society the ways cocaine could be used in delicate eye surgery.) Freud also recommended cocaine as a cure for morphine addiction. He had introduced cocaine to his friend Ernst von Fleischl-Marxow, who had become addicted to morphine taken to relieve years of excruciating nerve pain resulting from an infection acquired after injuring himself while performing an autopsy. His claim that Fleischl-Marxow was cured of his addiction was premature, though he never acknowledged that he had been at fault. Fleischl-Marxow developed an acute case of &quot;cocaine psychosis&quot;, and soon returned to using morphine, dying a few years later still suffering from intolerable pain.

The application as an anaesthetic turned out to be one of the few safe uses of cocaine, and as reports of addiction and overdose began to filter in from many places in the world, Freud&#x27;s medical reputation became somewhat tarnished. After the &quot;Cocaine Episode&quot; Freud ceased to publicly recommend the use of the drug, but continued to take it himself occasionally for depression, migraine and nasal inflammation during the early 1890s, before discontinuing its use in 1896.

===Unconscious===

The concept of the unconscious, which Freud regarded as already well known amongst poets, was important to his theories and ideas; he also believed that it was his responsibility to ensure that it received scientific recognition in the field of psychology.

Freud states explicitly that his concept of the unconscious as he first formulated it was based on the theory of repression. In his formulations of the concept of repression in his 1915 paper &#x27;Repression&#x27; (&quot;Standard Edition&quot; XIV) Freud introduces the distinction in the unconscious between primary repression linked to the universal taboo on incest (&#x27;innately present originally&#x27;) and repression (&#x27;after expulsion&#x27;) that was a product of an individual&#x27;s life history (&#x27;acquired in the course of the ego&#x27;s development&#x27;) in which something that was at one point conscious is rejected or eliminated from consciousness.

In his account of the development and modification of his theory of unconscious mental processes he sets out in his 1915 paper &#x27;The Unconscious&#x27; (&quot;Standard Edition&quot; XIV), Freud identifies the three perspectives he employs: the dynamic, the economic and the topographical.

The dynamic perspective concerns firstly the constitution of the unconscious by repression and secondly the process of &quot;censorship&quot; which maintains unwanted, anxiety-inducing thoughts as such. Here Freud is drawing on observations from his earliest clinical work in the treatment of hysteria.

In the economic perspective the focus is on the trajectories of the repressed contents (&quot;the vicissitudes of sexual impulses&quot;) as they undergo complex transformations in the process of both symptom formation and normal unconscious thought such as dreams and slips of the tongue. These were topics Freud explored in detail in &quot;The Interpretation of Dreams&quot; and &quot;The Psychopathology of Everyday Life&quot;.

Whereas both these former perspectives focus on the unconscious as it is about to enter consciousness, the topographical perspective represents a shift in which the systemic properties of the unconscious, its characteristic processes, and modes of operation such as Condensation and Displacement, are placed in the foreground.

This &quot;first topography&quot; presents a model of psychic structure comprising three systems:
* The System Ucs – the unconscious: &quot;primary process&quot; mentation governed by the pleasure principle characterised by &quot;exemption from mutual contradiction... mobility of cathexes, timelessness, and replacement of external by psychical reality.&quot; (&#x27;The Unconscious&#x27; (1915) &quot;Standard Edition&quot; XIV).
* The System Pcs – the preconscious in which the unconscious thing-presentations of the primary process are bound by the secondary processes of language (word presentations), a prerequisite for their becoming available to consciousness.
* The System Cns – conscious thought governed by the reality principle.

In his later work, notably in &quot;The Ego and the Id&quot; (1923), a second topography is introduced comprising id, ego and super-ego, which is superimposed on the first without replacing it. In this later formulation of the concept of the unconscious the id comprises a reservoir of instincts or drives, a portion of them being hereditary or innate, a portion repressed or acquired. As such, from the economic perspective, the id is the prime source of psychical energy and from the dynamic perspective it conflicts with the ego and the super-ego which, genetically speaking, are diversifications of the id.

===Dreams===
In Freud&#x27;s theory dreams are instigated by the daily occurrences and thoughts of everyday life. In what Freud called the &quot;dream-work&quot;, these &quot;secondary process&quot; thoughts (&quot;word presentations&quot;), governed by the rules of language and the reality principle, become subject to the &quot;primary process&quot; of unconscious thought (&quot;thing presentations&quot;) governed by the pleasure principle, wish gratification and the repressed sexual scenarios of childhood. Because of the disturbing nature of the latter and other repressed thoughts and desires which may have become linked to them, the dream-work operates a censorship function, disguising by distortion, displacement, and condensation the repressed thoughts to preserve sleep.

In the clinical setting, Freud encouraged free association to the dream&#x27;s manifest content, as recounted in the dream narrative, to facilitate interpretative work on its latent content – the repressed thoughts and fantasies – and also on the underlying mechanisms and structures operative in the dream-work. As Freud developed his theoretical work on dreams he went beyond his theory of dreams as wish-fulfillments to arrive at an emphasis on dreams as &quot;nothing other than a particular form of thinking... It is the dream-work that creates that form, and it alone is the essence of dreaming&quot;.

===Psychosexual development===

Freud&#x27;s theory of psychosexual development proposes that following on from the initial polymorphous perversity of infantile sexuality, the sexual &quot;drives&quot; pass through the distinct developmental phases of the oral, the anal, and the phallic. Though these phases then give way to a latency stage of reduced sexual interest and activity (from the age of five to puberty, approximately), they leave a &quot;perverse&quot; and bisexual residue which persists during the formation of adult genital sexuality. Freud argued that neurosis and perversion could be explained in terms of fixation or regression to these phases whereas adult character and cultural creativity could achieve a sublimation of their perverse residue.

After Freud&#x27;s later development of the theory of the Oedipus complex this normative developmental trajectory becomes formulated in terms of the child&#x27;s renunciation of incestuous desires under the fantasised threat of (or fantasised fact of, in the case of the girl) castration. The &quot;dissolution&quot; of the Oedipus complex is then achieved when the child&#x27;s rivalrous identification with the parental figure is transformed into the pacifying identifications of the Ego ideal which assume both similarity and difference and acknowledge the separateness and autonomy of the other.

Freud hoped to prove that his model was universally valid and turned to ancient mythology and contemporary ethnography for comparative material arguing that totemism reflected a ritualized enactment of a tribal Oedipal conflict.

===Id, ego, and super-ego===

Freud proposed that the human psyche could be divided into three parts: Id, ego, and super-ego. Freud discussed this model in the 1920 essay &quot;Beyond the Pleasure Principle&quot;, and fully elaborated upon it in &quot;The Ego and the Id&quot; (1923), in which he developed it as an alternative to his previous topographic schema (i.e., conscious, unconscious and preconscious). The id is the unconscious portion of the psyche that operates on the &quot;pleasure principle&quot; and is the source of basic impulses and drives; it seeks immediate pleasure and gratification. Freud acknowledged that his use of the term &quot;Id&quot; (&quot;das Es&quot;, &quot;the It&quot;) derives from the writings of Georg Groddeck.

The super-ego is the moral component of the psyche. The rational ego attempts to exact a balance between the impractical hedonism of the id and the equally impractical moralism of the super-ego; it is the part of the psyche that is usually reflected most directly in a person&#x27;s actions. When overburdened or threatened by its tasks, it may employ defence mechanisms including denial, repression, undoing, rationalization, and displacement. This concept is usually represented by the &quot;Iceberg Model&quot;. This model represents the roles the id, ego, and super-ego play in relation to conscious and unconscious thought.

Freud compared the relationship between the ego and the id to that between a charioteer and his horses: the horses provide the energy and drive, while the charioteer provides direction.

===Life and death drives===

Freud believed that the human psyche is subject to two conflicting drives: the life drive or libido and the death drive. The life drive was also termed &quot;Eros&quot; and the death drive &quot;Thanatos&quot;, although Freud did not use the latter term; &quot;Thanatos&quot; was introduced in this context by Paul Federn. Freud hypothesized that libido is a form of mental energy with which processes, structures, and object-representations are invested.

In &quot;Beyond the Pleasure Principle&quot; (1920), Freud inferred the existence of a death drive. Its premise was a regulatory principle that has been described as &quot;the principle of psychic inertia&quot;, &quot;the Nirvana principle&quot;, and &quot;the conservatism of instinct&quot;. Its background was Freud&#x27;s earlier &quot;Project for a Scientific Psychology&quot;, where he had defined the principle governing the mental apparatus as its tendency to divest itself of quantity or to reduce tension to zero. Freud had been obliged to abandon that definition, since it proved adequate only to the most rudimentary kinds of mental functioning, and replaced the idea that the apparatus tends toward a level of zero tension with the idea that it tends toward a minimum level of tension.

Freud in effect readopted the original definition in &quot;Beyond the Pleasure Principle&quot;, this time applying it to a different principle. He asserted that on certain occasions the mind acts as though it could eliminate tension, or in effect to reduce itself to a state of extinction; his key evidence for this was the existence of the compulsion to repeat. Examples of such repetition included the dream life of traumatic neurotics and children&#x27;s play. In the phenomenon of repetition, Freud saw a psychic trend to work over earlier impressions, to master them and derive pleasure from them, a trend that was before the pleasure principle but not opposed to it. In addition to that trend, there was also a principle at work that was opposed to, and thus &quot;beyond&quot; the pleasure principle. If repetition is a necessary element in the binding of energy or adaptation, when carried to inordinate lengths it becomes a means of abandoning adaptations and reinstating earlier or less evolved psychic positions. By combining this idea with the hypothesis that all repetition is a form of discharge, Freud concluded that the compulsion to repeat is an effort to restore a state that is both historically primitive and marked by the total draining of energy: death. This has been described by some scholars as &quot;metaphysical biology&quot;.

===Melancholia===

In his 1917 essay &quot;Mourning and Melancholia&quot;, Freud distinguished mourning, painful but an inevitable part of life, and &quot;melancholia&quot;, his term for pathological refusal of a mourner to &quot;decathect&quot; from the lost one. Freud claimed that, in normal mourning, the ego was responsible for narcissistically detaching the libido from the lost one as a means of self-preservation, but that in &quot;melancholia&quot;, prior ambivalence towards the lost one prevents this from occurring. Suicide, Freud hypothesized, could result in extreme cases, when unconscious feelings of conflict became directed against the mourner&#x27;s own ego.

===Femininity and female sexuality===
Freud&#x27;s account of femininity is grounded in his theory of psychic development as it traces the uneven transition from the earliest stages of infantile and childhood sexuality, characterised by polymorphous perversity and a bisexual disposition, through to the fantasy scenarios and rivalrous identifications of the Oedipus complex and on to the greater or lesser extent these are modified in adult sexuality. There are different trajectories for the boy and the girl which arise as effects of the castration complex. Anatomical difference, the possession of a penis, induces castration anxiety for the boy whereas the girl experiences a sense of deprivation. In the boy&#x27;s case the castration complex concludes the Oedipal phase whereas for the girl it precipitates it.

The constraint of the erotic feelings and fantasies of the girl and her turning away from the mother to the father is an uneven and precarious process entailing &quot;waves of repression&quot;. The normal outcome is, according to Freud, the vagina becoming &quot;the new leading zone&quot; of sexual sensitivity, displacing the previously dominant clitoris, the phallic properties of which made it indistinguishable in the child&#x27;s early sexual life from the penis. This leaves a legacy of penis envy and emotional ambivalence for the girl which was &quot;intimately related to the essence of femininity&quot; and leads to &quot;the greater proneness of women to neurosis and especially hysteria.&quot; In his last paper on the topic Freud likewise concludes that &quot;the development of femininity remains exposed to disturbance by the residual phenomena of the early masculine period... Some portion of what we men call the &#x27;enigma of women&#x27; may perhaps be derived from this expression of bisexuality in women&#x27;s lives.&quot;

Initiating what became the first debate within psychoanalysis on femininity, Karen Horney of the Berlin Psychoanalytic Institute set out to challenge Freud&#x27;s account of femininity. Rejecting Freud&#x27;s theories of the feminine castration complex and penis envy, Horney argued for a primary femininity and penis envy as a defensive formation rather than arising from the fact, or &quot;injury&quot;, of biological asymmetry as Freud held. Horney had the influential support of Melanie Klein and Ernest Jones who coined the term &quot;phallocentrism&quot; in his critique of Freud&#x27;s position.

In defending Freud against this critique, feminist scholar Jacqueline Rose has argued that it presupposes a more normative account of female sexual development than that given by Freud. She finds that Freud moved from a description of the little girl stuck with her &#x27;inferiority&#x27; or &#x27;injury&#x27; in the face of the anatomy of the little boy to an account in his later work which explicitly describes the process of becoming &#x27;feminine&#x27; as an &#x27;injury&#x27; or &#x27;catastrophe&#x27; for the complexity of her earlier psychic and sexual life.

Throughout his deliberations on what he described as the &quot;dark continent&quot; of female sexuality and the &quot;riddle&quot; of femininity, Freud was careful to emphasise the &quot;average validity&quot; and provisional nature of his findings. He did, however, in response to his critics, maintain a steadfast objection &quot;to all of you ... to the extent that you do not distinguish more clearly between what is psychic and what is biological...&quot;

===Religion===
Freud regarded the monotheistic God as an illusion based upon the infantile emotional need for a powerful, supernatural pater familias. He maintained that religion – once necessary to restrain man&#x27;s violent nature in the early stages of civilization – in modern times, can be set aside in favor of reason and science. &quot;Obsessive Actions and Religious Practices&quot; (1907) notes the likeness between faith (religious belief) and neurotic obsession. &quot;Totem and Taboo&quot; (1913) proposes that society and religion begin with the patricide and eating of the powerful paternal figure, who then becomes a revered collective memory. In &quot;The Future of an Illusion&quot; (1927) Freud argues that the function of religious belief is psychological consolation. He argues that the belief in a supernatural protector serves as a buffer against man&#x27;s &quot;fear of nature&quot;, just as the belief in an afterlife serves as a buffer against man&#x27;s fear of death. The core idea of the work is that religious belief can be explained through its function in society, not through its relation to the truth. In &quot;Civilization and Its Discontents&quot; (1930), he considers the &quot;oceanic feeling&quot; of wholeness, limitlessness, and eternity (brought to his attention by his friend Romain Rolland), as a possible source for religious feelings. He notes that he has no experience of this feeling himself, and suggests that it is a regression into the state of consciousness that precedes the ego&#x27;s differentiation of itself from the world of objects and others. &quot;Moses and Monotheism&quot; (1937) proposes that Moses was the tribal pater familias, killed by the Jews, who psychologically coped with the patricide with a reaction formation conducive to their establishing monotheistic Judaism; analogously, he described the Roman Catholic rite of Holy Communion as cultural evidence of the killing and devouring of the sacred father.

Moreover, he perceived religion, with its suppression of violence, as mediator of the societal and personal, the public and the private, conflicts between Eros and Thanatos, the forces of life and death. Later works indicate Freud&#x27;s pessimism about the future of civilization, which he noted in the 1931 edition of &quot;Civilization and its Discontents&quot;. Humphrey Skelton described Freud&#x27;s worldview as one of &quot;stoical humanism&quot;. The Humanist Heritage project summed his contributions to understanding of religion by saying:

In a footnote of his 1909 &quot;Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-year-old Boy&quot;, Freud theorized that the universal fear of castration was provoked in the uncircumcised when they perceived circumcision and that this was &quot;the deepest unconscious root of antisemitism&quot;.

==Legacy==

Freud&#x27;s legacy, though a highly contested area of controversy, has been assessed as &quot;one of the strongest influences on twentieth-century thought, its impact comparable only to that of Darwinism and Marxism,&quot; with its range of influence permeating &quot;all the fields of culture ... so far as to change our way of life and concept of man.&quot;

===Psychotherapy===
Though not the first methodology in the practice of individual verbal psychotherapy, Freud&#x27;s psychoanalytic system came to dominate the field from early in the twentieth century, forming the basis for many later variants. While these systems have adopted different theories and techniques, all have followed Freud by attempting to achieve psychic and behavioral change through having patients talk about their difficulties. Psychoanalysis is not as influential as it once was in Europe and the United States, though in some parts of the world, notably Latin America, its influence in the later 20th century expanded substantially. Psychoanalysis also remains influential within many contemporary schools of psychotherapy and has led to innovative therapeutic work in schools and with families and groups. There is a substantial body of research which demonstrates the efficacy of the clinical methods of psychoanalysis and of related psychodynamic therapies in treating a wide range of psychological disorders.

The neo-Freudians, a group including Alfred Adler, Otto Rank, Karen Horney, Harry Stack Sullivan and Erich Fromm, rejected Freud&#x27;s theory of instinctual drive, emphasized interpersonal relations and self-assertiveness, and made modifications to therapeutic practice that reflected these theoretical shifts. The neo-Freudian analysis places more emphasis on the patient&#x27;s relationship with the analyst and less on the exploration of the unconscious.

Jacques Lacan approached psychoanalysis through linguistics and literature. Lacan believed that most of Freud&#x27;s essential work had been done before 1905, and that ego psychology and object relations theory were based upon misreadings of Freud&#x27;s work. Lacan saw desire as more important than need.

Wilhelm Reich developed some of Freud&#x27;s ideas, such as Actualneurosis. Freud applied that idea both to infants and to adults. In the former case, seductions were sought as the causes of later neuroses and in the latter incomplete sexual release. Unlike Freud, Reich retained the idea that actual experience, especially sexual experience, was of key significance. By the 1920s, Reich had &quot;taken Freud&#x27;s original ideas about sexual release to the point of specifying the orgasm as the criteria of healthy function.&quot; Reich was also &quot;developing his ideas about character into a form that would later take shape, first as &quot;muscular armour&quot;, and eventually as a transducer of universal biological energy, the &quot;orgone&quot;.&quot;

Fritz Perls, who helped to develop Gestalt therapy, was influenced by Reich, Jung, and Freud. The key idea of gestalt therapy is that Freud overlooked the structure of awareness, &quot;an active process that moves toward the construction of organized meaningful wholes... between an organism and its environment.&quot; These wholes, called &quot;gestalts&quot;, are &quot;patterns involving all the layers of organismic function – thought, feeling, and activity&quot;, to which improper formation, in Perls&#x27; view, gives rise to neurosis and anxieties. Gestalt therapy attempts to cure patients by placing them in contact with &quot;immediate organismic needs.&quot; Perls rejected the verbal approach of classical psychoanalysis; favoring a workshop style approach.

Arthur Janov&#x27;s primal therapy, which has been influential post-Freudian psychotherapy, resembles psychoanalytic therapy in its emphasis on early childhood experience but has also differences with it. While Janov&#x27;s theory is akin to Freud&#x27;s early idea of Actualneurosis, he does not have a dynamic psychology but a nature psychology like that of Reich or Perls, in which need is primary while wish is derivative and dispensable when need is met. Despite its surface similarity to Freud&#x27;s ideas, Janov&#x27;s theory lacks a strictly psychological account of the unconscious and belief in infantile sexuality. While for Freud there was a hierarchy of dangerous situations, for Janov the key event in the child&#x27;s life is an awareness that the parents do not love it. Janov writes in &quot;The Primal Scream&quot; (1970) that primal therapy has in some ways returned to Freud&#x27;s early ideas and techniques.

Ellen Bass and Laura Davis, co-authors of &quot;The Courage to Heal&quot; (1988), are described as &quot;champions of survivorship&quot; by Frederick Crews, who considers Freud the key influence upon them, although in his view they are indebted not to classic psychoanalysis but to &quot;the pre-psychoanalytic Freud... who supposedly took pity on his hysterical patients, found that they were all harboring memories of early abuse... and cured them by unknotting their repression.&quot; Crews sees Freud as having anticipated the recovered memory movement by emphasizing &quot;mechanical cause-and-effect relations between symptomatology and the premature stimulation of one body zone or another&quot;, and with pioneering its &quot;technique of thematically matching a patient&#x27;s symptom with a sexually symmetrical &#x27;memory. Crews believes that Freud&#x27;s confidence in accurate recall of early memories anticipates the theories of recovered memory therapists such as Lenore Terr, which in his view have led to people being wrongfully imprisoned.

===Science===
Research projects designed to test Freud&#x27;s theories empirically have led to a vast literature on the topic. American psychologists began to attempt to study repression in the experimental laboratory around 1930. In 1934, when the psychologist Saul Rosenzweig sent Freud reprints of his attempts to study repression, Freud responded with a dismissive letter stating that &quot;the wealth of reliable observations&quot; on which psychoanalytic assertions were based made them &quot;independent of experimental verification.&quot; Seymour Fisher and Roger P. Greenberg concluded in 1977 that some of Freud&#x27;s concepts were supported by empirical evidence. Their analysis of research literature supported Freud&#x27;s concepts of oral and anal personality constellations, his account of the role of Oedipal factors in certain aspects of male personality functioning, his formulations about the relatively greater concern about the loss of love in women&#x27;s as compared to men&#x27;s personality economy, and his views about the instigating effects of homosexual anxieties on the formation of paranoid delusions. They also found limited and equivocal support for Freud&#x27;s theories about the development of homosexuality. They found that several of Freud&#x27;s other theories, including his portrayal of dreams as primarily containers of secret, unconscious wishes, as well as some of his views about the psychodynamics of women, were either not supported or contradicted by research. Reviewing the issues again in 1996, they concluded that much experimental data relevant to Freud&#x27;s work exists, and supports some of his major ideas and theories.

Other viewpoints include those of psychologist and science historian Malcolm Macmillan, who concludes in &quot;Freud Evaluated&quot; (1991) that &quot;Freud&#x27;s method is not capable of yielding objective data about mental processes&quot;. Morris Eagle states that it has been &quot;demonstrated quite conclusively that because of the epistemologically contaminated status of clinical data derived from the clinical situation, such data have questionable probative value in the testing of psychoanalytic hypotheses&quot;. Richard Webster, in &quot;Why Freud Was Wrong&quot; (1995), described psychoanalysis as &quot;perhaps the most complex and successful&quot; pseudoscience in history. Crews believes that psychoanalysis has no scientific or therapeutic merit. University of Chicago research associate Kurt Jacobsen takes these critics to task for their own supposedly dogmatic and historically naive views both about psychoanalysis and the nature of science.

I. Bernard Cohen regards Freud&#x27;s &quot;Interpretation of Dreams&quot; as a revolutionary work of science, the last such work to be published in book form. In contrast Allan Hobson believes that Freud, by rhetorically discrediting 19th century investigators of dreams such as Alfred Maury and the Marquis de Hervey de Saint-Denis at a time when study of the physiology of the brain was only beginning, interrupted the development of scientific dream theory for half a century. The dream researcher G. William Domhoff has disputed claims of Freudian dream theory being validated.

Karl Popper claimed that Freud&#x27;s Psychoanalytic Theories were presented in unfalsifiable form, meaning that no experiment could ever disprove them. The philosopher Adolf Grünbaum argues in &quot;The Foundations of Psychoanalysis&quot; (1984) that Popper was mistaken and that many of Freud&#x27;s theories are empirically testable, a position with which others such as Eysenck agree. The philosopher Roger Scruton, writing in &quot;Sexual Desire&quot; (1986), also rejected Popper&#x27;s arguments, pointing to the theory of repression as an example of a Freudian theory that does have testable consequences. Scruton nevertheless concluded that psychoanalysis is not genuinely scientific, because it involves an unacceptable dependence on metaphor. The philosopher Donald Levy agrees with Grünbaum that Freud&#x27;s theories are falsifiable but disputes Grünbaum&#x27;s contention that therapeutic success is only the empirical basis on which they stand or fall, arguing that a much wider range of empirical evidence can be adduced via clinical case material.

In a study of psychoanalysis in the United States, Nathan Hale reported on the &quot;decline of psychoanalysis in psychiatry&quot; during 1965–1985. The continuation of this trend was noted by Alan Stone: &quot;As academic psychology becomes more &#x27;scientific&#x27; and psychiatry more biological, psychoanalysis is being brushed aside.&quot; Paul Stepansky, while noting that psychoanalysis remains influential in the humanities, records the &quot;vanishingly small number of psychiatric residents who choose to pursue psychoanalytic training&quot; and the &quot;nonanalytic backgrounds of psychiatric chairpersons at major universities&quot; among the evidence he cites for his conclusion that &quot;Such historical trends attest to the marginalisation of psychoanalysis within American psychiatry.&quot; Nonetheless, Freud was ranked as the third most cited psychologist of the 20th century. It is also claimed that in moving beyond the &quot;orthodoxy of the not so distant past... new ideas and new research has led to an intense reawakening of interest in psychoanalysis from neighbouring disciplines ranging from the humanities to neuroscience and including the non-analytic therapies&quot;.

Research in the emerging field of neuropsychoanalysis, founded by neuroscientist and psychoanalyst Mark Solms, has proved controversial with some psychoanalysts criticising the very concept itself. Solms and his colleagues have argued for neuro-scientific findings being &quot;broadly consistent&quot; with Freudian theories pointing out brain structures relating to Freudian concepts such as libido, drives, the unconscious, and repression. Neuroscientists who have endorsed Freud&#x27;s work include David Eagleman who believes that Freud &quot;transformed psychiatry&quot; by providing &quot;the first exploration of the way in which hidden states of the brain participate in driving thought and behavior&quot; and Nobel laureate Eric Kandel who argues that &quot;psychoanalysis still represents the most coherent and intellectually satisfying view of the mind.&quot;

===Philosophy===

Psychoanalysis has been interpreted as both radical and conservative. By the 1940s, it had come to be seen as conservative by the European and American intellectual community. Critics outside the psychoanalytic movement, whether on the political left or right, saw Freud as a conservative. Fromm had argued that several aspects of psychoanalytic theory served the interests of political reaction in his &quot;The Fear of Freedom&quot; (1942), an assessment confirmed by sympathetic writers on the right. In &quot;&quot; (1959), Philip Rieff portrayed Freud as a man who urged men to make the best of an inevitably unhappy fate, and admirable for that reason. In the 1950s, Herbert Marcuse challenged the then prevailing interpretation of Freud as a conservative in &quot;Eros and Civilization&quot; (1955), as did Lionel Trilling in &quot;Freud and the Crisis of Our Culture&quot; and Norman O. Brown in &quot;Life Against Death&quot; (1959). &quot;Eros and Civilization&quot; helped make the idea that Freud and Karl Marx were addressing similar questions from different perspectives credible to the left. Marcuse criticized neo-Freudian revisionism for discarding seemingly pessimistic theories such as the death instinct, arguing that they could be turned in a utopian direction. Freud&#x27;s theories also influenced the Frankfurt School and critical theory as a whole.

Freud has been compared to Marx by Reich, who saw Freud&#x27;s importance for psychiatry as parallel to that of Marx for economics, and by Paul Robinson, who sees Freud as a revolutionary whose contributions to twentieth-century thought are comparable in importance to Marx&#x27;s contributions to the nineteenth-century thought. Fromm calls Freud, Marx, and Einstein the &quot;architects of the modern age&quot;, but rejects the idea that Marx and Freud were equally significant, arguing that Marx was both far more historically important and a finer thinker. Fromm nevertheless credits Freud with permanently changing the way human nature is understood. Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari write in &quot;Anti-Oedipus&quot; (1972) that psychoanalysis resembles the Russian Revolution in that it became corrupted almost from the beginning. They believe this began with Freud&#x27;s development of the theory of the Oedipus complex, which they see as idealist.

Jean-Paul Sartre critiques Freud&#x27;s theory of the unconscious in &quot;Being and Nothingness&quot; (1943), claiming that consciousness is essentially self-conscious. Maurice Merleau-Ponty considers Freud to be one of the anticipators of phenomenology, while Theodor W. Adorno considers Edmund Husserl, the founder of phenomenology, to be Freud&#x27;s philosophical opposite, writing that Husserl&#x27;s polemic against psychologism could have been directed against psychoanalysis. Paul Ricœur sees Freud as one of the three &quot;masters of suspicion&quot;, alongside Marx and Nietzsche, for their unmasking &#x27;the lies and illusions of consciousness&#x27;. Ricœur and Jürgen Habermas have helped create a &quot;hermeneutic version of Freud&quot;, one which &quot;claimed him as the most significant progenitor of the shift from an objectifying, empiricist understanding of the human realm to one stressing subjectivity and interpretation.&quot; Louis Althusser drew on Freud&#x27;s concept of overdetermination for his reinterpretation of Marx&#x27;s &quot;Capital&quot;. Jean-François Lyotard developed a theory of the unconscious that reverses Freud&#x27;s account of the dream-work.

Several scholars see Freud as parallel to Plato, writing that they hold nearly the same theory of dreams and have similar theories of the tripartite structure of the human soul or personality, even if the hierarchy between the parts of the soul is almost reversed. Ernest Gellner argues that Freud&#x27;s theories are an inversion of Plato&#x27;s. Whereas Plato saw a hierarchy inherent in the nature of reality and relied upon it to validate norms, Freud was a naturalist who could not follow such an approach. Both men&#x27;s theories drew a parallel between the structure of the human mind and that of society, but while Plato wanted to strengthen the super-ego, which Gellner compared to the aristocracy, Freud wanted to strengthen the ego, which corresponded to the middle class. Paul Vitz compares Freudian psychoanalysis to Thomism, noting St. Thomas&#x27;s belief in the existence of an &quot;unconscious consciousness&quot; and his &quot;frequent use of the word and concept &#x27;libido&#x27; – sometimes in a more specific sense than Freud, but always in a manner in agreement with the Freudian use.&quot; Vitz suggests that Freud may have been unaware his theory of the unconscious was reminiscent of Aquinas.

===Literature and literary criticism===
The poem &quot;In Memory of Sigmund Freud&quot; was published by W. H. Auden in his 1940 collection &quot;Another Time&quot;. Auden describes Freud as having created &quot;a whole climate of opinion / under whom we conduct our different lives.&quot;

Literary critic Harold Bloom has been influenced by Freud. Camille Paglia has also been influenced by Freud, whom she calls &quot;Nietzsche&#x27;s heir&quot; and one of the greatest sexual psychologists in literature, but has rejected the scientific status of his work in her &quot;Sexual Personae&quot; (1990), writing, &quot;Freud has no rivals among his successors because they think he wrote science, when in fact he wrote art.&quot;

===Feminism===

The decline in Freud&#x27;s reputation has been attributed partly to the revival of feminism. Simone de Beauvoir criticizes psychoanalysis from an existentialist standpoint in &quot;The Second Sex&quot; (1949), arguing that Freud saw an &quot;original superiority&quot; in the male that is in reality socially induced. Betty Friedan criticizes Freud and what she considered his Victorian view of women in &quot;The Feminine Mystique&quot; (1963). Freud&#x27;s concept of penis envy was attacked by Kate Millett, who in &quot;Sexual Politics&quot; (1970) accused him of confusion and oversights. In 1968, Anne Koedt wrote in her essay &quot;The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm:&quot; It was Freud&#x27;s feelings about women&#x27;s secondary and inferior relationship to men that formed the basis for his theories on female sexuality. Once having laid down the law about the nature of our sexuality, Freud not so strangely discovered a tremendous problem of frigidity in women. His recommended cure for a frigid woman was psychiatric care. She was suffering from failure to mentally adjust to her &#x27;natural&#x27; role as a woman. Naomi Weisstein writes that Freud and his followers erroneously thought his &quot;years of intensive clinical experience&quot; added up to scientific rigor.

Freud is also criticized by Shulamith Firestone and Eva Figes. In &quot;The Dialectic of Sex&quot; (1970), Firestone argues that Freud was a &quot;poet&quot; who produced metaphors rather than literal truths; in her view, Freud, like feminists, recognized that sexuality was the crucial problem of modern life, but ignored the social context. Firestone interprets Freud&#x27;s &quot;metaphors&quot; in terms of the facts of power within the family. Figes tries in &quot;Patriarchal Attitudes&quot; (1970) to place Freud within a &quot;history of ideas&quot;. Juliet Mitchell defends Freud against his feminist critics in &quot;Psychoanalysis and Feminism&quot; (1974), accusing them of misreading him and misunderstanding the implications of psychoanalytic theory for feminism. Mitchell helped introduce English-speaking feminists to Lacan. Mitchell is criticized by Jane Gallop in &quot;The Daughter&#x27;s Seduction&quot; (1982). Gallop compliments Mitchell for her criticism of feminist discussions of Freud but finds her treatment of Lacanian theory lacking.

Some French feminists, among them Julia Kristeva and Luce Irigaray, have been influenced by Freud as interpreted by Lacan.

Psychologist Carol Gilligan writes that &quot;The penchant of developmental theorists to project a masculine image, and one that appears frightening to women, goes back at least to Freud.&quot; She sees Freud&#x27;s criticism of women&#x27;s sense of justice reappearing in the work of Jean Piaget and Lawrence Kohlberg. Gilligan notes that Nancy Chodorow, in contrast to Freud, attributes sexual difference not to anatomy but to the fact that male and female children have different early social environments. Chodorow, writing against the masculine bias of psychoanalysis, &quot;replaces Freud&#x27;s negative and derivative description of female psychology with a positive and direct account of her own.&quot;

In her analysis of Freud&#x27;s work on religion in relation to gender, Judith Van Herik noted that Freud paired femininity and the concept of weakness with Christianity and wish fulfillment while associating masculinity and renunciation with Judaism.

Toril Moi has developed a feminist perspective on psychoanalysis proposing that it is a discourse that &quot;attempts to understand the psychic consequences of three universal traumas: the fact that there are others, the fact of sexual difference, and the fact of death&quot;. She replaces Freud&#x27;s term of castration with Stanley Cavell&#x27;s concept of &quot;victimization&quot; which is a more universal term that applies equally to both sexes. Moi regards this concept of human finitude as a suitable replacement for both castration and sexual difference as the traumatic &quot;discovery of our separate, sexed, mortal existence&quot; and how both men and women come to terms with it.

==In popular culture==
Sigmund Freud is the subject of three major films or TV series, the first of which was 1962&#x27;s&quot; &quot; starring Montgomery Clift as Freud, directed by John Huston from a revision of a script by an uncredited Jean-Paul Sartre. The film is focused on Freud&#x27;s early life from 1885 to 1890 and combines multiple case studies of Freud into single ones, and multiple friends of his into single characters.

In 1984, the BBC produced the six-episode mini-series &quot;Freud: the Life of a Dream&quot; starring David Suchet.

The stage play &quot;The Talking Cure&quot; and subsequent film &quot;A Dangerous Method&quot; focus on the conflict between Freud and Carl Jung. Both are written by Christopher Hampton and are partly based on the nonfiction book &quot;A Most Dangerous Method&quot; by John Kerr. Viggo Mortensen plays Freud and Michael Fassbender plays Jung.

More fanciful employments of Freud in fiction are &quot;The Seven-Per-Cent Solution&quot; by Nicholas Meyer, which centers on an encounter between Freud and the fictional detective Sherlock Holmes, with a main part of the plot seeing Freud helping Holmes overcome his cocaine addiction. The 2020 Austrian-German series &quot;Freud&quot; involves a young Freud solving murder mysteries. The series has been criticized for having Freud be helped by a medium with real paranormal powers, when in reality Freud was quite skeptical of the paranormal. Freud also helps to solve a murder case in the 2006 novel &quot;The Interpretation of Murder&quot; by Jed Rubenfeld.

Mark St. Germain&#x27;s 2009 play &quot;Freud&#x27;s Last Session&quot; imagines a meeting between C. S. Lewis, aged 40, and Freud, aged 83, at Freud&#x27;s house in Hampstead, London, in 1939, as the Second World War is about to break out. The play is focused on the two men discussing religion and whether it should be seen as a sign of neurosis. The play was inspired by the 2003 nonfiction book &quot;The Question of God: C. S. Lewis and Sigmund Freud Debate God, Love, Sex, and the Meaning of Life&quot; by Armand Nicholi which also inspired a four-part PBS series. The play was made into the 2023 film &quot;Freud&#x27;s Last Session&quot;, directed by Matthew Brown and with Anthony Hopkins as Freud.

Freud is employed to more comic effect in the 1983 film &quot;Lovesick&quot; in which Alec Guinness plays Freud&#x27;s ghost who gives love advice to a modern psychiatrist played by Dudley Moore. Freud is also presented in a comedic light in the 1989 film, &quot;Bill &amp; Ted&#x27;s Excellent Adventure&quot;. Portrayed by Rod Loomis, Freud is one of several historical figures recruited by the film&#x27;s time-traveling lead characters to assist them in passing their high school history class presentation.

==Works==
===Books===
* 1891 &quot;On Aphasia&quot;
* 1895 &quot;Studies on Hysteria&quot; (co-authored with Josef Breuer)
* 1899 &quot;The Interpretation of Dreams&quot;
* 1901 &quot;On Dreams&quot; (abridged version of &quot;The Interpretation of Dreams&quot;)
* 1904 &quot;The Psychopathology of Everyday Life&quot;
* 1905 &quot;Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious&quot;
* 1905 &quot;Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality&quot;
* 1907 &quot;Delusion and Dream in Jensen&#x27;s Gradiva&quot;
* 1910 &quot;Five Lectures on Psycho-Analysis&quot;
* 1910 &quot;Leonardo da Vinci, A Memory of His Childhood&quot;
* 1913 &quot;Totem and Taboo: Resemblances between the Psychic Lives of Savages and Neurotics&quot;
* 1915–17 &quot;Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis&quot;
* 1920 &quot;Beyond the Pleasure Principle&quot;
* 1921 &quot;Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego&quot;
* 1923 &quot;The Ego and the Id&quot;
* 1926 &quot;Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety&quot;
* 1926 &quot;The Question of Lay Analysis&quot;
* 1927 &quot;The Future of an Illusion&quot;
* 1930 &quot;Civilization and Its Discontents&quot;
* 1933 &quot;New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis&quot;
* 1939 &quot;Moses and Monotheism&quot;
* 1940 &quot;An Outline of Psychoanalysis&quot;
* 1967 &quot;Thomas Woodrow Wilson: A Psychological Study&quot;, with William C. Bullitt

===Case histories===
* 1905 Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria (the Dora case history)
* 1909 Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy (the Little Hans case history)
* 1909 Notes upon a Case of Obsessional Neurosis (the Rat Man case history)
* 1911 Psycho-Analytic Notes on an Autobiographical Account of a Case of Paranoia (the Schreber case)
* 1918 From the History of an Infantile Neurosis (the Wolfman case history)
* 1920 The Psychogenesis of a Case of Homosexuality in a Woman
* 1923 A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis (the Haizmann case)

===Papers on sexuality===
* 1906 My Views on the Part Played by Sexuality in the Aetiology of the Neuroses
* 1908 &quot;&quot;Civilized&quot; Sexual Morality and Modern Nervous Illness&quot;
* 1910 A Special Type of Choice of Object made by Men
* 1912 Types of Onset of Neurosis
* 1912 The Most Prevalent Form of Degradation in Erotic Life
* 1913 The Disposition to Obsessional Neurosis
* 1915 A Case of Paranoia Running Counter to the Psycho-Analytic Theory of the Disease
* 1919 A Child is Being Beaten: A Contribution to the Origin of Sexual Perversions
* 1922 Medusa&#x27;s Head
* 1922 Some Neurotic Mechanisms in Jealousy, Paranoia and Homosexuality
* 1923 Infantile Genital Organisation
* 1924 The Dissolution of the Oedipus Complex
* 1925 Some Psychical Consequences of the Anatomical Distinction between the Sexes
* 1927 Fetishism
* 1931 Female Sexuality
* 1933 Femininity
* 1938 The Splitting of the Ego in the Process of Defence

===Autobiographical papers===
* 1899 An Autobiographical Note
* 1914 On the History of the Psychoanalytic Movement
* 1925 An Autobiographical Study (1935 Revised edition with Postscript).

===The Standard Edition===
&quot;The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud&quot;. Translated from the German under the general editorship of James Strachey, in collaboration with Anna Freud, assisted by Alix Strachey, Alan Tyson, and Angela Richards. 24 volumes, London: Hogarth Press and the Institute of Psycho-Analysis, 1953–1974.
* Vol. I Pre-Psycho-Analytic Publications and Unpublished Drafts (1886–1899).
* Vol. II Studies in Hysteria (1893–1895). By Josef Breuer and S. Freud.
* Vol. III Early Psycho-Analytic Publications (1893–1899)
* Vol. IV The Interpretation of Dreams (I) (1900)
* Vol. V The Interpretation of Dreams (II) and On Dreams (1900–1901)
* Vol. VI The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901)
* Vol. VII A Case of Hysteria, Three Essays on Sexuality and Other Works (1901–1905)
* Vol. VIII Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious (1905)
* Vol. IX Jensen&#x27;s &#x27;Gradiva,&#x27; and Other Works (1906–1909)
* Vol. X The Cases of &#x27;Little Hans&#x27; and the Rat Man&#x27; (1909)
* Vol. XI Five Lectures on Psycho-Analysis, Leonardo and Other Works (1910)
* Vol. XII The Case of Schreber, Papers on Technique and Other Works (1911–1913)
* Vol. XIII Totem and Taboo and Other Works (1913–1914)
* Vol. XIV On the History of the Psycho-Analytic Movement, Papers on Meta-psychology and Other Works (1914–1916)
* Vol. XV Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis (Parts I and II) (1915–1916)
* Vol. XVI Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis (Part III) (1916–1917)
* Vol. XVII An Infantile Neurosis and Other Works (1917–1919)
* Vol. XVIII Beyond the Pleasure Principle, Group Psychology and Other Works (1920–1922)
* Vol. XIX The Ego and the Id and Other Works (1923–1925)
* Vol. XX An Autobiographical Study, Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, Lay Analysis and Other Works (1925–1926)
* Vol. XXI The Future of an Illusion, Civilization and its Discontents and Other Works (1927–1931)
* Vol. XXII New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis and Other Works (1932–1936)
* Vol. XXIII Moses and Monotheism, An Outline of Psycho-Analysis and Other Works (1937–1939)
* Vol. XXIV Indexes and Bibliographies (Compiled by Angela Richards,1974)

===The Revised Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud===
A revised and newly annotated edition of the Standard Edition texts was published in 2024 under the editorship of Mark Solms.

==Correspondence==
* &quot;Selected Letters of Sigmund Freud to Martha Bernays&quot;, Ansh Mehta and Ankit Patel (eds.), CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2015. 
* &quot;Correspondence: Sigmund Freud, Anna Freud&quot;, Cambridge: Polity 2014. 
* &quot; The Letters of Sigmund Freud and Otto Rank: Inside Psychoanalysis&quot; (eds. E.J. Lieberman and Robert Kramer). Johns Hopkins University Press, 2012.
* &quot;The Complete Letters of Sigmund Freud to Wilhelm Fliess, 1887–1904&quot;, (editor and translator Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson), 1985, 
* &quot;The Sigmund Freud Carl Gustav Jung Letters&quot;, Princeton University Press; Abr edition, 1994, 
* &quot;The Complete Correspondence of Sigmund Freud and Karl Abraham, 1907–1925&quot;, Karnac Books, 2002, 
* &quot;The Letters of Sigmund Freud to Jeanne Lampl-de Groot, 1921–1939: Psychoanalysis and Politics in the Interwar Years&quot;. Edited By Gertie Bögels. London: Routledge 2022.
* &quot;The Complete Correspondence of Sigmund Freud and Ernest Jones, 1908–1939.&quot;, Belknap Press, Harvard University Press, 1995, 
* &quot;The Sigmund Freud – Ludwig Binswanger Correspondence 1908–1939&quot;, London: Other Press 2003, 
* &quot;The Correspondence of Sigmund Freud and Sándor Ferenczi, Vol 1, 1908–1914&quot;, Belknap Press, Harvard University Press, 1994, 
* &quot;The Correspondence of Sigmund Freud and Sándor Ferenczi, Vol 2, 1914–1919&quot;, Belknap Press, Harvard University Press, 1996, 
* &quot;The Correspondence of Sigmund Freud and Sándor Ferenczi, Vol 3, 1920–1933&quot;, Belknap Press, Harvard University Press, 2000, 
* &quot;The Letters of Sigmund Freud to Eduard Silberstein, 1871–1881&quot;, Belknap Press, Harvard University Press, 
* &quot;Psycho-Analysis and Faith: The Letters of Sigmund Freud and Oskar Pfister&quot;. Trans. Eric Mosbacher. Heinrich Meng and Ernst L. Freud. eds London: Hogarth Press and the Institute of Psycho-Analysis, 1963.
* &quot;Sigmund Freud and Lou Andreas-Salome; Letters&quot;, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich; 1972, 
* &quot;The Letters of Sigmund Freud and Arnold Zweig&quot;, New York University Press, 1987, 
* &quot;Why War? Open Letters Between Einstein and Freud&quot;. London: New Commonwealth, 1934.
* &quot;Letters of Sigmund Freud&quot;, selected and edited by Ernst L. Freud, New York: Basic Books, 1960, 

==See also==
* The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud
* Sigmund Freud Archives
* Freud Museum (London)
* Sigmund Freud Museum (Vienna)
* A Clinical Lesson at the Salpêtrière
* Afterwardsness
* Freudian slip
* Freudo-Marxism
* School of Brentano
* Hedgehog&#x27;s dilemma
* Narcissism of small differences
* Hidden personality
* Histrionic personality disorder
* Psychoanalytic literary criticism
* Psychodynamics
* Saul Rosenzweig
* Signorelli parapraxis
* The Freudian Coverup
* The Passions of the Mind
* Uncanny
==Notes==
==References==

* Alexander, Sam. &quot;In Memory of Sigmund Freud&quot;, The Modernism Lab, Yale University. Retrieved 23 June 2012.
* Appignanesi, Lisa and Forrester, John. &quot;Freud&#x27;s Women&quot;. Penguin Books, 2000.
* Auden, W.H. &quot;In Memory of Sigmund Freud&quot;, 1940, poets.org. Retrieved 23 June 2012.
* Bloom, Harold. &quot;The Western Canon&quot;. Riverhead Books, 1994.
* Blumenthal, Ralph. &quot;Hotel log hints at desire that Freud didn&#x27;t repress&quot;, &quot;International Herald Tribune&quot;, 24 December 2006.
* Cohen, David. &quot;The Escape of Sigmund Freud&quot;. JR Books, 2009.
* Cohen, Patricia. &quot;Freud Is Widely Taught at Universities, Except in the Psychology Department&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, 25 November 2007.
* Eissler, K.R. &quot;Freud and the Seduction Theory: A Brief Love Affair&quot;. Int. Univ. Press, 2005.
* Eysenck, Hans. J. &quot;Decline and Fall of the Freudian Empire&quot;. Pelican Books, 1986.
* Ford, Donald H. &amp; Urban, Hugh B. &quot;Systems of Psychotherapy: A Comparative Study&quot;. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc, 1965.
* Freud, Sigmund (1896c). &quot;The Aetiology of Hysteria&quot;. Standard Edition 3.
* Freud, Sigmund and Bonaparte, Marie (ed.). &quot;The Origins of Psychoanalysis. Letters to Wilhelm Fliess: Drafts and Notes 1887–1902&quot;. Kessinger Publishing, 2009.
* Fuller, Andrew R. &quot;Psychology and Religion: Eight Points of View&quot;, Littlefield Adams, 1994.
* Gay, Peter. &quot;Freud: A Life for Our Time&quot;. W. W. Norton &amp; Company, 2006 (first published 1988).
* Gay, Peter (ed.) &quot;The Freud Reader&quot;. W.W. Norton &amp; Co., 1995.
* Gresser, Moshe. &quot;Dual Allegiance: Freud As a Modern Jew&quot;. SUNY Press, 1994.
* Holt, Robert. &quot;Freud Reappraised: A Fresh Look at Psychoanalytic Theory&quot;. The Guilford Press, 1989.
* Hothersall, D. &quot;History of Psychology&quot;. 3rd edition, Mcgraw-Hill, 1995.
* Jones, E. &quot;Sigmund Freud: Life and Work Vol 1: The Young Freud 1856–1900, &quot; Hogarth Press, 1953.
* Jones, E. &quot;Sigmund Freud: Life and Work Vol 2: The Years of Maturity 1901–1919,&quot; Hogarth Press, 1955
* Jones, E. &quot;Sigmund Freud: Life and Work Vol 3: The Final Years 1919–1939,&quot; Hogarth Press, 1957
* Juergensmeyer, Mark. &quot;Terror in the Mind of God: The Global Rise of Religious Violence&quot;. University of California Press, 2004.
* Juergensmeyer, Mark. &quot;Religious Violence&quot;, in Peter B. Clarke (ed.). &quot;The Oxford Handbook of the Sociology of Religion&quot;. Oxford University Press, 2009.
* Kovel, Joel. &quot;A Complete Guide to Therapy: From Psychoanalysis to Behaviour Modification&quot;. Penguin Books, 1991 (first published 1976).
* Leeming, D.A.; Madden, Kathryn; and Marlan, Stanton. &quot;Encyclopedia of Psychology and Religion&quot;. Springer Verlag u. Co., 2004.
* Mannoni, Octave. &quot;Freud: The Theory of the Unconscious&quot;, London: Verso, 2015 [1971].
* Masson, Jeffrey M. (ed.). &quot;The Complete Letters of Sigmund Freud to Wilhelm Fless, 1887–1904.&quot; Harvard University Press, 1985.
* Meissner, William W. &quot;Freud and the Bible&quot; in Bruce M. Metzger and Michael David Coogan (eds.). &quot;The Oxford Companion to the Bible&quot;. Oxford University Press, 1993.
* Michels, Robert. &quot;Psychoanalysis and Psychiatry: A Changing Relationship&quot;, American Mental Health Foundation. Retrieved 23 June 2012.
* Mitchell, Juliet. &quot;Psychoanalysis and Feminism: A Radical Reassessment of Freudian Psychoanalysis&quot;. Penguin Books, 2000.
* Palmer, Michael. &quot;Freud and Jung on Religion&quot;. Routledge, 1997.
* Rice, Emmanuel. &quot;Freud and Moses: The Long Journey Home&quot;. SUNY Press, 1990.
* Roudinesco, Elisabeth. &quot;Jacques Lacan&quot;. Polity Press, 1997.
* Sadock, Benjamin J. and Sadock, Virginia A. &quot;Kaplan and Sadock&#x27;s Synopsis of Psychiatry&quot;. 10th ed. Lippincott Williams &amp; Wilkins, 2007.
* Tononi, Fabio, “The Aesthetics of Freud: Movement, Embodiment and Imagination”, &quot;Reti, saperi, linguaggi: Italian Journal of Cognitive Sciences&quot;, 8: 1 (2021), pp. 125–154. https://www.rivisteweb.it/doi/10.12832/101348
* Vitz, Paul C. &quot;Sigmund Freud&#x27;s Christian Unconscious&quot;. The Guilford Press, 1988.
* Webster, Richard. &quot;Why Freud Was Wrong: Sin, Science and Psychoanalysis.&quot; HarperCollins, 1995.
==Further reading==

* Brown, Norman O. &quot;Life Against Death: The Psychoanalytical Meaning of History&quot;. Hanover, NH: Wesleyan University Press, Second Edition 1985.
* Blauner, Andrew, ed. &quot;On the Couch: Writers Analyze Sigmund Freud&quot;, Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2024. 
* Cioffi, Frank. &quot;Freud and the Question of Pseudoscience&quot;. Peru, IL: Open Court, 1999.
* Cole, J. Preston. &quot;The Problematic Self in Kierkegaard and Freud&quot;. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1971.
* Crews, Frederick. &quot;The Memory Wars: Freud&#x27;s Legacy in Dispute&quot;. New York: The New York Review of Books, 1995.
* Crews, Frederick. &quot;Unauthorized Freud: Doubters Confront a Legend&quot;. New York: Penguin Books, 1998.
* Dufresne, Todd. &quot;Killing Freud: Twentieth-Century Culture and the Death of Psychoanalysis&quot;. New York: Continuum, 2003.
* Dufresne, Todd, ed. &quot;Against Freud: Critics Talk Back&quot;. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2007.
* Ellenberger, Henri. &quot;Beyond the Unconscious: Essays of Henri F. Ellenberger in the History of Psychiatry&quot;. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993.
* Ellenberger, Henri. &quot;The Discovery of the Unconscious: The History and Evolution of Dynamic Psychiatry&quot;. New York: Basic Books, 1970.
* Esterson, Allen. &quot;Seductive Mirage: An Exploration of the Work of Sigmund Freud&quot;. Chicago: Open Court, 1993.
* Gellner, Ernest. &quot;The Psychoanalytic Movement: The Cunning of Unreason&quot;. London: Fontana Press, 1993.
* Grünbaum, Adolf. &quot;The Foundations of Psychoanalysis: A Philosophical Critique&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984.
* Grünbaum, Adolf. &quot;Validation in the Clinical Theory of Psychoanalysis: A Study in the Philosophy of Psychoanalysis&quot;. Madison, Connecticut: International Universities Press, 1993.
* Hale, Nathan G., Jr. &quot;Freud and the Americans: The Beginnings of Psychoanalysis in the United States, 1876–1917&quot;. New York: Oxford University Press, 1971.
* Hale, Nathan G., Jr. &quot;The Rise and Crisis of Psychoanalysis in the United States: Freud and the Americans, 1917–1985&quot;. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995.
* Hirschmüller, Albrecht. &quot;The Life and Work of Josef Breuer&quot;. New York University Press, 1989.
* Jung, Carl Gustav. &quot;The Collected Works of C. G. Jung Volume 4: Freud and Psychoanalysis&quot;. Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul Ltd, 1961.
* Macmillan, Malcolm. &quot;Freud Evaluated: The Completed Arc&quot;. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 1997.
* Marcuse, Herbert. &quot;Eros and Civilization: A Philosophical Inquiry into Freud&quot;. Boston: Beacon Press, 1974.
* Masson, Jeffrey Moussaieff. &quot;The Assault on Truth: Freud&#x27;s Suppression of the Seduction Theory&quot;. New York: Pocket Books, 1998.
* Nagorski, Andrew. &quot;Saving Freud: A Life in Vienna and an Escape to Freedom in London&quot;. London: Icon, 2022
* Ricœur, Paul. &quot;Freud and Philosophy: An Essay on Interpretation&quot;. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1970.
* Rieff, Philip. &quot;&quot;. Garden City, New York: Anchor Books, 1961.
* Roazen, Paul. &quot;Freud and His Followers&quot;. New York: Knopf, 1975, hardcover; trade paperback, Da Capo Press (22 March 1992), .
* Roazen, Paul. &quot;Freud: Political and Social Thought&quot;. London: Hogarth Press, 1969.
* Roth, Michael, ed. &quot;Freud: Conflict and Culture&quot;. New York: Vintage, 1998.
* Schur, Max. &quot;Freud: Living and Dying&quot;. New York: International Universities Press, 1972.
* Stannard, David E. &quot;Shrinking History: On Freud and the Failure of Psychohistory&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1982.
* Webster, Richard. &quot;Why Freud Was Wrong: Sin, Science and Psychoanalysis&quot;. Oxford: The Orwell Press, 2005.
* Wollheim, Richard. &quot;Freud&quot;. Fontana, 1971.
* Wollheim, Richard, and James Hopkins, eds. &quot;Philosophical Essays on Freud&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982.

===Biographical works===
* 
* Crews, Frederick (2017). &quot;Freud: The Making of an Illusion&quot;. New York: Metropolitan Books.
* 
* Freud, Ernst L., Grubrich-Simitis, Ilse (eds.) (1976) &quot;Sigmund Freud: His Life in Pictures and Words&quot; New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich
* Freud, Martin (1958) &quot;Sigmund Freud: Man and Father&quot;. New York: Vanguard Press.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* 
* Sigmund Freud at the &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="0" end="13" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="25" end="48" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigismund Schlomo Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="98" end="109" title="neurologist" label="neurologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="129" end="143" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q624758" start="191" end="202" title="psychopathology" label="pathologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q194034" start="245" end="251" title="Psyche (psychology)" label="psyche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467513" start="393" end="408" title="Galician Jews" label="Galician Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="424" end="431" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q654019" start="441" end="449" title="Příbor" label="Freiberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="458" end="473" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="527" end="547" title="University of Vienna" label="University of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q308678" start="569" end="581" title="habilitation" label="habilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q462390" start="610" end="616" title="docent" label="docent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650750" start="620" end="634" title="neuropathology" label="neuropathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="705" end="711" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="777" end="805" title="Anschluss" label="German annexation of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="850" end="854" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="929" end="943" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054460" start="1003" end="1019" title="free association (psychology)" label="free association"/>
<link wikidata="Q334231" start="1035" end="1047" title="transference" label="transference"/>
<link wikidata="Q131246" start="1199" end="1214" title="Oedipus complex" label="Oedipus complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q36348" start="1280" end="1285" title="dream" label="dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q941796" start="1412" end="1422" title="Repression (psychology)" label="repression"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1474" end="1485" title="#The unconscious" label="unconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q486893" start="1549" end="1570" title="id, ego and super-ego" label="id, ego and super-ego"/>
<link wikidata="Q178066" start="1606" end="1612" title="libido" label="libido"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570600" start="1734" end="1745" title="death drive" label="death drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q181032" start="1806" end="1814" title="Neurosis" label="neurotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="2033" end="2043" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="2045" end="2055" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="2057" end="2070" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="2087" end="2097" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="2266" end="2274" title="feminist" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q842333" start="2339" end="2354" title="Western thought" label="Western thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="2597" end="2613" title="Ashkenazi Jewish" label="Ashkenazi Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="2629" end="2636" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q654019" start="2646" end="2654" title="Příbor" label="Freiberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="2663" end="2678" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="2701" end="2715" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180086" start="2777" end="2784" title="Galicia (Eastern Europe)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10304780" start="2798" end="2809" title="Jacob Freud" label="Jakob Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="2911" end="2923" title="Hasidic Judaism" label="Hasidic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068324" start="3015" end="3026" title="Torah study" label="Torah study"/>
<link wikidata="Q78724" start="3056" end="3073" title="Amalia Freud" label="Amalia Nathansohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q94521" start="3142" end="3163" title="Isaac Noah Mannheimer" label="Isaac Noah Mannheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q603476" start="3345" end="3349" title="caul" label="caul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120735" start="3386" end="3390" title="omen" label="omen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503256" start="3432" end="3444" title="Freud family" label="Freud family"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="3501" end="3511" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="3779" end="3786" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="3807" end="3813" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q694222" start="4081" end="4087" title="Matura" label="Matura"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="4194" end="4200" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="4202" end="4207" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="4212" end="4217" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q57196" start="4393" end="4407" title="Franz Brentano" label="Franz Brentano"/>
<link wikidata="Q72374" start="4426" end="4438" title="Ernst Wilhelm von Brücke" label="Ernst Brücke"/>
<link wikidata="Q183493" start="4458" end="4467" title="Darwinist" label="Darwinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q112156" start="4478" end="4488" title="Carl Friedrich Wilhelm Claus" label="Carl Claus"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="4569" end="4576" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q261485" start="4837" end="4845" title="lampreys" label="lampreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211742" start="4889" end="4897" title="crayfish" label="crayfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="5001" end="5007" title="neuron" label="neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="5236" end="5252" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q913404" start="5298" end="5300" title="Doctor of medicine" label="MD"/>
<link wikidata="Q180080" start="5391" end="5414" title="Vienna General Hospital" label="Vienna General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836" start="5563" end="5570" title="aphasia" label="aphasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q62972" start="5768" end="5783" title="Theodor Meynert" label="Theodor Meynert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="5791" end="5802" title="Psychiatry" label="psychiatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q100329140" start="5819" end="5824" title="locum" label="locum"/>
<link wikidata="Q462390" start="5984" end="5990" title="docent" label="docent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650750" start="5994" end="6008" title="neuropathology" label="neuropathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042226" start="6254" end="6268" title="Martha Bernays" label="Martha Bernays"/>
<link wikidata="Q72133" start="6291" end="6304" title="Isaac Bernays" label="Isaac Bernays"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="6349" end="6356" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656215" start="6821" end="6826" title="Ernst L. Freud" label="Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q78485" start="6860" end="6864" title="Anna Freud" label="Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q694810" start="6964" end="6976" title="Sigmund Freud Museum (Vienna)" label="Berggasse 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q267329" start="6983" end="6995" title="Innere Stadt" label="Innere Stadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q248686" start="7081" end="7103" title="B&amp;#x27;nai B&amp;#x27;rith" label="B&amp;#x27;nai B&amp;#x27;rith"/>
<link wikidata="Q726382" start="7260" end="7281" title="The Interpretation of Dreams" label="book of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="7543" end="7552" title="Carl Jung" label="Carl Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q7212330" start="7753" end="7768" title="tobacco smoking" label="smoking tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405524" start="7913" end="7925" title="self-control" label="self-control"/>
<link wikidata="Q68726" start="7983" end="7997" title="Wilhelm Fliess" label="Wilhelm Fliess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143025" start="8043" end="8056" title="Oral cancer" label="buccal cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8396" start="8157" end="8169" title="masturbation" label="masturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q57196" start="8253" end="8267" title="Franz Brentano" label="Franz Brentano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256401" start="8412" end="8451" title="Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint" label="Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="8616" end="8630" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q77057" start="8693" end="8712" title="Eduard von Hartmann" label="Eduard von Hartmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756941" start="8726" end="8759" title="The Philosophy of the Unconscious" label="The Philosophy of the Unconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q76881" start="8817" end="8824" title="Gustav Fechner" label="Fechner"/>
<link wikidata="Q76685" start="8829" end="8836" title="Johann Friedrich Herbart" label="Herbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q61970" start="8996" end="9009" title="Theodor Lipps" label="Theodor Lipps"/>
<link wikidata="Q38193" start="9282" end="9294" title="Schopenhauer" label="Schopenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="9299" end="9308" title="Nietzsche" label="Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053359" start="9896" end="9916" title="The Birth of Tragedy" label="The Birth of Tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605652" start="9963" end="9983" title="Untimely Meditations" label="Untimely Meditations"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="10442" end="10451" title="neurology" label="neurology"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="10465" end="10484" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q68726" start="11243" end="11257" title="Wilhelm Fliess" label="Wilhelm Fliess"/>
<link wikidata="Q837132" start="11555" end="11564" title="Biorhythm (pseudoscience)" label="biorhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8396" start="11721" end="11733" title="masturbation" label="masturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q182207" start="11735" end="11753" title="coitus interruptus" label="coitus interruptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14076" start="11770" end="11777" title="condoms" label="condoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q510236" start="11863" end="11875" title="neurasthenia" label="neurasthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925151" start="12228" end="12242" title="metapsychology" label="metapsychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q78728" start="12732" end="12745" title="Emma Eckstein" label="Emma Eckstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q718595" start="13086" end="13102" title="Middle nasal concha" label="middle turbinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="14275" end="14281" title="Kepler" label="Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q20710" start="15064" end="15083" title="Jean-Martin Charcot" label="Jean-Martin Charcot"/>
<link wikidata="Q8609" start="15152" end="15160" title="hypnosis" label="hypnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q84430" start="15683" end="15695" title="Josef Breuer" label="Josef Breuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q61178" start="15947" end="15954" title="Anna O." label="Anna O."/>
<link wikidata="Q7679855" start="16053" end="16065" title="talking cure" label="talking cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054460" start="16535" end="16551" title="free association (psychology)" label="free association"/>
<link wikidata="Q941796" start="16752" end="16762" title="Repression (psychology)" label="repression"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="16852" end="16866" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343085" start="17708" end="17737" title="Freud&amp;#x27;s seduction theory" label="Freud&amp;#x27;s seduction theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q131246" start="18353" end="18368" title="Oedipus complex" label="Oedipus complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q84430" start="18600" end="18612" title="Josef Breuer" label="Josef Breuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q726382" start="18643" end="18671" title="The Interpretation of Dreams" label="The Interpretation of Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027564" start="18826" end="18843" title="Wish fulfilment" label="wish-fulfillments"/>
<link wikidata="Q27592" start="19246" end="19282" title="The Psychopathology of Everyday Life" label="The Psychopathology of Everyday Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q28955345" start="19306" end="19349" title="Humor in Freud" label="Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q673747" start="19373" end="19412" title="Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality" label="Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q78729" start="19687" end="19732" title="Dora (case study)" label="Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19794" end="19806" title="#Case histories" label="case studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q144119" start="19883" end="19891" title="hysteria" label="hysteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q334231" start="19963" end="19975" title="transference" label="transference"/>
<link wikidata="Q178190" start="20084" end="20104" title="obsessional neurosis" label="obsessional neurosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279554" start="20124" end="20131" title="Rat man" label="Rat man"/>
<link wikidata="Q175854" start="20137" end="20143" title="phobia" label="phobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q78730" start="20159" end="20170" title="Little Hans" label="Little Hans"/>
<link wikidata="Q462390" start="20957" end="20963" title="docent" label="docent"/>
<link wikidata="Q78612" start="21600" end="21614" title="Wilhelm Stekel" label="Wilhelm Stekel"/>
<link wikidata="Q152393" start="22010" end="22022" title="Alfred Adler" label="Alfred Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206544" start="22860" end="22874" title="Dorotheergasse" label="Dorotheergasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q84559" start="23174" end="23182" title="Max Graf" label="Max Graf"/>
<link wikidata="Q78730" start="23228" end="23239" title="Herbert Graf" label="Little Hans"/>
<link wikidata="Q84172" start="23487" end="23496" title="Otto Rank" label="Otto Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="23603" end="23619" title="Carl Gustav Jung" label="Carl Gustav Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326834" start="23711" end="23733" title="Galvanic Skin Response" label="Galvanic Skin Response"/>
<link wikidata="Q206702" start="23753" end="23770" title="University of Zurich" label="Zurich University"/>
<link wikidata="Q115506" start="23808" end="23821" title="Eugen Bleuler" label="Eugen Bleuler"/>
<link wikidata="Q577131" start="23829" end="23855" title="Burghölzli" label="Burghölzli Mental Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q116614" start="23891" end="23908" title="Ludwig Binswanger" label="Ludwig Binswanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q685872" start="24173" end="24202" title="Vienna Psychoanalytic Society" label="Vienna Psychoanalytic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q88012" start="24372" end="24392" title="Margarete Hilferding" label="Margarete Hilferding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655993" start="24462" end="24479" title="Tatiana Rosenthal" label="Tatiana Rosenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q232336" start="24484" end="24500" title="Sabina Spielrein" label="Sabina Spielrein"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="25034" end="25042" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q221870" start="25197" end="25209" title="Ernest Jones" label="Ernest Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q71027" start="25752" end="25764" title="Karl Abraham" label="Karl Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q89566" start="25769" end="25781" title="Max Eitingon" label="Max Eitingon"/>
<link wikidata="Q335466" start="25795" end="25810" title="Sándor Ferenczi" label="Sándor Ferenczi"/>
<link wikidata="Q78992" start="25848" end="25861" title="Abraham Brill" label="Abraham Brill"/>
<link wikidata="Q15820307" start="26384" end="26428" title="Internationale Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse" label="Internationale Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234598" start="26470" end="26513" title="International Psychoanalytical Association" label="international association of psychoanalysts"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="26995" end="27016" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q309675" start="27293" end="27305" title="G. Stanley Hall" label="Stanley Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095773" start="27320" end="27336" title="Clark University" label="Clark University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067385" start="27649" end="27669" title="James Jackson Putnam" label="James Jackson Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="27718" end="27725" title="Harvard" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843014" start="28041" end="28076" title="American Psychoanalytic Association" label="American Psychoanalytic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656604" start="28163" end="28194" title="New York Psychoanalytic Society" label="New York Psychoanalytic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234598" start="28380" end="28422" title="International Psychoanalytical Association" label="International Psychoanalytical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q835792" start="29406" end="29427" title="individual psychology" label="individual psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895303" start="29539" end="29568" title="Psychology of the Unconscious" label="Psychology of the Unconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q245179" start="29730" end="29751" title="analytical psychology" label="analytical psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658079" start="29872" end="29888" title="Inner circle (psychoanalysis)" label="Secret Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q79062" start="30108" end="30119" title="Hanns Sachs" label="Hanns Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256338" start="30256" end="30277" title="psychoanalytic theory" label="psychoanalytic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769995" start="30950" end="30969" title="The Trauma of Birth" label="The Trauma of Birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q78485" start="31415" end="31425" title="Anna Freud" label="Anna Freud"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31832" end="31842" title="International Psychoanalytical Association#International Congresses" label="Congresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="31870" end="31881" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q476325" start="32071" end="32102" title="Berlin Psychoanalytic Institute" label="Berlin Psychoanalytic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q95186" start="32348" end="32360" title="Ernst Simmel" label="Ernst Simmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q651833" start="32373" end="32386" title="Schloss Tegel" label="Schloss Tegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="32418" end="32424" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="33212" end="33225" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843014" start="33331" end="33366" title="American Psychoanalytic Association" label="American Psychoanalytic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925747" start="33587" end="33619" title="British Psychoanalytical Society" label="British Psychoanalytical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q78733" start="33961" end="33975" title="Helene Deutsch" label="Helene Deutsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="34218" end="34227" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="34285" end="34297" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q655971" start="35245" end="35273" title="The Question of Lay Analysis" label="The Question of Lay Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q159909" start="35652" end="35664" title="Goethe Prize" label="Goethe Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q563843" start="35844" end="35854" title="Cäcilie M." label="Cäcilie M."/>
<link wikidata="Q78729" start="35874" end="35878" title="Dora (case study)" label="Dora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36032" end="36043" title="Oedipus complex#Oedipal case study" label="Little Hans"/>
<link wikidata="Q78730" start="36045" end="36057" title="Herbert Graf" label="Herbert Graf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279554" start="36071" end="36078" title="Rat Man" label="Rat Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268464" start="36125" end="36133" title="Sergei Pankejeff" label="Wolf Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q690760" start="36185" end="36215" title="Prince Pedro Augusto of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Prince Pedro Augusto of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q236469" start="36217" end="36221" title="H.D." label="H.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q78728" start="36223" end="36236" title="Emma Eckstein" label="Emma Eckstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="36238" end="36251" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Gustav Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q115472" start="36311" end="36335" title="Princess Marie Bonaparte" label="Princess Marie Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008219" start="36337" end="36359" title="Edith Banfield Jackson" label="Edith Banfield Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q838145" start="36600" end="36611" title="leukoplakia" label="leukoplakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542027" start="36615" end="36626" title="epithelioma" label="epithelioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q171171" start="36757" end="36770" title="dermatologist" label="dermatologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q189553" start="37164" end="37175" title="rhinologist" label="rhinologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="37610" end="37620" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927614" start="37690" end="37707" title="Nazi book burnings" label="those they burned"/>
<link wikidata="Q221870" start="37727" end="37739" title="Ernest Jones" label="Ernest Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="37783" end="37794" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="37980" end="37989" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="38036" end="38048" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234598" start="38095" end="38137" title="International Psychoanalytical Association" label="International Psychoanalytical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="38325" end="38332" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q333429" start="38600" end="38616" title="Samuel Hoare, 1st Viscount Templewood" label="Sir Samuel Hoare"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="38816" end="38829" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q133747" start="38831" end="38848" title="William Henry Bragg" label="Sir William Bragg"/>
<link wikidata="Q333426" start="38884" end="38896" title="Edward Wood, 1st Earl of Halifax" label="Lord Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q734436" start="39111" end="39126" title="William Christian Bullitt, Jr." label="William Bullitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="39159" end="39168" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227062" start="39265" end="39282" title="John Cooper Wiley" label="John Cooper Wiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q695843" start="40065" end="40074" title="Reichskommissar" label="Kommissar"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="40219" end="40236" title="Vienna University" label="Vienna University"/>
<link wikidata="Q94013" start="40253" end="40265" title="Josef Herzig" label="Josef Herzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q317162" start="40865" end="40893" title="Reich Flight Tax" label="&amp;quot;Reich&amp;quot; Flight Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q115472" start="41108" end="41132" title="Princess Marie Bonaparte" label="Princess Marie Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q191985" start="41420" end="41434" title="Orient Express" label="Orient Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q985210" start="41629" end="41652" title="London Victoria station" label="London Victoria station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="41736" end="41749" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q78491" start="41751" end="41763" title="Stefan Zweig" label="Stefan Zweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q703935" start="41765" end="41772" title="Leonard Woolf" label="Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q40909" start="41777" end="41791" title="Virginia Woolf" label="Virginia Woolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="41797" end="41808" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="41833" end="41846" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000674" start="41920" end="41934" title="List of Fellows of the Royal Society elected in 1936" label="Foreign Member"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="42171" end="42195" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="Nazi concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q25610" start="42698" end="42707" title="Hampstead" label="Hampstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455777" start="42711" end="42732" title="Freud Museum" label="20 Maresfield Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195449" start="43121" end="43141" title="Moses and Monotheism" label="Moses and Monotheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002914" start="43237" end="43265" title="An Outline of Psychoanalysis" label="An Outline of Psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143025" start="43357" end="43374" title="jaw cancer" label="cancer of the jaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q9711" start="43473" end="43479" title="Honoré de Balzac" label="Balzac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142149" start="43493" end="43511" title="La Peau de chagrin" label="La Peau de chagrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q84522" start="43645" end="43654" title="Max Schur" label="Max Schur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4141350" start="44806" end="44831" title="Golders Green Crematorium" label="Golders Green Crematorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q332474" start="44838" end="44845" title="Harrods" label="Harrods"/>
<link wikidata="Q78491" start="44982" end="44994" title="Stefan Zweig" label="Stefan Zweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q85762142" start="45036" end="45096" title="Freud Corner (Golders Green Crematorium)" label="a corner of the crematorium&amp;#x27;s Ernest George Columbarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q738680" start="45149" end="45162" title="Pottery of ancient Greece" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q476968" start="45163" end="45174" title="bell krater" label="bell krater"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="45188" end="45204" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysian scenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q57196" start="45747" end="45761" title="Franz Brentano" label="Franz Brentano"/>
<link wikidata="Q189033" start="45963" end="45980" title="medulla oblongata" label="medulla oblongata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836" start="46027" end="46034" title="aphasia" label="aphasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q220322" start="46132" end="46139" title="agnosia" label="agnosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q115506" start="46253" end="46266" title="Eugen Bleuler" label="Eugen Bleuler"/>
<link wikidata="Q210427" start="46378" end="46392" title="cerebral palsy" label="cerebral palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168038" start="46616" end="46635" title="William John Little" label="William John Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q84430" start="46883" end="46895" title="Josef Breuer" label="Josef Breuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q61178" start="47020" end="47027" title="Anna O." label="Anna O."/>
<link wikidata="Q61178" start="47116" end="47133" title="Bertha Pappenheim" label="Bertha Pappenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q26553" start="48977" end="48999" title="childhood sexual abuse" label="childhood sexual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343085" start="49064" end="49080" title="Freud&amp;#x27;s seduction theory" label="seduction theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11009445" start="49348" end="49354" title="Drive theory" label="drives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343085" start="49744" end="49760" title="Freud&amp;#x27;s seduction theory" label="seduction theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="51943" end="51950" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q173235" start="51977" end="51986" title="analgesic" label="analgesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q76560" start="52237" end="52251" title="antidepressant" label="antidepressant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922143" start="52289" end="52308" title="scientific priority" label="scientific priority"/>
<link wikidata="Q131130" start="52329" end="52339" title="anaesthesia" label="anesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q84585" start="52409" end="52420" title="Karl Koller (ophthalmologist)" label="Karl Koller"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="52634" end="52642" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q84938" start="52694" end="52719" title="Ernst von Fleischl-Marxow" label="Ernst von Fleischl-Marxow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139133" start="53068" end="53097" title="Cocaine intoxication" label="&amp;quot;cocaine psychosis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q133823" start="53594" end="53602" title="migraine" label="migraine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54182" end="54210" title="#The Standard Edition" label="&amp;quot;Standard Edition&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54799" end="54827" title="#The Standard Edition" label="&amp;quot;Standard Edition&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q726382" start="55581" end="55609" title="The Interpretation of Dreams" label="The Interpretation of Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q27592" start="55626" end="55662" title="The Psychopathology of Everyday Life" label="The Psychopathology of Everyday Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780990" start="55937" end="55949" title="Condensation (psychology)" label="Condensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458245" start="55954" end="55966" title="Displacement (psychology)" label="Displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756222" start="56187" end="56205" title="Pleasure principle (psychology)" label="pleasure principle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56396" end="56424" title="#The Standard Edition" label="&amp;quot;Standard Edition&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148588" start="56777" end="56795" title="The Ego and the Id" label="The Ego and the Id"/>
<link wikidata="Q486893" start="56855" end="56876" title="id, ego and super-ego" label="id, ego and super-ego"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56999" end="57001" title="Id, ego and super-ego#Id" label="id"/>
<link wikidata="Q11009445" start="57040" end="57046" title="Drive theory" label="drives"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57269" end="57272" title="Id, ego and super-ego#Ego" label="ego"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57281" end="57290" title="Id, ego and super-ego#Superego" label="super-ego"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149866" start="58873" end="58896" title="polymorphous perversity" label="polymorphous perversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496249" start="59005" end="59009" title="oral stage" label="oral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999681" start="59015" end="59019" title="anal stage" label="anal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480413" start="59029" end="59036" title="phallic stage" label="phallic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699232" start="59077" end="59090" title="latency stage" label="latency stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q590919" start="59275" end="59298" title="genital stage" label="adult genital sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q181032" start="59318" end="59326" title="neurosis" label="neurosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q626217" start="59331" end="59341" title="perversion" label="perversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q217249" start="59476" end="59487" title="Sublimation (psychology)" label="sublimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131246" start="59574" end="59589" title="Oedipus complex" label="Oedipus complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q110877008" start="59793" end="59803" title="castration complex" label="castration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147957" start="60002" end="60011" title="Ego ideal" label="Ego ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148588" start="60599" end="60617" title="The Ego and the Id" label="The Ego and the Id"/>
<link wikidata="Q70258" start="61083" end="61097" title="Georg Groddeck" label="Georg Groddeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064" start="61221" end="61229" title="hedonism" label="hedonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866472" start="61452" end="61469" title="defence mechanism" label="defence mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q25556154" start="61481" end="61487" title="denial" label="denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458245" start="61531" end="61543" title="displacement (psychology)" label="displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q178066" start="62039" end="62045" title="libido" label="libido"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570600" start="62054" end="62065" title="death drive" label="death drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q78872" start="62256" end="62267" title="Paul Federn" label="Paul Federn"/>
<link wikidata="Q466271" start="62412" end="62441" title="Beyond the Pleasure Principle" label="Beyond the Pleasure Principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299806" start="63543" end="63563" title="repetition compulsion" label="compulsion to repeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656306" start="64787" end="64796" title="decathexis" label="decathect"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149866" start="65473" end="65496" title="polymorphous perversity" label="polymorphous perversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="65503" end="65511" title="bisexuality" label="bisexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q131246" start="65595" end="65610" title="Oedipus complex" label="Oedipus complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q110877008" start="65777" end="65795" title="castration complex" label="castration complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880" start="66296" end="66302" title="vagina" label="vagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q873072" start="66403" end="66411" title="clitoris" label="clitoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q738728" start="66549" end="66559" title="penis envy" label="penis envy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181032" start="66722" end="66730" title="neurosis" label="neurosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q144119" start="66746" end="66754" title="hysteria" label="hysteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q71020" start="67180" end="67192" title="Karen Horney" label="Karen Horney"/>
<link wikidata="Q476325" start="67200" end="67231" title="Berlin Psychoanalytic Institute" label="Berlin Psychoanalytic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q82999" start="67586" end="67599" title="Melanie Klein" label="Melanie Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q221870" start="67604" end="67616" title="Ernest Jones" label="Ernest Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493035" start="67643" end="67657" title="phallogocentrism" label="phallocentrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157793" start="67766" end="67781" title="Jacqueline Rose" label="Jacqueline Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="68776" end="68788" title="Monotheism" label="monotheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q601444" start="68877" end="68891" title="pater familias" label="pater familias"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="69060" end="69066" title="reason" label="reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q181032" start="69197" end="69205" title="Neurosis" label="neurotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q910769" start="69223" end="69238" title="Totem and Taboo" label="Totem and Taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10345565" start="69302" end="69311" title="patricide" label="patricide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167737" start="69411" end="69436" title="The Future of an Illusion" label="The Future of an Illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170621" start="69888" end="69920" title="Civilization and Its Discontents" label="Civilization and Its Discontents"/>
<link wikidata="Q47162" start="70062" end="70076" title="Romain Rolland" label="Romain Rolland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195449" start="70352" end="70372" title="Moses and Monotheism" label="Moses and Monotheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="70400" end="70405" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q744344" start="70509" end="70527" title="reaction formation" label="reaction formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="70635" end="70649" title="Eucharist" label="Holy Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570600" start="70887" end="70895" title="Death drive" label="Thanatos"/>
<link wikidata="Q49447" start="71129" end="71138" title="worldview" label="worldview"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="71155" end="71162" title="stoicism" label="stoical"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="71163" end="71171" title="humanism" label="humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="71535" end="71547" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q183493" start="71763" end="71772" title="Darwinism" label="Darwinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="71777" end="71784" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q940923" start="72889" end="72902" title="psychodynamic" label="psychodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977685" start="72971" end="72983" title="neo-Freudian" label="neo-Freudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q152393" start="73004" end="73016" title="Alfred Adler" label="Alfred Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q84172" start="73018" end="73027" title="Otto Rank" label="Otto Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q71020" start="73029" end="73041" title="Karen Horney" label="Karen Horney"/>
<link wikidata="Q354331" start="73043" end="73063" title="Harry Stack Sullivan" label="Harry Stack Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57085" start="73068" end="73079" title="Erich Fromm" label="Erich Fromm"/>
<link wikidata="Q169906" start="73427" end="73440" title="Jacques Lacan" label="Jacques Lacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="73475" end="73486" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656208" start="73595" end="73609" title="ego psychology" label="ego psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399895" start="73614" end="73637" title="object relations theory" label="object relations theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q84412" start="73735" end="73748" title="Wilhelm Reich" label="Wilhelm Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q60750" start="74500" end="74511" title="Fritz Perls" label="Fritz Perls"/>
<link wikidata="Q828879" start="74535" end="74550" title="Gestalt therapy" label="Gestalt therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q703849" start="75272" end="75284" title="Arthur Janov" label="Arthur Janov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854055" start="75292" end="75306" title="primal therapy" label="primal therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197755" start="76082" end="76099" title="The Primal Scream" label="The Primal Scream"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364752" start="76204" end="76214" title="Ellen Bass" label="Ellen Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410536" start="76252" end="76271" title="The Courage to Heal" label="The Courage to Heal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087101" start="76344" end="76359" title="Frederick Crews" label="Frederick Crews"/>
<link wikidata="Q11167292" start="76735" end="76751" title="recovered memory" label="recovered memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523108" start="77185" end="77196" title="Lenore Terr" label="Lenore Terr"/>
<link wikidata="Q930584" start="77527" end="77542" title="Saul Rosenzweig" label="Saul Rosenzweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q83021" start="77921" end="77939" title="empirical evidence" label="empirical evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512476" start="78449" end="78509" title="Sigmund Freud&amp;#x27;s views on homosexuality" label="Freud&amp;#x27;s theories about the development of homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q940923" start="78695" end="78709" title="psychodynamics" label="psychodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329866" start="79469" end="79484" title="Richard Webster (British author)" label="Richard Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997787" start="79495" end="79514" title="Why Freud Was Wrong" label="Why Freud Was Wrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="79609" end="79622" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="79710" end="79731" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347036" start="79910" end="79926" title="I. Bernard Cohen" label="I. Bernard Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q943092" start="80082" end="80094" title="Allan Hobson" label="Allan Hobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972200" start="80190" end="80202" title="Alfred Maury" label="Alfred Maury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786" start="80211" end="80243" title="Marie-Jean-Léon, Marquis d&amp;#x27;Hervey de Saint Denys" label="Marquis de Hervey de Saint-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q81244" start="80494" end="80505" title="Karl Popper" label="Karl Popper"/>
<link wikidata="Q15279398" start="80519" end="80555" title="Freud&amp;#x27;s Psychoanalytic Theories" label="Freud&amp;#x27;s Psychoanalytic Theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q220888" start="80574" end="80587" title="Falsifiability" label="unfalsifiable"/>
<link wikidata="Q361974" start="80663" end="80677" title="Adolf Grünbaum" label="Adolf Grünbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q60785066" start="80694" end="80727" title="The Foundations of Psychoanalysis" label="The Foundations of Psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q445939" start="80899" end="80912" title="Roger Scruton" label="Roger Scruton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="82702" end="82714" title="neuroscience" label="neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705119" start="82798" end="82817" title="neuropsychoanalysis" label="neuropsychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382575" start="82863" end="82873" title="Mark Solms" label="Mark Solms"/>
<link wikidata="Q999577" start="83266" end="83280" title="David Eagleman" label="David Eagleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q155529" start="83497" end="83508" title="Eric Kandel" label="Eric Kandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277598" start="84063" end="84082" title="The Fear of Freedom" label="The Fear of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184285" start="84182" end="84194" title="Philip Rieff" label="Philip Rieff"/>
<link wikidata="Q60030" start="84327" end="84342" title="Herbert Marcuse" label="Herbert Marcuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q778527" start="84425" end="84446" title="Eros and Civilization" label="Eros and Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827287" start="84468" end="84483" title="Lionel Trilling" label="Lionel Trilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081872" start="84539" end="84554" title="Norman O. Brown" label="Norman O. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544708" start="84564" end="84582" title="Life Against Death" label="Life Against Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="84667" end="84676" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q151843" start="84979" end="84995" title="Frankfurt School" label="Frankfurt School"/>
<link wikidata="Q301751" start="85000" end="85015" title="critical theory" label="critical theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q184226" start="85685" end="85699" title="Gilles Deleuze" label="Gilles Deleuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q352465" start="85704" end="85718" title="Félix Guattari" label="Félix Guattari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235943" start="85734" end="85746" title="Anti-Oedipus" label="Anti-Oedipus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="85794" end="85812" title="Russian Revolution" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364" start="85989" end="86005" title="Jean-Paul Sartre" label="Jean-Paul Sartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q119709" start="86064" end="86085" title="Being and Nothingness" label="Being and Nothingness"/>
<link wikidata="Q212639" start="86159" end="86180" title="Maurice Merleau-Ponty" label="Maurice Merleau-Ponty"/>
<link wikidata="Q179235" start="86230" end="86243" title="Phenomenology (philosophy)" label="phenomenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q152388" start="86251" end="86268" title="Theodor W. Adorno" label="Theodor W. Adorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q58586" start="86279" end="86293" title="Edmund Husserl" label="Edmund Husserl"/>
<link wikidata="Q192066" start="86474" end="86485" title="Paul Ricœur" label="Paul Ricœur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823131" start="86523" end="86543" title="masters of suspicion" label="masters of suspicion"/>
<link wikidata="Q182593" start="86620" end="86628" title="illusion" label="illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="86633" end="86646" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q76357" start="86665" end="86680" title="Jürgen Habermas" label="Jürgen Habermas"/>
<link wikidata="Q102686" start="86708" end="86719" title="Hermeneutics" label="hermeneutic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184169" start="86942" end="86957" title="Louis Althusser" label="Louis Althusser"/>
<link wikidata="Q331449" start="86990" end="87007" title="overdetermination" label="overdetermination"/>
<link wikidata="Q58784" start="87054" end="87061" title="Das Kapital" label="Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q193257" start="87069" end="87090" title="Jean-François Lyotard" label="Jean-François Lyotard"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="87226" end="87231" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q170078" start="87449" end="87463" title="Ernest Gellner" label="Ernest Gellner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154168" start="87969" end="87978" title="Paul Vitz" label="Paul Vitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q328945" start="88015" end="88022" title="Thomism" label="Thomism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="88397" end="88404" title="Aquinas" label="Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q178698" start="88512" end="88523" title="W. H. Auden" label="W. H. Auden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4003641" start="88553" end="88565" title="Another Time (book)" label="Another Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q345612" start="88714" end="88726" title="Harold Bloom" label="Harold Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q255463" start="88757" end="88771" title="Camille Paglia" label="Camille Paglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958586" start="88980" end="88995" title="Sexual Personae" label="Sexual Personae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="89237" end="89245" title="feminism" label="feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197" start="89247" end="89265" title="Simone de Beauvoir" label="Simone de Beauvoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q38066" start="89300" end="89314" title="Existentialism" label="existentialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q470098" start="89335" end="89349" title="The Second Sex" label="The Second Sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q234604" start="89472" end="89485" title="Betty Friedan" label="Betty Friedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438791" start="89564" end="89585" title="The Feminine Mystique" label="The Feminine Mystique"/>
<link wikidata="Q738728" start="89624" end="89634" title="penis envy" label="penis envy"/>
<link wikidata="Q292268" start="89651" end="89663" title="Kate Millett" label="Kate Millett"/>
<link wikidata="Q10351063" start="89678" end="89693" title="Sexual Politics" label="Sexual Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617946" start="89757" end="89767" title="Anne Koedt" label="Anne Koedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752967" start="89793" end="89823" title="The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm" label="The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q303555" start="90105" end="90114" title="frigidity" label="frigidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964710" start="90281" end="90296" title="Naomi Weisstein" label="Naomi Weisstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q271551" start="90467" end="90486" title="Shulamith Firestone" label="Shulamith Firestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q216098" start="90491" end="90500" title="Eva Figes" label="Eva Figes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730063" start="90511" end="90531" title="The Dialectic of Sex" label="The Dialectic of Sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195695" start="90974" end="90990" title="history of ideas" label="history of ideas"/>
<link wikidata="Q453560" start="90998" end="91013" title="Juliet Mitchell" label="Juliet Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152257" start="91306" end="91317" title="Jane Gallop" label="Jane Gallop"/>
<link wikidata="Q159876" start="91537" end="91551" title="Julia Kristeva" label="Julia Kristeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q28918" start="91556" end="91569" title="Luce Irigaray" label="Luce Irigaray"/>
<link wikidata="Q284025" start="91640" end="91654" title="Carol Gilligan" label="Carol Gilligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q123190" start="91913" end="91924" title="Jean Piaget" label="Jean Piaget"/>
<link wikidata="Q311745" start="91929" end="91946" title="Lawrence Kohlberg" label="Lawrence Kohlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q598648" start="91968" end="91982" title="Nancy Chodorow" label="Nancy Chodorow"/>
<link wikidata="Q113730321" start="92413" end="92429" title="Judith Van Herik" label="Judith Van Herik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779042" start="92594" end="92603" title="Toril Moi" label="Toril Moi"/>
<link wikidata="Q725020" start="92921" end="92942" title="Stanley Cavell" label="Stanley Cavell&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q193102" start="93433" end="93449" title="Montgomery Clift" label="Montgomery Clift"/>
<link wikidata="Q51575" start="93472" end="93483" title="John Huston" label="John Huston"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364" start="93529" end="93545" title="Jean-Paul Sartre" label="Jean-Paul Sartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="93740" end="93743" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503244" start="93781" end="93819" title="Freud (miniseries)" label="&amp;quot;Freud: the Life of a Dream&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q211831" start="93829" end="93841" title="David Suchet" label="David Suchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q188159" start="93914" end="93932" title="A Dangerous Method" label="A Dangerous Method"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="93979" end="93988" title="Carl Jung" label="Carl Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q515274" start="94010" end="94029" title="Christopher Hampton" label="Christopher Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242981" start="94113" end="94122" title="John Kerr (author)" label="John Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q171363" start="94124" end="94139" title="Viggo Mortensen" label="Viggo Mortensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57147" start="94156" end="94174" title="Michael Fassbender" label="Michael Fassbender"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763420" start="94244" end="94271" title="The Seven-Per-Cent Solution" label="The Seven-Per-Cent Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8312" start="94281" end="94295" title="Nicholas Meyer" label="Nicholas Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="94369" end="94384" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q82332636" start="94507" end="94524" title="Freud (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Freud&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q583271" start="94637" end="94643" title="Mediumship" label="medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742358" start="94798" end="94826" title="The Interpretation of Murder" label="The Interpretation of Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344078" start="94836" end="94849" title="Jed Rubenfeld" label="Jed Rubenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769812" start="94852" end="94868" title="Mark St. Germain" label="Mark St. Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="94951" end="94962" title="C. S. Lewis" label="C. S. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792688" start="95364" end="95378" title="Armand Nicholi" label="Armand Nicholi"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="95411" end="95414" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q116032513" start="95466" end="95491" title="Freud&amp;#x27;s Last Session" label="Freud&amp;#x27;s Last Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q65932" start="95534" end="95549" title="Anthony Hopkins" label="Anthony Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125895" start="95617" end="95637" title="Lovesick (1983 film)" label="&amp;quot;Lovesick&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q103894" start="95647" end="95660" title="Alec Guinness" label="Alec Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q310343" start="95743" end="95755" title="Dudley Moore" label="Dudley Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q795042" start="95824" end="95865" title="Bill &amp;amp; Ted&amp;#x27;s Excellent Adventure" label="Bill &amp;amp; Ted&amp;#x27;s Excellent Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356283" start="95886" end="95896" title="Rod Loomis" label="Rod Loomis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19598219" start="96109" end="96119" title="On Aphasia" label="On Aphasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938821" start="96139" end="96158" title="Studies on Hysteria" label="Studies on Hysteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q84430" start="96183" end="96195" title="Josef Breuer" label="Josef Breuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q726382" start="96210" end="96238" title="The Interpretation of Dreams" label="The Interpretation of Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q27592" start="96350" end="96386" title="The Psychopathology of Everyday Life" label="The Psychopathology of Everyday Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198113" start="96406" end="96449" title="Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious" label="Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q673747" start="96469" end="96508" title="Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality" label="Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035556" start="96528" end="96571" title="Delusion and Dream in Jensen&amp;#x27;s Gradiva" label="Delusion and Dream in Jensen&amp;#x27;s Gradiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q669072" start="96643" end="96687" title="Leonardo da Vinci, A Memory of His Childhood" label="Leonardo da Vinci, A Memory of His Childhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q910769" start="96707" end="96787" title="Totem and Taboo" label="Totem and Taboo: Resemblances between the Psychic Lives of Savages and Neurotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048122" start="96810" end="96850" title="Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis" label="Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q466271" start="96870" end="96899" title="Beyond the Pleasure Principle" label="Beyond the Pleasure Principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427642" start="96919" end="96963" title="Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego" label="Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148588" start="96983" end="97001" title="The Ego and the Id" label="The Ego and the Id"/>
<link wikidata="Q655971" start="97074" end="97102" title="The Question of Lay Analysis" label="The Question of Lay Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167737" start="97122" end="97147" title="The Future of an Illusion" label="The Future of an Illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170621" start="97167" end="97199" title="Civilization and Its Discontents" label="Civilization and Its Discontents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195449" start="97283" end="97303" title="Moses and Monotheism" label="Moses and Monotheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002914" start="97323" end="97351" title="An Outline of Psychoanalysis" label="An Outline of Psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q734436" start="97428" end="97446" title="William Christian Bullitt Jr." label="William C. Bullitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q78729" start="97527" end="97531" title="Dora (case study)" label="Dora"/>
<link wikidata="Q78730" start="97602" end="97613" title="Herbert Graf" label="Little Hans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279554" start="97682" end="97689" title="Rat Man" label="Rat Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q62468" start="97791" end="97799" title="Daniel Paul Schreber" label="Schreber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268464" start="97860" end="97867" title="Sergei Pankejeff" label="Wolfman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085076" start="98002" end="98010" title="Christoph Haizmann" label="Haizmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220025" start="98138" end="98202" title="&amp;quot;Civilized&amp;quot; Sexual Morality and Modern Nervous Illness" label="&amp;quot;Civilized&amp;quot; Sexual Morality and Modern Nervous Illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807337" start="98582" end="98600" title="Medusa&amp;#x27;s Head" label="Medusa&amp;#x27;s Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739823" start="99027" end="99072" title="The History of the Psychoanalytic Movement" label="On the History of the Psychoanalytic Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496558" start="99180" end="99253" title="The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud" label="The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681142" start="99320" end="99334" title="James Strachey" label="James Strachey"/>
<link wikidata="Q78485" start="99358" end="99368" title="Anna Freud" label="Anna Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727526" start="99382" end="99395" title="Alix Strachey" label="Alix Strachey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328815" start="99397" end="99407" title="Alan Tyson" label="Alan Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623362" start="99450" end="99463" title="Hogarth Press" label="Hogarth Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382575" start="101548" end="101558" title="Mark Solms" label="Mark Solms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042226" start="101625" end="101639" title="Martha Bernays" label="Martha Bernays"/>
<link wikidata="Q78485" start="101773" end="101783" title="Anna Freud" label="Anna Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q84172" start="101858" end="101867" title="Otto Rank" label="Otto Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q68726" start="102025" end="102039" title="Wilhelm Fliess" label="Wilhelm Fliess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399625" start="102081" end="102106" title="Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson" label="Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="102142" end="102158" title="Carl Gustav Jung" label="Carl Gustav Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q71027" start="102279" end="102291" title="Karl Abraham" label="Karl Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q12280051" start="102371" end="102392" title="Jeanne Lampl-de Groot" label="Jeanne Lampl-de Groot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="102615" end="102639" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q116614" start="102676" end="102693" title="Ludwig Binswanger" label="Ludwig Binswanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="102857" end="102881" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="102994" end="103018" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="103131" end="103155" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="103256" end="103280" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q115868" start="103351" end="103364" title="Oskar Pfister" label="Oskar Pfister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656215" start="103413" end="103427" title="Ernst L. Freud" label="Ernst L. Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623362" start="103441" end="103454" title="Hogarth Press" label="Hogarth Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q38873" start="103525" end="103543" title="Lou Andreas-Salome" label="Lou Andreas-Salome"/>
<link wikidata="Q75868" start="103635" end="103647" title="Arnold Zweig" label="Arnold Zweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="103727" end="103735" title="Einstein" label="Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656215" start="103848" end="103862" title="Ernst L. Freud" label="Ernst L. Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496558" start="103910" end="103983" title="The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud" label="The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512477" start="103986" end="104008" title="Sigmund Freud Archives" label="Sigmund Freud Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455777" start="104011" end="104023" title="Freud Museum" label="Freud Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q694810" start="104035" end="104064" title="Sigmund Freud Museum (Vienna)" label="Sigmund Freud Museum (Vienna)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9366635" start="104067" end="104103" title="A Clinical Lesson at the Salpêtrière" label="A Clinical Lesson at the Salpêtrière"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962848" start="104106" end="104120" title="Afterwardsness" label="Afterwardsness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418757" start="104123" end="104136" title="Freudian slip" label="Freudian slip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455817" start="104139" end="104153" title="Freudo-Marxism" label="Freudo-Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q628502" start="104156" end="104174" title="School of Brentano" label="School of Brentano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076181" start="104177" end="104200" title="Hedgehog&amp;#x27;s dilemma" label="Hedgehog&amp;#x27;s dilemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965514" start="104203" end="104234" title="Narcissism of small differences" label="Narcissism of small differences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5752072" start="104237" end="104255" title="Hidden personality" label="Hidden personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q845787" start="104258" end="104289" title="Histrionic personality disorder" label="Histrionic personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395875" start="104292" end="104325" title="Psychoanalytic literary criticism" label="Psychoanalytic literary criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q940923" start="104328" end="104342" title="Psychodynamics" label="Psychodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q930584" start="104345" end="104360" title="Saul Rosenzweig" label="Saul Rosenzweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513004" start="104363" end="104384" title="Signorelli parapraxis" label="Signorelli parapraxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735275" start="104387" end="104407" title="The Freudian Coverup" label="The Freudian Coverup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142785" start="104410" end="104434" title="The Passions of the Mind" label="The Passions of the Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q633852" start="104437" end="104444" title="Uncanny" label="Uncanny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347665" start="107746" end="107761" title="Robert Michels (physician)" label="Michels, Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081872" start="108874" end="108890" title="Norman O. Brown" label="Brown, Norman O."/>
<link wikidata="Q6544708" start="108897" end="108915" title="Life Against Death" label="Life Against Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443080" start="109164" end="109177" title="Frank Cioffi" label="Cioffi, Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087101" start="109385" end="109401" title="Frederick Crews" label="Crews, Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750972" start="109409" end="109424" title="The Memory Wars" label="The Memory Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196436" start="109623" end="109637" title="Todd Dufresne" label="Dufresne, Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q115111" start="109865" end="109883" title="Henri Ellenberger" label="Ellenberger, Henri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656259" start="110055" end="110087" title="The Discovery of the Unconscious" label="The Discovery of the Unconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q170078" start="110296" end="110311" title="Ernest Gellner" label="Gellner, Ernest"/>
<link wikidata="Q361974" start="110410" end="110425" title="Adolf Grünbaum" label="Grünbaum, Adolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q60785066" start="110433" end="110466" title="The Foundations of Psychoanalysis" label="The Foundations of Psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="111197" end="111214" title="Carl Jung" label="Jung, Carl Gustav"/>
<link wikidata="Q60030" start="111455" end="111471" title="Herbert Marcuse" label="Marcuse, Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q778527" start="111479" end="111500" title="Eros and Civilization" label="Eros and Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399625" start="111574" end="111600" title="Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson" label="Masson, Jeffrey Moussaieff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714703" start="111608" end="111628" title="The Assault on Truth" label="The Assault on Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q192066" start="111836" end="111848" title="Paul Ricœur" label="Ricœur, Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503251" start="111856" end="111876" title="Freud and Philosophy" label="Freud and Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184285" start="111954" end="111967" title="Philip Rieff" label="Rieff, Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645748" start="112028" end="112040" title="Paul Roazen" label="Roazen, Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678589" start="112447" end="112464" title="David Stannard" label="Stannard, David E"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329866" start="112581" end="112597" title="Richard Webster (British author)" label="Webster, Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997787" start="112605" end="112624" title="Why Freud Was Wrong" label="Why Freud Was Wrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q614749" start="112699" end="112716" title="Richard Wollheim" label="Wollheim, Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087101" start="112916" end="112932" title="Frederick Crews" label="Crews, Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656215" start="113022" end="113037" title="Ernst Freud" label="Freud, Ernst L."/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="113335" end="113358" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="26746" wikidata="Q1211" url="?curid=26746" title="South Dakota">
<text>South Dakota (; Sioux: , ) is a landlocked state in the North Central region of the United States. It is also part of the Great Plains. South Dakota is named after the Dakota Sioux tribe, which comprises a large portion of the population — with nine reservations currently in the state — and has historically dominated the territory. South Dakota is the 17th-largest by area, but the fifth-least populous, and the fifth-least densely populated of the 50 United States. Pierre is the state capital, and Sioux Falls, with a population of about 213,900, is South Dakota&#x27;s most populous city. The state is bisected by the Missouri River, dividing South Dakota into two geographically and socially distinct halves, known to residents as &quot;East River&quot; and &quot;West River&quot;. South Dakota is bordered by North Dakota to the north, Minnesota to the east, Iowa to the southeast, Nebraska to the south, Wyoming to the west, and Montana to the northwest.

Humans have inhabited the area for several millennia, with the Sioux becoming dominant by the early 19th century. In the late 19th century, European-American settlement intensified after a gold rush in the Black Hills and the construction of railroads from the east. Encroaching miners and settlers triggered a number of Indian wars, ending with the Wounded Knee Massacre in 1890. As the southern part of the former Dakota Territory, South Dakota became a state on November 2, 1889, simultaneously with North Dakota. They are the 39th and 40th states admitted to the union; President Benjamin Harrison shuffled the statehood papers before signing them so that no one could tell which became a state first.

Key events in the 20th century included the Dust Bowl and Great Depression, increased federal spending during the 1940s and 1950s for agriculture and defense, and an industrialization of agriculture that has reduced family farming. Eastern South Dakota is home to most of the state&#x27;s population, and the area&#x27;s fertile soil is used to grow a variety of crops. West of the Missouri River, ranching is the predominant agricultural activity, and the economy is more dependent on tourism and defense spending. Most of the Native American reservations are in West River. The Black Hills, a group of low pine-covered mountains sacred to the Sioux, is in the southwest part of the state. Mount Rushmore, a major tourist destination, is there. South Dakota has a temperate continental climate, with four distinct seasons and precipitation levels ranging from moderate in the east to semi-arid in the west. The state&#x27;s ecology features species typical of a North American grassland biome.

While several Democrats have historically represented South Dakota for multiple terms in both chambers of Congress, the state government is largely controlled by the Republican Party, whose nominees have carried South Dakota in each of the last 14 presidential elections. Historically dominated by an agricultural economy and a rural lifestyle, South Dakota has recently sought to diversify its economy in other areas to both attract and retain residents. South Dakota&#x27;s history and rural character still strongly influence the state&#x27;s culture.

==History==


=== Early history ===
Humans have lived in what is today South Dakota for several thousand years. The first inhabitants were Paleoindian hunter-gatherers, and disappeared from the area around 5000 BC. Between 500 AD and 800 AD, a semi-nomadic people known as the Mound Builders lived in central and eastern South Dakota. In the 14th century, the Crow Creek Massacre occurred, in which several hundred men, women, and children were killed near the Missouri River.

By 1500, the Arikara (or Ree) had settled in much of the Missouri River valley. European contact with the area began in 1743, when the LaVérendrye brothers explored the region. The LaVérendrye group buried a plate near the site of modern-day Pierre, claiming the region for France as part of greater Louisiana. In 1762 the entire region became part of the Spanish Louisiana until 1802. By the early 19th century, the Sioux had largely replaced the Arikara as the dominant group in the area.

=== American settlement and statehood ===
In 1803, the United States purchased the Louisiana Territory, an area that included most of South Dakota, from Napoleon Bonaparte, and President Thomas Jefferson organized the Lewis and Clark Expedition to explore the region. In 1817, an American fur trading post was set up at present-day Fort Pierre, beginning continuous American settlement of the area. In 1855, the U.S. Army bought Fort Pierre but abandoned it in 1857 in favor of Fort Randall to the south. Settlement by Americans and Europeans was by this time increasing rapidly, and in 1858 the Yankton Sioux signed the 1858 Treaty, ceding most of present-day eastern South Dakota to the United States.

Land speculators founded two of eastern South Dakota&#x27;s largest present-day cities: Sioux Falls in 1856 and Yankton in 1859. In 1861, the Dakota Territory was established by the United States government (this initially included North Dakota, South Dakota, and parts of Montana and Wyoming). Settlement of the area, mostly by people from the eastern United States as well as western and northern Europe, increased rapidly, especially after the completion of an eastern railway link to Yankton in 1873.

In 1874, gold was discovered in the Black Hills during a military expedition led by George A. Custer and miners and explorers began illegally entering land promised to the Lakota. Custer&#x27;s expedition took place despite the fact that the Sioux had been granted the entire western half of present-day South Dakota (West River) in 1868 by the Treaty of Laramie as part of the Great Sioux Reservation. The Sioux declined to grant mining rights or land in the Black Hills, and war broke out after the U.S. failed to stop white miners and settlers from entering the region. Eventually the U.S. won and broke up the Great Sioux Reservation into five reservations, settling the Lakota there. In 1980 the Supreme Court and Congress ordered compensation to be offered but the Lakota still refuse to accept it, insisting on return of their land.


A growing population in the Dakota Territory caused political dissatisfaction between northern and southern territory residents, with the southern half being always more populated. Following the territorial capital being moved from Yankton to Bismarck in the northern part, calls for dividing the territory increased. South Dakota held constitutional conventions in 1883, 1885, and 1889. Other account(s) state that the real reason for the split was a political lure for four Republican senators instead of two from the Republican dominated Dakota Territory and in their push to split the territory, Republican congressmen also ignored the uncomfortable fact that much of the land in the anticipated state of South Dakota belonged to the Sioux. Eventually, in the 1887 general election, Dakota Territory residents voted for the division, so it was divided in half and Republican President Benjamin Harrison signed proclamations formally admitting South Dakota and North Dakota to the union on November 2, 1889. Harrison had the papers shuffled to obscure which one was signed first and the order went unrecorded.

On December 29, 1890, the Wounded Knee Massacre occurred on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation. Commonly cited as the last major armed conflict between the United States and the Lakota Sioux Nation, the massacre resulted in the deaths of at least 146 Sioux, many of them women and children. 31 U.S. soldiers were also killed in the conflict.

=== 20th century and beyond ===
During the 1930s, several economic and climatic conditions combined with disastrous results for South Dakota. A lack of rainfall, extremely high temperatures and inappropriate cultivation techniques produced what was known as the Dust Bowl in South Dakota and several other plains states. Fertile topsoil was blown away in massive dust storms, and several harvests were completely ruined. The experiences of the Dust Bowl, coupled with local bank foreclosures and the general economic effects of the Great Depression, resulted in many South Dakotans leaving the state. The population of South Dakota declined by more than 7% between 1930 and 1940.

Economic stability returned with the U.S. entry into World War II in 1941, when demand for the state&#x27;s agricultural and industrial products grew as the nation mobilized for war. In 1944, the Pick–Sloan Plan was passed as part of the Flood Control Act of 1944 by the U.S. Congress, resulting in the construction of six large dams on the Missouri River, four of which are at least partially in South Dakota. Flood control, hydroelectricity, and recreational opportunities such as boating and fishing are provided by the dams and their reservoirs.

In recent decades, South Dakota has been transformed from a state dominated by agriculture to one with a more diversified economy. The tourism industry has grown considerably since the mid-twentieth century, with the Black Hills becoming more important as a destination. The financial service industry began to grow in the state as well, with Citibank moving its credit card operations from New York to Sioux Falls in 1981, a move that has been followed by several other financial companies. South Dakota was the first state to eliminate caps on interest rates.

In 2007, the site of the recently closed Homestake gold mine near Lead was chosen as the location of a new underground research facility, the Deep Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory. Despite a growing state population and recent economic development, many rural areas have been struggling over the past 50 years with locally declining populations and the emigration of educated young adults to larger South Dakota cities, such as Rapid City or Sioux Falls, or to other states. Mechanization and consolidation of agriculture has contributed greatly to the declining number of smaller family farms and the resulting economic and demographic challenges facing rural towns. Gallup-Sharecare State of American Well-Being Rankings in 2018 named South Dakota the happiest, healthiest state in the United States.

==Geography==

South Dakota is in the north-central United States, and is considered a part of the Midwest by the U.S. Census Bureau; it is also part of the Great Plains region. The culture, economy, and geography of western South Dakota have more in common with the West than the Midwest. South Dakota has a total area of , making the state the 17th largest in the Union.

Black Elk Peak, formerly named Harney Peak, with an elevation of , is the state&#x27;s highest point, while the shoreline of Big Stone Lake is the lowest, with an elevation of . South Dakota is bordered to the north by North Dakota; to the south by Nebraska; to the east by Iowa and Minnesota; and to the west by Wyoming and Montana. The geographical center of the U.S. is west of Castle Rock in Butte County. The North American continental pole of inaccessibility is between Allen and Kyle, from the nearest coastline.

The Missouri River is the largest and longest river in the state. Other major South Dakota rivers include the Cheyenne, James, Big Sioux, and White Rivers. Eastern South Dakota has many natural lakes, mostly created by periods of glaciation. Additionally, dams on the Missouri River create four large reservoirs: Lake Oahe, Lake Sharpe, Lake Francis Case, and Lewis and Clark Lake.

===Regions and geology===

South Dakota can generally be divided into three regions: eastern South Dakota, western South Dakota, and the Black Hills. The Missouri River serves as a boundary in terms of geographic, social, and political differences between eastern and western South Dakota. The geography of the Black Hills, long considered sacred by Native Americans, differs from its surroundings to such an extent it can be considered separate from the rest of western South Dakota. At times the Black Hills are combined with the rest of western South Dakota, and people often refer to the resulting two regions divided by the Missouri River as West River and East River.
Eastern South Dakota generally features higher precipitation and lower topography than the western part of the state. Smaller geographic regions of this area include the Coteau des Prairies, the Dissected Till Plains, and the James River Valley. The Coteau des Prairies is a plateau bordered on the east by the Minnesota River Valley and on the west by the James River Basin. Further west, the James River Basin is mostly low, flat, highly eroded land, following the flow of the James River through South Dakota from north to south. The Dissected Till Plains, an area of rolling hills and fertile soil that covers much of Iowa and Nebraska, extends into the southeastern corner of South Dakota. Layers deposited during the Pleistocene epoch, starting around two million years ago, cover most of eastern South Dakota. These are the youngest rock and sediment layers in the state, the product of several successive periods of glaciation which deposited a large amount of rocks and soil, known as till, over the area.

The Great Plains cover most of the western two-thirds of South Dakota. West of the Missouri River the landscape becomes more arid and rugged, consisting of rolling hills, plains, ravines, and steep flat-topped hills called buttes. In the south, east of the Black Hills, lie the South Dakota Badlands. Erosion from the Black Hills, marine skeletons which fell to the bottom of a large shallow sea that once covered the area, and volcanic material all contribute to the geology of this area.
The Black Hills are in the southwestern part of South Dakota and extend into Wyoming. This range of low mountains covers , with peaks that rise from 2,000 to 4,000 feet (600 to 1,200 m) above their bases. The Black Hills are the location of Black Elk Peak (7,242 ft or 2,207 m above sea level), the highest point in South Dakota and also the highest point in the United States east of the Rocky Mountains. Two-billion-year-old Precambrian formations, the oldest rocks in the state, form the central core of the Black Hills. Formations from the Paleozoic Era form the outer ring of the Black Hills; these were created between roughly 540 and 250 million years ago. This area features rocks such as limestone, which were deposited here when the area formed the shoreline of an ancient inland sea.

===Ecology===

Much of South Dakota (except for the Black Hills area) is dominated by a temperate grassland biome. Although grasses and crops cover most of this region, deciduous trees such as cottonwoods, elms, and willows are common near rivers and in shelter belts.
Mammals in this area include bison, deer, pronghorn, coyotes, and prairie dogs. The state bird, the ring-necked pheasant, has adapted well to the area after being introduced from China. Growing populations of bald eagles are spread throughout the state, especially near the Missouri River. Rivers and lakes of the grasslands support populations of walleye, carp, pike, bass, and other species. The Missouri River also contains the pre-historic paddlefish.

Due to a higher elevation and level of precipitation, the Black Hills ecology differs significantly from that of the plains. The mountains are thickly blanketed by various types of pines, including ponderosa and lodgepole pines, as well as spruces. Black Hills mammals include deer, elk (wapiti), bighorn sheep, mountain goats, pine marten, and mountain lions, while the streams and lakes contain several species of trout.

===Climate===
South Dakota has a continental climate with four distinct seasons, ranging from cold, dry winters to warm and semi-humid summers. During the summers, the state&#x27;s average high temperature is often close to , although it cools to near at night. It is not unusual for South Dakota to have severe hot, dry spells in the summer with the temperature climbing above several times a year. Winters are cold with January high temperatures averaging below freezing and low temperatures averaging below in most of the state. The highest recorded temperature is at Usta on July 15, 2006 and the lowest recorded temperature is at McIntosh on February 17, 1936.

Average annual precipitation in South Dakota ranges from semi-arid conditions in the northwestern part of the state (around ) to semi-humid around the southeast portion of the state (around ), although a small area centered on Lead in the Black Hills has the highest precipitation at nearly per year.

South Dakota summers bring frequent, sometimes severe, thunderstorms with high winds, thunder, and hail. The state&#x27;s eastern part is often considered part of Tornado Alley, and South Dakota experiences an average of 30 tornadoes each year. Severe blizzards and ice storms often occur during winter.


===National parks and monuments===

South Dakota has several sites administered by the National Park Service. Two national parks have been established in the state, both in its southwestern region. Wind Cave National Park, established in 1903 in the Black Hills, has an extensive cave network and is home to a large herd of bison. Badlands National Park was established in 1978, and features an eroded, brightly colored landscape surrounded by semi-arid grasslands. Mount Rushmore National Memorial in the Black Hills was established in 1925. The sculpture of four U.S. Presidents was carved into the mountainside by sculptor Gutzon Borglum.

Other areas managed by the National Park Service include Jewel Cave National Monument near Custer, the Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail, the Minuteman Missile National Historic Site, which features a decommissioned nuclear missile silo and a separate missile control area several miles away, and the Missouri National Recreational River. The Crazy Horse Memorial is a large mountainside sculpture near Mount Rushmore being built using private funds. The Mammoth Site near Hot Springs is another privately owned attraction in the Black Hills. It is a working paleontological dig and has one of the world&#x27;s largest concentrations of mammoth remains.

==Demographics==

===Population===
At the 2022 estimate South Dakota&#x27;s population was 909,824 on July 1, 2022, a 2.61% increase since the 2020 United States census.

In 2020, 6.5% of South Dakota&#x27;s population was reported as under 5, 24.5% under 18, and 17.7% were 65 or older. Females made up approximately 49.7% of the population. As of the 2020 census, South Dakota ranked fifth-lowest in the nation in population and population density, only North Dakota, Alaska, Vermont, and Wyoming have fewer residents.

Of the people residing in South Dakota, 65.7% were born in South Dakota, 31.4% were born in another U.S. state, 0.6% were born in Puerto Rico, U.S. Island areas, or born abroad to American parent(s), and 2.3% were born in another country. The top countries of origin for South Dakota&#x27;s immigrants and refugees in 2018 were Guatemala, the Philippines, Mexico, Sudan and Ethiopia.

The center of population of South Dakota is in Buffalo County, in the unincorporated county seat of Gann Valley.

According to HUD&#x27;s 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 1,389 homeless people in South Dakota.

In 2022, South Dakota had the lowest drug overdose death rate of any US state, at 11.3 per 100,000 people.

===Race or Hispanic Origin (U.S. Census)===
According to the 2022 census estimate, the racial composition of the population was:
* 84.2% White alone, percent
* 2.6% Black or African American alone, percent
* 8.5% American Indian and Alaska Native alone, percent
* 1.8% Asian alone, percent
* 0.1% Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone, percent
* 2.8% Two or More Races, percent
* 4.9% Hispanic or Latino, percent
* 80.7% White alone, not Hispanic or Latino, percent
Source:

Ethnically, 4.9% of South Dakota&#x27;s population was of Hispanic, Latino, or Spanish origin (they may be of any race). Ethnicity for the remainder of the population is not similarly accounted by the federal government.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, 25.4% of South Dakota&#x27;s population younger than age 1 were &#x27;minorities&#x27; as of 2011, meaning they had at least one parent who was not non-Hispanic white.

=== Ethnicity and Place of Origin ===
As of 2000, the five largest ancestry groups in South Dakota are German (40.7%), Norwegian (15.3%), Irish (10.4%), Native American (8.3%), and English (7.1%).

German Americans are the largest ancestry group in most parts of the state, especially in East River (east of the Missouri River), although there are also large Scandinavian-descended populations in some counties. South Dakota has the nation&#x27;s largest population of Hutterites, a communal Anabaptist group which emigrated in 1874 from German-speaking villages in what today is Ukraine but at that time was part of the Russian Empire.

American Indians, largely Lakota, Dakota, and Nakota (Sioux), are predominant in several counties and constitute 20 percent of the population in West River. The seven large Indian reservations in the state occupy an area much diminished from their former Great Sioux Reservation of West River, which the federal government had once allocated to the Sioux tribes. South Dakota has the third-highest proportion of Native Americans of any state, behind Alaska and New Mexico.

Five of the state&#x27;s counties are wholly within the boundaries of sovereign Indian reservations. Because of the limitations of climate and land, and isolation from urban areas with more employment opportunities, living standards on many South Dakota reservations are often far below the national average; Ziebach County ranked as the poorest county in the nation in 2009. The unemployment rate in Fort Thompson, on the Crow Creek Reservation, is 70%, and 21% of households lack plumbing or basic kitchen appliances. A 1995 study by the U.S. Census Bureau found 58% of homes on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation did not have a telephone. The reservations&#x27; isolation also inhibits their ability to generate revenue from gaming casinos, an avenue that has proved profitable for many tribes closer to urban centers.

===Languages===
In 1995, the legislature passed a law to make English the &quot;common language&quot; of the state. Since 2019, &quot;the language of the Great Sioux Nation, three dialects, Dakota, Lakota, and Nakota&quot; is the official indigenous language. As of the 2000 census, 1.90% of the population age5 or older speak German at home, while 1.51% speak Lakota or Dakota, and 1.43% Spanish. As of 2010, 93.46% (692,504) of South Dakota residents age5 and older spoke English as their primary language. 6.54% of the population spoke a language other than English. 2.06% (15,292) of the population spoke Spanish, 1.39% (10,282) spoke Dakota, and 1.37% (10,140) spoke German. Other languages spoken included Vietnamese (0.16%), Chinese (0.12%), and Russian (0.10%).

===Growth and rural flight===
Over the last several decades, the population in many rural areas has declined in South Dakota, in common with other Great Plains states. The change has been characterized as &quot;rural flight&quot; as family farming has declined. Young people have moved to cities for other employment. This trend has continued in recent years, with 30 of South Dakota&#x27;s counties losing population between the 1990 and the 2000 census. During that time, nine counties had a population loss of greater than 10%, with Harding County, in the northwest corner of the state, losing nearly 19% of its population. Low birth rates and a lack of younger immigration has caused the median age of many of these counties to increase. In 24 counties, at least 20% of the population is over the age of 65, compared with a national rate of 12.8%.

The effect of rural flight has not been spread evenly through South Dakota, however. Although most rural counties and small towns have lost population, the Sioux Falls area, the larger counties along Interstate 29, the Black Hills, and many Indian reservations have all gained population. As the reservations have exercised more sovereignty, some Sioux have returned to them from urban areas. Lincoln County near Sioux Falls was the seventh fastest-growing county (by percentage) in the United States in 2010. The growth in these areas has compensated for losses in the rest of the state. South Dakota&#x27;s total population continues to increase steadily, albeit at a slower rate than the national average.

A one-night stay in South Dakota is all that is necessary to qualify a person to claim residency in South Dakota. Residency in South Dakota has therefore become very popular among full-time travelers (persons who reside in recreational vehicles, aboard cruise ships, etc.).

===Religion===
According to the Public Religion Research Institute in 2020, 73% of the adult population were Christian. Per the Pew Research Center&#x27;s separate 2014 study, the largest religious denominations in Christianity by number of adherents as a percentage of South Dakota&#x27;s population in 2014 were the Catholic Church with 22 percent, evangelical Protestants with 25 percent, and mainline Protestants with 32 percent. Together, all kinds of Protestants accounted for 57 percent. Those unaffiliated with any religion represented 18 percent of the population. The breakdown of other religions was &lt;1% Muslim, &lt;1% Hindu and 1% Buddhist. The number of Jewish people in South Dakota is under 400, the lowest total in any of the fifty states.

The largest Christian denominations by number of adherents in 2010 were the Roman Catholic Church with 148,883 members; the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA) with 112,649 members; and the United Methodist Church (UMC) with 36,020 members. The ELCA and UMC are specific denominations within the broader terms &#x27;Lutheran&#x27; and &#x27;Methodist&#x27;, respectively. Through the Association of Religion Data Archives in 2020, Catholicism remained the largest Christian denomination, followed by the ELCA. Non-denominational Protestants numbered 63,992, becoming the third largest group of Christians throughout the state.

In 2022, the Public Religion Research Institute determined 72% of the state were Christian altogether, though Protestants were 48%, Catholics 22%, and Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses 2%. The religiously unaffiliated declined from 22% to 21% between 2020 and 2022. Other non-Christian faith groups with a substantial presence in the South Dakota were Buddhism (3%), New Age (3%), and others at 1% altogether. Through the Association of Religion Data Archives 2020 study, there were 978 adherents to the Baha&#x27;i Faith and 535 Muslims.

==Economy==

The current-dollar gross state product of South Dakota was $39.8 billion as of 2010, the fifth-smallest total state output in the U.S. The per capita personal income was $38,865 in 2010, ranked 25th in the U.S., and 12.5% of the population was below the poverty line in 2008. CNBC&#x27;s list of &quot;Top States for Business for 2010&quot; has recognized South Dakota as the seventh-best state in the nation. In July 2011, the state&#x27;s unemployment rate was 4.7%.

The service industry is the largest economic contributor in South Dakota. This sector includes the retail, finance, and healthcare industries. Citibank, which was at one time the largest bank holding company in the United States, established national banking operations in South Dakota in 1981 to take advantage of favorable banking regulations. Today the trust fund industry manages hundreds of billions of dollars and is known as tax haven for foreigners. Government spending is another important segment of the state&#x27;s economy, providing over ten percent of the gross state product. Ellsworth Air Force Base, near Rapid City, is the second-largest single employer in the state.

Agriculture has historically been the key component of the South Dakota economy. Although other industries have expanded rapidly in recent decades, agricultural production is still very important to the state&#x27;s economy, especially in rural areas. The five most valuable agricultural products in South Dakota are cattle, corn (maize), soybeans, wheat, and hogs. Agriculture-related industries such as meat packing and ethanol production also have a considerable economic impact on the state. South Dakota is the sixth leading ethanol-producing state in the nation.

Another important sector in South Dakota&#x27;s economy is tourism. Many travel to view the attractions of the state, particularly those in the Black Hills region, such as historic Deadwood, Mount Rushmore, and the nearby state and national parks. One of the largest tourist events in the state is the annual Sturgis Motorcycle Rally. The five-day event drew over 739,000 attendees in 2015; significant considering the state has a total population of 850,000. In 2006, tourism provided an estimated 33,000 jobs in the state and contributed over two billion dollars to the economy of South Dakota.

==Transportation==

South Dakota has of highways, roads, and streets, along with of interstate highways. Two major interstates pass through South Dakota: Interstate 90, which runs east and west through the southern half of the state; and Interstate 29, running north and south in the eastern portion of the state. The I-29 corridor features generally higher rates of population and economic growth than areas in eastern South Dakota further from the interstate.

Also in the state are the shorter Interstates 190, a spur into central Rapid City, and 229, a loop around southern and eastern Sioux Falls. Several major U.S. highways pass through the state. U.S. routes 12, 14, 16, 18 and 212 travel east and west, while U.S. routes 81, 83, 85 and 281 run north and south. South Dakota and Montana are the only states sharing a land border that is not traversed by a paved road.

South Dakota contains two National Scenic Byways. The Peter Norbeck National Scenic Byway is in the Black Hills, while the Native American Scenic Byway runs along the Missouri River in the north-central part of the state. Other scenic byways include the Badlands Loop Scenic Byway, the Spearfish Canyon Scenic Byway, and the Wildlife Loop Road Scenic Byway.

Railroads have played an important role in South Dakota transportation since the mid-19th century. Some of railroad track were built in South Dakota during the late 19th century and early 20th century, but only are active. BNSF is the largest railroad in South Dakota; the Rapid City, Pierre &amp; Eastern Railroad (formerly the Dakota, Minnesota and Eastern) is the state&#x27;s other major carrier. Other state carriers include Dakota Southern Railway, D&amp;I Railroad, Ellis &amp; Eastern, Sunflour Railroad, CPKC, and the Sisseton Milbank Railroad. Rail transportation in the state is mostly freight, but there are two passenger heritage railroads: the Black Hills Central and the Prairie Village, Herman, and Milwaukee. However, South Dakota is one of the two contiguous states that lack Amtrak service. (South Dakota is the only contiguous state that &quot;never had&quot; Amtrak—Wyoming used to be served by the San Francisco Zephyr and the Pioneer.)

South Dakota&#x27;s largest commercial airports in terms of passenger traffic are the Sioux Falls Regional Airport and Rapid City Regional Airport. Delta Air Lines, Frontier Airlines, and Allegiant Airlines, as well as commuter airlines using the brand affiliation with major airlines serve the two largest airports. Several other cities in the state also have commercial air service: Aberdeen Regional Airport, Pierre Regional Airport, and Watertown Regional Airport, some of which are subsidized by the Essential Air Service program.

Public transit played a large role in the development of cities in South Dakota. There were seven cities with a streetcar system in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, however, all of these were discontinued over time. Today, only three fixed route public transit systems exist in the state, those being in Sioux Falls, Rapid City and on the Yankton Reservation.

==Government and politics==


===Government===

Like other U.S. states, the structure of the government of South Dakota follows the same separation of powers as the federal government, with executive, legislative, and judicial branches. The structure of the state government is laid out in the Constitution of South Dakota, the highest law in the state. The constitution may be amended by a majority vote of both houses of the legislature, or by voter initiative.

The Governor of South Dakota occupies the executive branch of the state government. The current governor is Larry Rhoden, a Republican. The state constitution gives the governor the power to sign into law or veto bills passed by the state legislature, to serve as commander-in-chief of the South Dakota National Guard, to appoint a cabinet, and to commute criminal sentences or to pardon those convicted of crimes. The governor serves for a four-year term, and may not serve more than two consecutive terms.

The state legislature is made up of two bodies, the Senate, which has 35 members, and the House of Representatives, with 70 members. South Dakota is divided into 35 legislative districts, with voters electing two representatives and one senator per district. The legislature meets for an annual session which begins on the second Tuesday in January and lasts for 30 days; it also meets if a special session is called by the governor.

The judicial branch is made up of several levels. The state supreme court, with four justices and a chief justice, is the highest court in the state. Below the supreme court are the circuit courts; 41 circuit judges serve in seven judicial circuits in the state. Below the circuit courts are the magistrate courts, which deal with lesser criminal and civil actions.

===State taxes===

As of 2005, South Dakota has the lowest per capita total state tax rate in the United States. The state does not levy personal or corporate income taxes, inheritance taxes, or taxes on intangible personal property. The state sales tax rate is 4.2 percent. Various localities have local levies so in some areas the rate is six percent. The state sales tax does not apply to sales to Indians on Indian reservations, but many reservations have a compact with the state. Businesses on the reservation collect the tax and the state refunds to the Indian Tribes the percentage of sales tax collections relating to the ratio of Indian population to total population in the county or area affected. Ad valorem property taxes are local taxes and are a large source of funding for school systems, counties, municipalities and other local government units. The South Dakota Special Tax Division regulates some taxes including cigarette and alcohol-related taxes.

===Federal representation===

South Dakota is represented at the federal level by Senator John Thune, Senator Mike Rounds, and Representative Dusty Johnson. All three are Republicans. South Dakota is one of seven states with only one seat in the U.S. House of Representatives. In United States presidential elections, South Dakota is allotted three of 538 votes in the Electoral College. As in all other states except Maine and neighboring Nebraska, South Dakota&#x27;s electoral votes are granted in a winner-take-all system.

===Politics===

South Dakota politics are generally dominated by the Republican Party. Since statehood, Republicans have carried the state&#x27;s electoral votes in all but five presidential elections: 1896, 1912 (by Theodore Roosevelt&#x27;s Progressive Party), 1932, 1936 and 1964. (Democrat George McGovern—a native South Dakotan—failed to carry his home state in 1972.) Only Alaska has been carried fewer times by a Democrat. Additionally, a Democrat has not won the governorship since 1974. As of 2024, Republicans hold a 2-to-1 voter registration advantage over Democrats and hold supermajorities in both the state House and the state Senate.

Despite the state&#x27;s general Republican and conservative leanings, Democrats have found success in various statewide elections, most notably in those involving South Dakota&#x27;s congressional representatives in Washington. American Indians have been becoming more active in state and county electoral politics. In the 2002 election, American Indian voting carried Tim Johnson as the Democratic candidate by a margin of 532 votes. Until his electoral defeat in 2004, Senator Tom Daschle was the Senate minority leader (and briefly its majority leader during Democratic control of the Senate in 2001–02). Other prominent South Dakota Democrats include former presidential nominees George McGovern and Hubert Humphrey.

In 2016, South Dakota voted for Republican nominee Donald Trump over Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton by a margin of 30%. In 2018, Republican congresswoman Kristi Noem defeated Democrat Billie Sutton in the gubernatorial election by a small margin, and Republican Dusty Johnson defeated Democrat Tim Bjorkman for the state&#x27;s at-large seat in the U.S. House of Representatives. Noem was sworn in on January 5, 2019, making her the first female governor of the state.

Contemporary political issues in South Dakota include the costs and benefits of the state lottery, South Dakota&#x27;s relatively low rankings in education spending (particularly teacher pay—recently the State Sales Tax was increased from 4% to 4.5% to finance an increase in teacher pay), and recent legislative and electoral attempts to ban abortion in the state.

A Republican-supported bill passed in March 2019 requires that all public schools display &quot;In God We Trust&quot; in a prominent location.

In a 2020 study, South Dakota was ranked as the 22nd hardest state for citizens to vote in.

==Culture==


South Dakota&#x27;s culture reflects the state&#x27;s American Indian, rural, Western, and European roots. A number of annual events celebrating the state&#x27;s ethnic and historical heritage take place around the state, such as Days of &#x27;76 in Deadwood, Czech Days in Tabor, and the annual St. Patrick&#x27;s Day and Cinco de Mayo festivities in Sioux Falls. The various tribes hold many annual pow wows at their reservations throughout the state, to which non-Native Americans are sometimes invited. Custer State Park holds an annual Buffalo Roundup, in which volunteers on horseback gather the park&#x27;s herd of around 1,500 bison.

Black Elk (Lakota) was a medicine man and heyokha, whose life spanned the transition to reservations. His accounts of the 19th-century Indian Wars and Ghost Dance movement, and his deep thoughts on personal visions and Native American religion, form the basis of the book &quot;Black Elk Speaks&quot;, first published in 1932. (Among several editions, a premier annotated edition was published in 2008.) Paul Goble, a children&#x27;s book author and illustrator, was based in the Black Hills from 1977.

Laura Ingalls Wilder, whose semi-autobiographical books are based on her experiences as a child and young adult on the frontier, is one of South Dakota&#x27;s best-known writers. She drew from her life growing up on a homestead near De Smet as the basis for five of her novels: &quot;By the Shores of Silver Lake&quot;, &quot;The Long Winter&quot;, &quot;Little Town on the Prairie&quot;, &quot;These Happy Golden Years&quot;, and &quot;The First Four Years&quot;. These gained renewed popularity in the United States when &quot;Little House on the Prairie&quot; was adapted and produced as a television series in 1974. Wilder&#x27;s daughter, Rose Wilder Lane, who became a well-known writer in her own right, was born near De Smet in 1886.

South Dakota has also produced several notable artists. Harvey Dunn grew up on a homestead near Manchester in the late 19th century. While Dunn worked most of his career as a commercial illustrator, his most famous works showed various scenes of frontier life; he completed these near the end of his career. Oscar Howe (Crow) was born on the Crow Creek Indian Reservation and won fame for his watercolor paintings. Howe was one of the first Native American painters to adopt techniques and style heavily influenced by the mid-20th century abstraction movement, rather than relying on traditional Native American styles. Terry Redlin, originally from Watertown, was an accomplished painter of rural and wildlife scenes. Many of his works are on display at the Redlin Art Center in Watertown.

==Cities and towns==


Sioux Falls is the most populous city in South Dakota, with a 2020 population of 192,517,
and a metropolitan area population of 281,958.
The city, founded in 1856, is in the southeast corner of the state. Retail, finance, and healthcare have assumed greater importance in Sioux Falls, where the economy was originally centered on agri-business and quarrying.

Rapid City, with a 2020 population of 74,703, and a metropolitan area population of 144,558, is the second-largest city in the state. It is on the eastern edge of the Black Hills, and was founded in 1876. Rapid City&#x27;s economy is largely based on tourism and defense spending, because of the proximity of many tourist attractions in the Black Hills and Ellsworth Air Force Base.

The next eight largest cities in the state, in order of descending 2010 population, are Aberdeen (28,495), Brookings (23,337), Watertown (22,655), Mitchell (15,660), Yankton (15,411), Huron (14,263), Pierre (14,091), and Spearfish (12,193). Pierre is the state capital, and Brookings and Vermillion are the locations of the state&#x27;s two largest universities (South Dakota State University and University of South Dakota, respectively). With a population of about 14,000, Pierre is the second smallest state capital in the United States. Of the ten largest cities in the state, only Rapid City and Spearfish are west of the Missouri River.

==Media==

South Dakota&#x27;s first newspaper, the &quot;Dakota Democrat&quot;, began publishing in Yankton in 1858. Today, the state&#x27;s largest newspaper is the Sioux Falls &quot;Argus Leader&quot;, with a Sunday circulation of 63,701 and a weekday circulation of 44,334. The &quot;Rapid City Journal&quot;, with a Sunday circulation of 32,638 and a weekday circulation of 27,827, is South Dakota&#x27;s second largest newspaper. The next four largest newspapers in the state are the Aberdeen &quot;American News&quot;, the &quot;Watertown Public Opinion&quot;, the &quot;Huron Plainsman&quot;, and the &quot;Brookings Register&quot;. In 1981, Tim Giago founded the &quot;Lakota Times&quot; as a newspaper for the local American Indian community on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation. The newspaper, now published in New York and known as &quot;Indian Country Today&quot;, is available in every state in the country. The &quot;Sioux City Journal&quot; also covers parts of South Dakota.

There are nine television stations broadcasting in South Dakota; South Dakota Public Television broadcasts from a number of locations around the state, while the other stations broadcast from Sioux Falls or Rapid City. The two largest television media markets in South Dakota are Sioux Falls-Mitchell, with a viewership of 246,020, and Rapid City, with a viewership of 91,070. The two markets rank as 114th and 177th largest in the United States, respectively. The state&#x27;s first television station, KELO-TV, began airing in Sioux Falls in 1953. Among KELO&#x27;s early programs was &quot;Captain 11&quot;, an afternoon children&#x27;s program. &quot;Captain 11&quot; ran from 1955 until 1996, making it the nation&#x27;s longest continuously running children&#x27;s television program.

A number of South Dakotans are famous for their work in television and publishing. Former NBC Nightly News anchor and author Tom Brokaw is from Webster and Yankton, &quot;USA Today&quot; founder Al Neuharth was from Eureka and Alpena, gameshow host Bob Barker spent much of his childhood in Mission, and entertainment news hosts Pat O&#x27;Brien and Mary Hart are from Sioux Falls.

==Education==


As of 2006, South Dakota has a total primary and secondary school enrollment of 136,872, with 120,278 of these students being educated in the public school system. There are 703 public schools in 168 school districts, giving South Dakota the highest number of schools per capita in the United States. The current high school graduation rate is 89.9%, and the average ACT score is 21.8, slightly above the national average of 21.1. 89.8% of the adult population has earned at least a high school diploma, and 25.8% has earned a bachelor&#x27;s degree or higher. South Dakota&#x27;s 2008 average public school teacher salary of $36,674 was the lowest in the nation (national average was $52,308). In 2007 South Dakota passed legislation modeled after Montana&#x27;s Indian Education for All Act (1999), mandating education about Native American tribal history, culture, and heritage in all the schools, from pre-school through college, in an effort to increase knowledge and appreciation about Indian culture among all residents of the state, as well as to reinforce Indian students&#x27; understanding of their own cultures&#x27; contributions.

The South Dakota Board of Regents, whose members are appointed by the governor, controls the six public universities in the state. South Dakota State University (SDSU), in Brookings, is the state&#x27;s largest university, with an enrollment of 12,831. The University of South Dakota (USD), in Vermillion, is the state&#x27;s oldest university, and has South Dakota&#x27;s only law school and medical school. South Dakota also has several private universities, the largest of which is Augustana University in Sioux Falls.

==Sports and recreation==
===Organized sports===

Because of its low population, South Dakota does not host any major league professional sports franchises. The state has minor league and independent league teams, all of which play in Sioux Falls or Rapid City. Sioux Falls is home to four teams: the Sioux Falls Canaries (baseball), the Sioux Falls Skyforce (basketball), the Sioux Falls Stampede (hockey), and the Sioux Falls Storm (indoor American football). The Canaries play in the American Association, and their home field is Sioux Falls Stadium. The Skyforce plays in the NBA G League and is owned by the NBA&#x27;s Miami Heat. It plays at the Sanford Pentagon. The Stampede and Storm share the Denny Sanford Premier Center. The Stampede plays in the USHL, and the Storm plays in the IFL. Rapid City has a hockey team named the Rapid City Rush that plays in the ECHL. The Rush began its inaugural season in 2008 at the Rushmore Plaza Civic Center.

Universities in South Dakota host a variety of sports programs. For many years, South Dakota was one of the only states in the country without an NCAA Division I football or basketball team. However, the South Dakota State Jackrabbits decided to move their teams from DivisionII to DivisionI in 2007, a move followed by the South Dakota Coyotes in 2011. Other universities in the state compete at the NCAA&#x27;s Division II level, or in the NAIA.

Famous South Dakota athletes include Billy Mills, Mike Miller, Mark Ellis, Becky Hammon, Brock Lesnar, Chad Greenway, and Adam Vinatieri. Mills is from the town of Pine Ridge and competed at the 1964 Summer Olympic Games in Tokyo, becoming the only American to win a gold medal in the 10,000-meter event. Miller, of Mitchell, is a two-time NBA champion who played college basketball at the University of Florida, leading them to the 2000 NCAA Championship game his sophomore year, and won the 2001 NBA rookie of the year award. Ellis, of Rapid City, played for the University of Florida and four MLB teams before retiring in 2015. Hammon, of Rapid City, played for the WNBA&#x27;s New York Liberty and San Antonio Silver Stars before becoming an assistant coach for the NBA&#x27;s San Antonio Spurs in 2014. Lesnar, of Webster, is a former heavy-weight champion in the UFC and WWE. Vinatieri is an NFL placekicker who grew up in Rapid City and attended SDSU.

===Recreation===

Fishing and hunting are popular outdoor activities in South Dakota. Fishing contributes over $224 million to South Dakota&#x27;s economy, and hunting contributes over $303 million. In 2007, over 275,000 hunting licenses and 175,000 fishing licenses were sold in the state; around half of the hunting licenses and over two-thirds of the fishing licenses were purchased by South Dakotans. Popular species of game include pheasants, white-tailed deer, mule deer, and turkeys, as well as waterfowl such as Canada geese, snow geese, and mallards. Targets of anglers include walleye in the eastern glacial lakes and Missouri River reservoirs, Chinook salmon in Lake Oahe, and trout in the Black Hills.

Other sports, such as cycling and running, are also popular in the state. In 1991, the state opened the George S. Mickelson Trail, a rail trail in the Black Hills. Besides being used by cyclists, the trail is also the site of a portion of the annual Mount Rushmore marathon; the marathon&#x27;s entire course is at an elevation of over 4,000 feet (1,200 m). Other events in the state include the Tour de Kota, a , six-day cycling event that covers much of eastern and central South Dakota, and the annual Sturgis Motorcycle Rally, which draws hundreds of thousands of participants from around the United States.

==State symbols==
Some of South Dakota&#x27;s official state symbols include:
:State bird: Ring-necked pheasant
:State flower: American pasque flower
:State tree: Black Hills spruce
: State nicknames: Mount Rushmore State (official), Coyote state and Sunshine state (both unofficial)
: State motto: &quot;Under God, the people rule&quot;
: State slogan: &quot;Great Faces. Great Places.&quot;
:State mineral: Rose quartz
:State insect: Honey bee (&quot;Apis mellifera&quot;)
:State animal: Coyote
:State fish: Walleye
:State gemstone: Fairburn agate
:State song: &quot;Hail, South Dakota!&quot;

==See also==
* Index of South Dakota-related articles
* Outline of South Dakota
* 

==Notes==
==References==
===Bibliography===
* 

==Further reading==

* Lauck, Jon K. &quot;Prairie Republic: The Political Culture of Dakota Territory, 1879–1889&quot; (University of Oklahoma Press; 2010) 281 pages
* Wishart, David J. ed. &quot;Encyclopedia of the Great Plains&quot;, University of Nebraska Press, 2004, . complete text online; 900 pages of scholarly articles
* From the publisher of South Dakota Magazine, with many photographs.

==External links==
* 
* South Dakota Department of Tourism
* South Dakota State Databases
* Energy Profile for South Dakota
* USGS real-time, geographic, and other scientific resources of South Dakota
* U.S. Census Bureau
* South Dakota State Facts from USDA 
* South Dakota State Historical Society Press 
* 
* Dakota Pathways</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="0" end="12" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q13268" start="16" end="21" title="Sioux language" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="23" end="23" title="South Dakota" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="43" end="48" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524187" start="56" end="69" title="West North Central states" label="North Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="84" end="97" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="122" end="134" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148367" start="168" end="174" title="Dakota people" label="Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="175" end="180" title="Sioux" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="250" end="262" title="Indian reservation" label="reservations"/>
<link wikidata="Q150340" start="354" end="374" title="List of U.S. states and territories by area" label="17th-largest by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q125503" start="384" end="404" title="List of U.S. states and territories by population" label="fifth-least populous"/>
<link wikidata="Q280788" start="414" end="443" title="List of U.S. states and territories by population density" label="fifth-least densely populated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682357" start="451" end="467" title="List of U.S. states" label="50 United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q40747" start="469" end="475" title="Pierre, South Dakota" label="Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q321470" start="483" end="496" title="List of capitals in the United States" label="state capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q131335" start="502" end="513" title="Sioux Falls, South Dakota" label="Sioux Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386142" start="574" end="592" title="List of cities in South Dakota" label="most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="623" end="637" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329270" start="743" end="753" title="East River (South Dakota)" label="East River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986373" start="770" end="780" title="West River (South Dakota)" label="West River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="816" end="828" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="843" end="852" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="866" end="870" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="889" end="897" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="912" end="919" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="937" end="944" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="964" end="970" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453700" start="1153" end="1162" title="Black Hills Gold Rush" label="gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q849680" start="1285" end="1296" title="American Indian Wars" label="Indian wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q108413" start="1314" end="1335" title="Wounded Knee Massacre" label="Wounded Knee Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117425" start="1380" end="1396" title="Dakota Territory" label="Dakota Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="1467" end="1479" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q35678" start="1548" end="1565" title="Benjamin Harrison" label="Benjamin Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q726501" start="1715" end="1724" title="Dust Bowl" label="Dust Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="1729" end="1745" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q509028" start="2069" end="2074" title="ranch" label="ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986373" start="2235" end="2245" title="West River (South Dakota)" label="West River"/>
<link wikidata="Q250937" start="2251" end="2262" title="Black Hills" label="Black Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q83497" start="2362" end="2376" title="Mount Rushmore" label="Mount Rushmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="2446" end="2465" title="continental climate" label="continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="2649" end="2658" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="2681" end="2690" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="2773" end="2781" title="Congress (United States)" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="2833" end="2849" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q47566" start="2915" end="2937" title="United States presidential election" label="presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q888099" start="3362" end="3373" title="Paleoindian" label="Paleoindian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4241801" start="3583" end="3602" title="Crow Creek Massacre" label="Crow Creek Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="3684" end="3698" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256681" start="3714" end="3721" title="Arikara" label="Arikara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260640" start="3836" end="3847" title="Louis-Joseph Gaultier de La Vérendrye" label="LaVérendrye"/>
<link wikidata="Q40747" start="3943" end="3949" title="Pierre, South Dakota" label="Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q658054" start="3993" end="4010" title="Louisiana (New France)" label="greater Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q748300" start="4057" end="4074" title="Louisiana (New Spain)" label="Spanish Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="4118" end="4123" title="Sioux" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500063" start="4276" end="4295" title="Louisiana Territory" label="Louisiana Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="4346" end="4364" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="4380" end="4396" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="4411" end="4437" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="Lewis and Clark Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994648" start="4525" end="4536" title="Fort Pierre, South Dakota" label="Fort Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994648" start="4622" end="4633" title="Fort Pierre, South Dakota" label="Fort Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077995" start="4671" end="4683" title="Fort Randall" label="Fort Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148367" start="4789" end="4802" title="Yankton Sioux" label="Yankton Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544478" start="4814" end="4825" title="List of United States treaties" label="1858 Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q131335" start="4986" end="4997" title="Sioux Falls, South Dakota" label="Sioux Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q989288" start="5010" end="5017" title="Yankton, South Dakota" label="Yankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117425" start="5040" end="5056" title="Dakota Territory" label="Dakota Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="5130" end="5142" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="5171" end="5178" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="5183" end="5190" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="5297" end="5303" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q250937" start="5440" end="5451" title="Black Hills" label="Black Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q188205" start="5488" end="5504" title="George Armstrong Custer" label="George A. Custer"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="5646" end="5651" title="Sioux" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986373" start="5722" end="5732" title="West River (South Dakota)" label="West River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481957" start="5749" end="5766" title="Treaty of Fort Laramie (1868)" label="Treaty of Laramie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599966" start="5782" end="5805" title="Great Sioux Reservation" label="Great Sioux Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="6079" end="6085" title="Lakota people" label="Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="6105" end="6118" title="United States Supreme Court" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920963" start="6140" end="6166" title="Black Hills Land Claim" label="compensation to be offered"/>
<link wikidata="Q37066" start="6489" end="6497" title="Bismarck, North Dakota" label="Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q35678" start="7135" end="7152" title="Benjamin Harrison" label="Benjamin Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q108413" start="7386" end="7407" title="Wounded Knee Massacre" label="Wounded Knee Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929568" start="7424" end="7453" title="Pine Ridge Indian Reservation" label="Pine Ridge Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="7537" end="7556" title="Lakota Sioux" label="Lakota Sioux Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q726501" start="7964" end="7973" title="Dust Bowl" label="Dust Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247456" start="8031" end="8038" title="topsoil" label="topsoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q231710" start="8181" end="8192" title="foreclosure" label="foreclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="8234" end="8250" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8436" end="8448" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190964" start="8579" end="8594" title="Pick–Sloan Plan" label="Pick–Sloan Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460039" start="8621" end="8646" title="Flood Control Act of 1944" label="Flood Control Act of 1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="8809" end="8825" title="hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q250937" start="9151" end="9162" title="Black Hills" label="Black Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q857063" start="9277" end="9285" title="Citibank" label="Citibank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="9325" end="9333" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q131335" start="9337" end="9348" title="Sioux Falls, South Dakota" label="Sioux Falls"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9472" end="9494" title="Usury#Usury statutes in the United States" label="caps on interest rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351504" start="9538" end="9557" title="Homestake Mine (South Dakota)" label="Homestake gold mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q584982" start="9563" end="9567" title="Lead, South Dakota" label="Lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250343" start="9639" end="9690" title="Deep Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory" label="Deep Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q213325" start="9939" end="9949" title="Rapid City, South Dakota" label="Rapid City"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="10414" end="10421" title="Midwest" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="10472" end="10484" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="10582" end="10586" title="Western United States" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q150340" start="10661" end="10673" title="List of U.S. states by area" label="17th largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585737" start="10689" end="10703" title="Black Elk Peak" label="Black Elk Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q859342" start="10814" end="10828" title="Big Stone Lake" label="Big Stone Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="10908" end="10920" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="10938" end="10946" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="10963" end="10967" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="10972" end="10981" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="11002" end="11009" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="11014" end="11021" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613601" start="11085" end="11097" title="Butte County, South Dakota" label="Butte County"/>
<link wikidata="Q752003" start="11130" end="11153" title="pole of inaccessibility" label="pole of inaccessibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524515" start="11165" end="11170" title="Allen, South Dakota" label="Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028181" start="11175" end="11179" title="Kyle, South Dakota" label="Kyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="11214" end="11228" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116752" start="11320" end="11328" title="Cheyenne River" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542610" start="11330" end="11335" title="James River (Dakotas)" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q859274" start="11337" end="11346" title="Big Sioux River" label="Big Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126786" start="11352" end="11357" title="White River (Missouri River)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966525" start="11523" end="11532" title="Oahe Dam" label="Lake Oahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477698" start="11534" end="11545" title="Lake Sharpe" label="Lake Sharpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475894" start="11547" end="11564" title="Lake Francis Case" label="Lake Francis Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334123" start="11570" end="11590" title="Lewis and Clark Lake" label="Lewis and Clark Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q250937" start="11730" end="11741" title="Black Hills" label="Black Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986373" start="12240" end="12250" title="West River (South Dakota)" label="West River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329270" start="12255" end="12265" title="East River (South Dakota)" label="East River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136590" start="12437" end="12456" title="Coteau des Prairies" label="Coteau des Prairies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282741" start="12462" end="12483" title="Dissected Till Plains" label="Dissected Till Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136502" start="12578" end="12593" title="Minnesota River" label="Minnesota River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542610" start="12746" end="12757" title="James River (Dakotas)" label="James River"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="12990" end="13001" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="13191" end="13201" title="glacier" label="glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q427711" start="13261" end="13265" title="till" label="till"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="13287" end="13299" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="13366" end="13380" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554910" start="13506" end="13511" title="butte" label="butte"/>
<link wikidata="Q306216" start="13574" end="13582" title="Badlands National Park" label="Badlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="13850" end="13857" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585737" start="14014" end="14028" title="Black Elk Peak" label="Black Elk Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="14162" end="14177" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q103910" start="14200" end="14211" title="Precambrian" label="Precambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="14317" end="14330" title="Paleozoic Era" label="Paleozoic Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="14470" end="14479" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="14667" end="14676" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="14738" end="14747" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q678847" start="14762" end="14773" title="Populus sect. Aegiros" label="cottonwoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="14785" end="14791" title="willow" label="willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039061" start="14823" end="14835" title="shelter belt" label="shelter belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="14838" end="14845" title="Mammals" label="Mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="14867" end="14872" title="American bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="14874" end="14878" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q187943" start="14880" end="14889" title="pronghorn" label="pronghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="14891" end="14898" title="coyotes" label="coyotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q30359" start="14904" end="14915" title="prairie dog" label="prairie dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q25432" start="14938" end="14958" title="common pheasant" label="ring-necked pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="15017" end="15022" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="15047" end="15057" title="bald eagle" label="bald eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="15112" end="15126" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462862" start="15186" end="15193" title="walleye" label="walleye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751223" start="15195" end="15199" title="carp" label="carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q191674" start="15201" end="15205" title="Pike (fish)" label="pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224135" start="15207" end="15211" title="bass (fish)" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q827142" start="15282" end="15292" title="American paddlefish" label="paddlefish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="15476" end="15480" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q460523" start="15493" end="15502" title="Ponderosa pine" label="ponderosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q165091" start="15507" end="15522" title="Pinus contorta" label="lodgepole pines"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="15535" end="15542" title="spruces" label="spruces"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="15572" end="15576" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180404" start="15578" end="15590" title="elk" label="elk (wapiti)"/>
<link wikidata="Q189466" start="15592" end="15605" title="bighorn sheep" label="bighorn sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q242602" start="15607" end="15620" title="mountain goat" label="mountain goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q322145" start="15623" end="15634" title="American marten" label="pine marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q35255" start="15640" end="15653" title="mountain lion" label="mountain lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258881" start="15711" end="15716" title="trout" label="trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="15752" end="15771" title="continental climate" label="continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23709436" start="16290" end="16294" title="Usta, South Dakota" label="Usta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574896" start="16354" end="16362" title="McIntosh, South Dakota" label="McIntosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="16401" end="16414" title="precipitation" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="16443" end="16452" title="Semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q584982" start="16613" end="16617" title="Lead, South Dakota" label="Lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q250937" start="16625" end="16636" title="Black Hills" label="Black Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q923442" start="16851" end="16864" title="Tornado Alley" label="Tornado Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q205418" start="16940" end="16948" title="blizzard" label="blizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q304958" start="16954" end="16963" title="ice storm" label="ice storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="17081" end="17102" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="17108" end="17122" title="national parks" label="national parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334313" start="17192" end="17215" title="Wind Cave National Park" label="Wind Cave National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q250937" start="17244" end="17255" title="Black Hills" label="Black Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="17318" end="17323" title="American Bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q306216" start="17325" end="17347" title="Badlands National Park" label="Badlands National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="17438" end="17447" title="semi-arid" label="semi-arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q83497" start="17460" end="17492" title="Mount Rushmore National Memorial" label="Mount Rushmore National Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q336432" start="17620" end="17634" title="Gutzon Borglum" label="Gutzon Borglum"/>
<link wikidata="Q386178" start="17694" end="17722" title="Jewel Cave National Monument" label="Jewel Cave National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026175" start="17728" end="17734" title="Custer, South Dakota" label="Custer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123048" start="17740" end="17779" title="Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail" label="Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315665" start="17785" end="17825" title="Minuteman Missile National Historic Site" label="Minuteman Missile National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q853409" start="17859" end="17879" title="nuclear missile silo" label="nuclear missile silo"/>
<link wikidata="Q772673" start="17944" end="17980" title="Missouri National Recreational River" label="Missouri National Recreational River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139250" start="17986" end="18006" title="Crazy Horse Memorial" label="Crazy Horse Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q14709758" start="18094" end="18110" title="The Mammoth Site" label="The Mammoth Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q937736" start="18116" end="18127" title="Hot Springs, South Dakota" label="Hot Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="18441" end="18466" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="18754" end="18766" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="18768" end="18774" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="18776" end="18783" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="18789" end="18796" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="19148" end="19157" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="19163" end="19174" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="19176" end="19182" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="19184" end="19189" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="19194" end="19202" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q852031" start="19209" end="19229" title="center of population" label="center of population"/>
<link wikidata="Q484450" start="19252" end="19266" title="Buffalo County, South Dakota" label="Buffalo County"/>
<link wikidata="Q974030" start="19305" end="19316" title="Gann Valley, South Dakota" label="Gann Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q811595" start="19332" end="19335" title="United States Department of Housing and Urban Development" label="HUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769654" start="19348" end="19381" title="Annual Homeless Assessment Report to Congress" label="Annual Homeless Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="19413" end="19421" title="homeless" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="20099" end="20107" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="20572" end="20578" title="German-American" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193808" start="20588" end="20597" title="Norwegian-American" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="20607" end="20612" title="Irish American" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="20622" end="20637" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="20650" end="20657" title="English-American" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q258344" start="20938" end="20948" title="Hutterites" label="Hutterites"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="20961" end="20971" title="Anabaptist" label="Anabaptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="21049" end="21056" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="21090" end="21104" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="21107" end="21123" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="American Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="21133" end="21139" title="Lakota people" label="Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21141" end="21147" title="Sioux#Linguistics" label="Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248791" start="21153" end="21159" title="Nakota" label="Nakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986373" start="21252" end="21262" title="West River (South Dakota)" label="West River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599966" start="21362" end="21385" title="Great Sioux Reservation" label="Great Sioux Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="21568" end="21578" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="21661" end="21679" title="Indian reservation" label="Indian reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q198529" start="21890" end="21904" title="Ziebach County, South Dakota" label="Ziebach County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438770" start="21982" end="21995" title="Fort Thompson, South Dakota" label="Fort Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189081" start="22004" end="22026" title="Crow Creek Reservation" label="Crow Creek Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929568" start="22166" end="22195" title="Pine Ridge Indian Reservation" label="Pine Ridge Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="22557" end="22575" title="Great Sioux Nation" label="Great Sioux Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13268" start="22593" end="22619" title="Sioux language" label="Dakota, Lakota, and Nakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q33537" start="22764" end="22770" title="Lakota language" label="Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q530384" start="22774" end="22780" title="Dakota language" label="Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="22877" end="22884" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="22894" end="22910" title="primary language" label="primary language"/>
<link wikidata="Q13268" start="23042" end="23048" title="Sioux language" label="Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="23115" end="23125" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="23135" end="23142" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="23156" end="23163" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608153" start="23385" end="23397" title="rural flight" label="rural flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q492493" start="23710" end="23724" title="Harding County, South Dakota" label="Harding County"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="23839" end="23850" title="immigration" label="immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q751359" start="24227" end="24240" title="Interstate 29 in South Dakota" label="Interstate 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="24268" end="24287" title="Indian reservations" label="Indian reservations"/>
<link wikidata="Q495209" start="24420" end="24434" title="Lincoln County, South Dakota" label="Lincoln County"/>
<link wikidata="Q746448" start="24960" end="24981" title="recreational vehicles" label="recreational vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q39804" start="24990" end="25002" title="cruise ships" label="cruise ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257538" start="25044" end="25078" title="Public Religion Research Institute" label="Public Religion Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="25140" end="25159" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414953" start="25200" end="25222" title="religious denomination" label="religious denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="25682" end="25688" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q730726" start="25896" end="25934" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="25972" end="25995" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810029" start="26166" end="26203" title="Association of Religion Data Archives" label="Association of Religion Data Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="26753" end="26761" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="26768" end="26775" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="26905" end="26922" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baha&amp;#x27;i Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735001" start="26931" end="26938" title="Islam in the United States" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610525" start="26973" end="26992" title="gross state product" label="gross state product"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166835" start="27093" end="27119" title="Per capita personal income in the United States" label="per capita personal income"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="27428" end="27444" title="service industry" label="service industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q857063" start="27567" end="27575" title="Citibank" label="Citibank"/>
<link wikidata="Q854022" start="27780" end="27790" title="trust fund" label="trust fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="27856" end="27865" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929688" start="27882" end="27901" title="Government spending" label="Government spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q960480" start="28015" end="28039" title="Ellsworth Air Force Base" label="Ellsworth Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="28436" end="28448" title="maize" label="corn (maize)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="28450" end="28458" title="soybeans" label="soybeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="28460" end="28465" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="28471" end="28475" title="pig" label="hogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q955043" start="28516" end="28528" title="meat packing" label="meat packing"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="28533" end="28540" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q250937" start="28825" end="28836" title="Black Hills" label="Black Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q262483" start="28862" end="28870" title="Deadwood, South Dakota" label="Deadwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q83497" start="28872" end="28886" title="Mount Rushmore" label="Mount Rushmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q548404" start="28990" end="29014" title="Sturgis Motorcycle Rally" label="Sturgis Motorcycle Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="29363" end="29382" title="interstate highways" label="interstate highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q809127" start="29433" end="29446" title="Interstate 90 in South Dakota" label="Interstate 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q751359" start="29517" end="29530" title="Interstate 29 in South Dakota" label="Interstate 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q809214" start="29788" end="29791" title="Interstate 190 (South Dakota)" label="190"/>
<link wikidata="Q786061" start="29795" end="29799" title="spur route" label="spur"/>
<link wikidata="Q809226" start="29829" end="29832" title="Interstate 229 (South Dakota)" label="229"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574863" start="29836" end="29840" title="loop route" label="loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q408192" start="29896" end="29909" title="United States Numbered Highways" label="U.S. highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q407564" start="29946" end="29948" title="U.S. Route 12" label="12"/>
<link wikidata="Q407638" start="29950" end="29952" title="U.S. Route 14" label="14"/>
<link wikidata="Q407823" start="29954" end="29956" title="U.S. Route 16" label="16"/>
<link wikidata="Q407853" start="29958" end="29960" title="U.S. Route 18" label="18"/>
<link wikidata="Q517346" start="29965" end="29968" title="U.S. Route 212" label="212"/>
<link wikidata="Q410661" start="30009" end="30011" title="U.S. Route 81" label="81"/>
<link wikidata="Q410689" start="30013" end="30015" title="U.S. Route 83" label="83"/>
<link wikidata="Q410716" start="30017" end="30019" title="U.S. Route 85" label="85"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175059" start="30024" end="30027" title="U.S. Route 281" label="281"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="30066" end="30073" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q800517" start="30182" end="30203" title="National Scenic Byway" label="National Scenic Byway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176129" start="30210" end="30245" title="Peter Norbeck Scenic Byway" label="Peter Norbeck National Scenic Byway"/>
<link wikidata="Q267122" start="30738" end="30742" title="BNSF" label="BNSF"/>
<link wikidata="Q18156853" start="30788" end="30829" title="Rapid City, Pierre &amp;amp; Eastern Railroad" label="Rapid City, Pierre &amp;amp; Eastern Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209979" start="30844" end="30873" title="Dakota, Minnesota and Eastern" label="Dakota, Minnesota and Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210047" start="30945" end="30968" title="Dakota Southern Railway" label="Dakota Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q30694538" start="30970" end="30986" title="D&amp;amp;I Railroad" label="D&amp;amp;I Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q48772914" start="30988" end="31007" title="Ellis &amp;amp; Eastern" label="Ellis &amp;amp; Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639998" start="31009" end="31026" title="Sunflour Railroad" label="Sunflour Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q117706368" start="31028" end="31032" title="CPKC" label="CPKC"/>
<link wikidata="Q48792316" start="31042" end="31067" title="Sisseton Milbank Railroad" label="Sisseton Milbank Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920959" start="31173" end="31192" title="Black Hills Central Railroad" label="Black Hills Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q48792307" start="31201" end="31239" title="Prairie Village, Herman and Milwaukee Railroad" label="Prairie Village, Herman, and Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612464" start="31281" end="31291" title="Geographic contiguity" label="contiguous"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="31309" end="31315" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="31402" end="31409" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414138" start="31435" end="31455" title="San Francisco Zephyr" label="San Francisco Zephyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196631" start="31464" end="31471" title="Pioneer (Amtrak)" label="Pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876127" start="31561" end="31589" title="Sioux Falls Regional Airport" label="Sioux Falls Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876124" start="31594" end="31621" title="Rapid City Regional Airport" label="Rapid City Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q188920" start="31623" end="31638" title="Delta Air Lines" label="Delta Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139541" start="31640" end="31657" title="Frontier Airlines" label="Frontier Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319601" start="31663" end="31681" title="Allegiant Airlines" label="Allegiant Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876107" start="31860" end="31885" title="Aberdeen Regional Airport" label="Aberdeen Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192417" start="31887" end="31910" title="Pierre Regional Airport" label="Pierre Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974510" start="31916" end="31942" title="Watertown Regional Airport" label="Watertown Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368759" start="31980" end="32001" title="Essential Air Service" label="Essential Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525432" start="32323" end="32334" title="Sioux Area Metro" label="Sioux Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294144" start="32336" end="32346" title="Rapid City Rapid Ride" label="Rapid City"/>
<link wikidata="Q8048832" start="32358" end="32377" title="YST Transit" label="Yankton Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="32517" end="32537" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="32545" end="32563" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="32581" end="32592" title="Legislature" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="32598" end="32606" title="Judiciary" label="judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589318" start="32674" end="32702" title="Constitution of South Dakota" label="Constitution of South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626318" start="32849" end="32873" title="Governor of South Dakota" label="Governor of South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193325" start="32953" end="32965" title="Larry Rhoden" label="Larry Rhoden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566974" start="33135" end="33162" title="South Dakota National Guard" label="South Dakota National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304409" start="33358" end="33375" title="South Dakota Legislature" label="state legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q429756" start="33406" end="33412" title="South Dakota State Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q526732" start="33444" end="33468" title="South Dakota House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566996" start="33843" end="33862" title="South Dakota Supreme Court" label="state supreme court"/>
<link wikidata="Q12201088" start="34085" end="34102" title="Limited jurisdiction" label="magistrate courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="34315" end="34325" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q628413" start="34329" end="34344" title="inheritance tax" label="inheritance tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q499094" start="34360" end="34388" title="personal property" label="intangible personal property"/>
<link wikidata="Q11055488" start="34400" end="34409" title="sales tax" label="sales tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="34557" end="34564" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="34568" end="34586" title="Indian reservation" label="Indian reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q46257" start="34866" end="34876" title="Ad valorem tax" label="Ad valorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566987" start="35025" end="35058" title="South Dakota Special Tax Division" label="South Dakota Special Tax Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q462981" start="35218" end="35228" title="John Thune" label="John Thune"/>
<link wikidata="Q722503" start="35238" end="35249" title="Mike Rounds" label="Mike Rounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q30015838" start="35270" end="35283" title="Dusty Johnson" label="Dusty Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q47566" start="35408" end="35443" title="United States presidential election" label="United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="35497" end="35514" title="Electoral College (United States)" label="Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="35546" end="35551" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="35568" end="35576" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="35725" end="35741" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q699201" start="35858" end="35862" title="1896 United States presidential election" label="1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q699289" start="35864" end="35868" title="1912 United States presidential election" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="35873" end="35891" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363538" start="35899" end="35916" title="Progressive Party (United States, 1912)" label="Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q179868" start="35919" end="35923" title="1932 United States presidential election" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q634429" start="35925" end="35929" title="1936 United States presidential election" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q699646" start="35934" end="35938" title="1964 United States presidential election" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="35950" end="35965" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q644161" start="36023" end="36027" title="1972 United States presidential election" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="36076" end="36084" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="36523" end="36533" title="Washington D.C." label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q443640" start="36786" end="36797" title="Tom Daschle" label="Tom Daschle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869252" start="36813" end="36828" title="minority leader" label="minority leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738431" start="36846" end="36861" title="majority leader" label="majority leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="36991" end="37006" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q209989" start="37011" end="37026" title="Hubert Humphrey" label="Hubert Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="37080" end="37092" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="37117" end="37132" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886655" start="37156" end="37160" title="2018 South Dakota gubernatorial election" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q465749" start="37187" end="37198" title="Kristi Noem" label="Kristi Noem"/>
<link wikidata="Q16885979" start="37217" end="37230" title="Billie Sutton" label="Billie Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q30015838" start="37295" end="37308" title="Dusty Johnson" label="Dusty Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566970" start="37587" end="37600" title="South Dakota Lottery" label="state lottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q270871" start="37966" end="37981" title="In God We Trust" label="In God We Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q262483" start="38371" end="38379" title="Deadwood, South Dakota" label="Deadwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q374501" start="38395" end="38400" title="Tabor, South Dakota" label="Tabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q181817" start="38417" end="38439" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q660447" start="38444" end="38457" title="Cinco de Mayo" label="Cinco de Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q254279" start="38522" end="38529" title="pow wow" label="pow wow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803230" start="38628" end="38645" title="Custer State Park" label="Custer State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="38756" end="38761" title="American bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q436655" start="38764" end="38773" title="Black Elk" label="Black Elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q683932" start="38806" end="38813" title="heyokha" label="heyokha"/>
<link wikidata="Q849680" start="38899" end="38910" title="American Indian Wars" label="Indian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295854" start="38915" end="38926" title="Ghost Dance" label="Ghost Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404825" start="39042" end="39058" title="Black Elk Speaks" label="Black Elk Speaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150924" start="39168" end="39178" title="Paul Goble (writer and illustrator)" label="Paul Goble"/>
<link wikidata="Q237514" start="39268" end="39288" title="Laura Ingalls Wilder" label="Laura Ingalls Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625666" start="39501" end="39508" title="De Smet, South Dakota" label="De Smet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427960" start="39552" end="39580" title="By the Shores of Silver Lake" label="By the Shores of Silver Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428339" start="39594" end="39609" title="The Long Winter (novel)" label="The Long Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428311" start="39623" end="39649" title="Little Town on the Prairie" label="Little Town on the Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428115" start="39663" end="39687" title="These Happy Golden Years" label="These Happy Golden Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427987" start="39705" end="39725" title="The First Four Years (novel)" label="The First Four Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q438558" start="39912" end="39928" title="Rose Wilder Lane" label="Rose Wilder Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128029" start="40067" end="40078" title="Harvey Dunn" label="Harvey Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q926155" start="40107" end="40117" title="Manchester, South Dakota" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q454467" start="40319" end="40329" title="Oscar Howe" label="Oscar Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q388450" start="40331" end="40335" title="Crow" label="Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189081" start="40353" end="40382" title="Crow Creek Indian Reservation" label="Crow Creek Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q673661" start="40550" end="40561" title="abstraction" label="abstraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704942" start="40631" end="40643" title="Terry Redlin" label="Terry Redlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065503" start="40661" end="40670" title="Watertown, South Dakota" label="Watertown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306057" start="40770" end="40787" title="Redlin Art Center" label="Redlin Art Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q131335" start="40826" end="40837" title="Sioux Falls, South Dakota" label="Sioux Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q213325" start="41186" end="41196" title="Rapid City, South Dakota" label="Rapid City"/>
<link wikidata="Q250937" start="41527" end="41538" title="Black Hills" label="Black Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q960480" start="41543" end="41567" title="Ellsworth Air Force Base" label="Ellsworth Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q236713" start="41658" end="41666" title="Aberdeen, South Dakota" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650462" start="41677" end="41686" title="Brookings, South Dakota" label="Brookings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065503" start="41697" end="41706" title="Watertown, South Dakota" label="Watertown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988986" start="41717" end="41725" title="Mitchell, South Dakota" label="Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q989288" start="41736" end="41743" title="Yankton, South Dakota" label="Yankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988967" start="41754" end="41759" title="Huron, South Dakota" label="Huron"/>
<link wikidata="Q40747" start="41770" end="41776" title="Pierre, South Dakota" label="Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q568764" start="41791" end="41800" title="Spearfish, South Dakota" label="Spearfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302260" start="41933" end="41962" title="South Dakota State University" label="South Dakota State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305521" start="41967" end="41993" title="University of South Dakota" label="University of South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="42197" end="42211" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q989288" start="42315" end="42322" title="Yankton, South Dakota" label="Yankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789787" start="42399" end="42411" title="Argus Leader" label="Argus Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294142" start="42502" end="42520" title="Rapid City Journal" label="Rapid City Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q236713" start="42704" end="42712" title="Aberdeen, South Dakota" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713524" start="42719" end="42732" title="American News" label="American News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974505" start="42750" end="42774" title="Watertown Public Opinion" label="Watertown Public Opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200752" start="42792" end="42807" title="Huron Plainsman" label="Huron Plainsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720321" start="42829" end="42847" title="Brookings Register" label="Brookings Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803539" start="42864" end="42873" title="Tim Giago" label="Tim Giago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929568" start="42973" end="43002" title="Pine Ridge Indian Reservation" label="Pine Ridge Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150076" start="43064" end="43084" title="Indian Country Today" label="Indian Country Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525449" start="43146" end="43164" title="Sioux City Journal" label="Sioux City Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566976" start="43272" end="43302" title="South Dakota Public Television" label="South Dakota Public Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270014" start="43453" end="43465" title="media market" label="media market"/>
<link wikidata="Q6328487" start="43711" end="43718" title="KELO-TV" label="KELO-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036519" start="43800" end="43810" title="Captain 11" label="Captain 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q594503" start="44089" end="44105" title="NBC Nightly News" label="NBC Nightly News"/>
<link wikidata="Q919527" start="44124" end="44134" title="Tom Brokaw" label="Tom Brokaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350996" start="44143" end="44150" title="Webster, South Dakota" label="Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="44170" end="44179" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q320805" start="44194" end="44205" title="Al Neuharth" label="Al Neuharth"/>
<link wikidata="Q666688" start="44215" end="44221" title="Eureka, South Dakota" label="Eureka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718237" start="44226" end="44232" title="Alpena, South Dakota" label="Alpena"/>
<link wikidata="Q381178" start="44248" end="44258" title="Bob Barker" label="Bob Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380665" start="44290" end="44297" title="Mission, South Dakota" label="Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3368573" start="44328" end="44344" title="Pat O&amp;#x27;Brien (television)" label="Pat O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296190" start="44349" end="44358" title="Mary Hart" label="Mary Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q288826" start="44765" end="44768" title="ACT (examination)" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="44925" end="44947" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566951" start="45547" end="45576" title="South Dakota Board of Regents" label="South Dakota Board of Regents"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302260" start="45674" end="45703" title="South Dakota State University" label="South Dakota State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650462" start="45715" end="45724" title="Brookings, South Dakota" label="Brookings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305521" start="45800" end="45826" title="University of South Dakota" label="University of South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q989284" start="45837" end="45847" title="Vermillion, South Dakota" label="Vermillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896329" start="45921" end="45931" title="University of South Dakota School of Law" label="law school"/>
<link wikidata="Q27640660" start="45936" end="45949" title="University of South Dakota Sanford School of Medicine" label="medical schoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298397" start="46028" end="46048" title="Augustana University" label="Augustana University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485144" start="46367" end="46387" title="Sioux Falls Canaries" label="Sioux Falls Canaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060261" start="46404" end="46424" title="Sioux Falls Skyforce" label="Sioux Falls Skyforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496461" start="46443" end="46463" title="Sioux Falls Stampede" label="Sioux Falls Stampede"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="46465" end="46471" title="Ice hockey" label="hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485143" start="46482" end="46499" title="Sioux Falls Storm" label="Sioux Falls Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358545" start="46501" end="46525" title="indoor American football" label="indoor American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743069" start="46553" end="46573" title="American Association of Independent Professional Baseball" label="American Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525496" start="46599" end="46618" title="Sioux Falls Stadium" label="Sioux Falls Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q842793" start="46646" end="46658" title="NBA G League" label="NBA G League"/>
<link wikidata="Q169138" start="46690" end="46700" title="Miami Heat" label="Miami Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417657" start="46718" end="46734" title="Sanford Pentagon" label="Sanford Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259227" start="46769" end="46797" title="Denny Sanford Premier Center" label="Denny Sanford Premier Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q499211" start="46825" end="46829" title="United States Hockey League" label="USHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248855" start="46858" end="46861" title="Indoor Football League" label="IFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q954032" start="46902" end="46917" title="Rapid City Rush" label="Rapid City Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="46936" end="46940" title="ECHL" label="ECHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380865" start="46993" end="47020" title="Rushmore Plaza Civic Center" label="Rushmore Plaza Civic Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="47169" end="47184" title="NCAA Division I" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566988" start="47227" end="47257" title="South Dakota State Jackrabbits" label="South Dakota State Jackrabbits"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284438" start="47291" end="47301" title="NCAA Division II" label="DivisionII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566956" start="47347" end="47367" title="South Dakota Coyotes" label="South Dakota Coyotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q927765" start="47465" end="47469" title="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics" label="NAIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q436062" start="47509" end="47520" title="Billy Mills" label="Billy Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q380541" start="47522" end="47533" title="Mike Miller (basketball, born 1980)" label="Mike Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294069" start="47535" end="47545" title="Mark Ellis (baseball)" label="Mark Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q240690" start="47547" end="47559" title="Becky Hammon" label="Becky Hammon"/>
<link wikidata="Q220556" start="47561" end="47573" title="Brock Lesnar" label="Brock Lesnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947432" start="47575" end="47588" title="Chad Greenway" label="Chad Greenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q351092" start="47594" end="47608" title="Adam Vinatieri" label="Adam Vinatieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086753" start="47636" end="47646" title="Pine Ridge, South Dakota" label="Pine Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8420" start="47667" end="47692" title="1964 Summer Olympic Games" label="1964 Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988986" start="47788" end="47796" title="Mitchell, South Dakota" label="Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="47812" end="47815" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="48068" end="48071" title="Major League Baseball" label="MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q213325" start="48114" end="48124" title="Rapid City, South Dakota" label="Rapid City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593221" start="48141" end="48145" title="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association" label="WNBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q974705" start="48153" end="48169" title="New York Liberty" label="New York Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472697" start="48174" end="48198" title="San Antonio Silver Stars" label="San Antonio Silver Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q159729" start="48253" end="48270" title="San Antonio Spurs" label="San Antonio Spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350996" start="48291" end="48298" title="Webster, South Dakota" label="Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="48370" end="48373" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q213325" start="48401" end="48411" title="Rapid City, South Dakota" label="Rapid City"/>
<link wikidata="Q25432" start="48869" end="48878" title="Common pheasant" label="pheasants"/>
<link wikidata="Q215887" start="48880" end="48897" title="White tailed deer" label="white-tailed deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q338831" start="48899" end="48908" title="mule deer" label="mule deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43794" start="48914" end="48921" title="turkey (bird)" label="turkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q26733" start="48952" end="48964" title="Canada goose" label="Canada geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074540" start="48966" end="48976" title="snow geese" label="snow geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348" start="48982" end="48990" title="mallards" label="mallards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462862" start="49019" end="49026" title="walleye" label="walleye"/>
<link wikidata="Q833503" start="49087" end="49101" title="Chinook salmon" label="Chinook salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q474408" start="49105" end="49114" title="Lake Oahe" label="Lake Oahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258881" start="49120" end="49125" title="trout" label="trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544174" start="49251" end="49276" title="George S. Mickelson Trail" label="George S. Mickelson Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116321" start="49280" end="49290" title="rail trail" label="rail trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q548404" start="49652" end="49676" title="Sturgis Motorcycle Rally" label="Sturgis Motorcycle Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q13517610" start="49839" end="49849" title="List of U.S. state birds" label="State bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q25432" start="49851" end="49871" title="Common pheasant" label="Ring-necked pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851570" start="49873" end="49885" title="List of U.S. state flowers" label="State flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q50346836" start="49887" end="49909" title="Pulsatilla nuttalliana" label="American pasque flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474110" start="49911" end="49921" title="List of U.S. state trees" label="State tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="49935" end="49941" title="spruce" label="spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q783822" start="49944" end="49959" title="List of U.S. state nicknames" label="State nicknames"/>
<link wikidata="Q83497" start="49961" end="49975" title="Mount Rushmore" label="Mount Rushmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="49994" end="50000" title="Coyote" label="Coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q193788" start="50011" end="50019" title="Sunlight" label="Sunshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357912" start="50046" end="50057" title="List of U.S. state mottos" label="State motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891002" start="50154" end="50167" title="List of U.S. state minerals, rocks, stones and gemstones" label="State mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="50174" end="50180" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478371" start="50182" end="50194" title="List of U.S. state insects" label="State insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q30034" start="50196" end="50205" title="Western honey bee" label="Honey bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471311" start="50236" end="50248" title="List of U.S. state animals" label="State animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="50250" end="50256" title="Coyote" label="Coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q491045" start="50258" end="50268" title="List of U.S. state fish" label="State fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462862" start="50270" end="50277" title="Walleye" label="Walleye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891002" start="50279" end="50293" title="List of U.S. state minerals, rocks, stones and gemstones" label="State gemstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734124" start="50295" end="50303" title="Fairburn, South Dakota" label="Fairburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q123314" start="50304" end="50309" title="agate" label="agate"/>
<link wikidata="Q783790" start="50311" end="50321" title="List of U.S. state songs" label="State song"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125751" start="50329" end="50348" title="Hail, South Dakota!" label="Hail, South Dakota!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018582" start="50371" end="50409" title="Index of South Dakota-related articles" label="Index of South Dakota-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112459" start="50412" end="50435" title="Outline of South Dakota" label="Outline of South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50657" end="50674" title="David J. Wishart" label="Wishart, David J."/>
<link wikidata="Q7566972" start="50841" end="50862" title="South Dakota Magazine" label="South Dakota Magazine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="26748" wikidata="Q39" url="?curid=26748" title="Switzerland">
<text>Switzerland, officially the Swiss Confederation, is a landlocked country located in west-central Europe. It is bordered by Italy to the south, France to the west, Germany to the north, and Austria and Liechtenstein to the east. Switzerland is geographically divided among the Swiss Plateau, the Alps and the Jura; the Alps occupy the greater part of the territory, whereas most of the country&#x27;s nearly 9 million people are concentrated on the plateau, which hosts its largest cities and economic centres, including Zurich, Geneva, and Lausanne. 

Switzerland is a federal republic composed of 26 cantons, with federal authorities based in Bern. It has four main linguistic and cultural regions: German, French, Italian and Romansh. Although most Swiss are German-speaking, national identity is fairly cohesive, being rooted in a common historical background, shared values such as federalism and direct democracy, and Alpine symbolism. Swiss identity transcends language, ethnicity, and religion, leading to Switzerland being described as a (&quot;nation of volition&quot;) rather than a nation state.

Switzerland originates from the Old Swiss Confederacy established in the Late Middle Ages as a defensive and commercial alliance; the Federal Charter of 1291 is considered the country&#x27;s founding document. The confederation steadily expanded and consolidated despite external threats and internal political and religious strife. Swiss independence from the Holy Roman Empire was formally recognised in the Peace of Westphalia in 1648. The confederation was among the first and few republics of the early modern period, and the only one besides San Marino to survive the Napoleonic Wars. 

Switzerland remained a network of self-governing states until 1798, when revolutionary France invaded and imposed the centralist Helvetic Republic. Napoleon abolished the republic in 1803 and reinstated a confederation. Following the Napoleonic Wars, Switzerland restored its pre-revolutionary system, but by 1830 faced growing division and conflict between liberal and conservative movements; this culminated in a new constitution in 1848 that established the current federal system and enshrined principles such as individual rights, separation of powers, and parliamentary bicameralism. 

Switzerland has maintained a policy of armed neutrality since the 16th century and has not fought an international war since 1815. It joined the United Nations only in 2002 but pursues an active foreign policy that includes frequent involvement in peace building and global governance. Switzerland is the birthplace of the Red Cross and hosts the headquarters or offices of most major international institutions, including the WTO, the WHO, the ILO, FIFA, the WEF, and the UN. It is a founding member of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) but not part of the European Union (EU), the European Economic Area, or the eurozone; however, it participates in the European single market and the Schengen Area. 

Switzerland is among the world&#x27;s most developed countries, with the highest nominal wealth per adult and the eighth-highest gross domestic product (GDP) per capita. It performs highly on several international metrics, including economic competitiveness, democratic governance, and press freedom. Zurich, Geneva and Basel rank among the highest in quality of life, albeit with some of the highest costs of living. Switzerland holds an international reputation for its established banking sector and for its specialized industries in watchmaking and chocolate production.

== Etymology ==

The English name &quot;Switzerland&quot; is a portmanteau of &quot;Switzer&quot;, an obsolete term for a Swiss person which was in use during the 16th to 19th centuries, and &quot;land&quot;. The English adjective &quot;Swiss&quot; is a loanword from French &#x27;, also in use since the 16th century. The name &quot;Switzer&quot; is from the Alemannic &#x27;, in origin an inhabitant of &quot;Schwyz&quot; and its associated territory, one of the cantons which formed the nucleus of the Old Swiss Confederacy. The Swiss began to adopt the name for themselves after the Swabian War of 1499, used alongside the term for &quot;Confederates&quot;, (literally: &quot;comrades by oath&quot;), used since the 14th century. The data code for Switzerland, CH, is derived from Latin (&quot;Helvetic Confederation&quot;).

The toponym &quot;Schwyz&quot; itself was first attested in 972, as Old High German &#x27;, perhaps related to &#x27; &#x27;to burn&#x27; (cf. Old Norse &#x27;to singe, burn&#x27;), referring to the area of forest that was burned and cleared to build. The name was extended to the area dominated by the canton, and after the Swabian War of 1499 gradually came to be used for the entire Confederation. The Swiss German name of the country, &#x27;, is homophonous to that of the canton and the settlement, but distinguished by the use of the definite article (&#x27; for the Confederation, but simply &quot;&quot; for the canton and the town). The long [iː] of Swiss German is historically and still often today spelled rather than , preserving the original identity of the two names even in writing.

The Latin name was neologised and introduced gradually after the formation of the federal state in 1848, harking back to the Napoleonic Helvetic Republic. It appeared on coins from 1879, inscribed on the Federal Palace in 1902 and after 1948 used in the official seal (e.g., the ISO banking code &quot;CHF&quot; for the Swiss franc, the Swiss postage stamps (&#x27;HELVETIA&#x27;) and the country top-level domain &quot;.ch&quot;, are both taken from the state&#x27;s Latin name). is derived from the &quot;Helvetii&quot;, a Gaulish tribe living on the Swiss Plateau before the Roman era.

&quot;Helvetia&quot; appeared as a national personification of the Swiss confederacy in the 17th century in a 1672 play by Johann Caspar Weissenbach.

== History ==

The state of Switzerland took its present form with the adoption of the Swiss Federal Constitution in 1848. Switzerland&#x27;s precursors established a defensive alliance in 1291, forming a loose confederation that persisted for centuries.

=== Beginnings ===

The oldest traces of hominid existence in Switzerland date to about 150,000 years ago. The oldest known farming settlements in Switzerland, which were found at Gächlingen, date to around 5300 BC.

The earliest known tribes formed the Hallstatt and La Tène cultures, named after the archaeological site of La Tène on the north side of Lake Neuchâtel. La Tène culture developed and flourished during the late Iron Age from around 450 BC, possibly influenced by Greek and Etruscan civilisations. One of the most prominent La Tène tribes were the Helvetii, who primarily occupied the Swiss Plateau, alongside the Rhaetians in the eastern regions. Facing pressures from Germanic tribes, in 58 BC, the Helvetii, influenced by Orgetorix, a wealthy aristocrat, decided to abandon the Swiss Plateau for better opportunities in western Gallia. After Orgetorix&#x27;s mysterious death, the tribe continued their migration but was decisively defeated by Julius Caesar&#x27;s armies at the Battle of Bibracte, in present-day eastern France. Following their defeat, the Helvetii were forced by Caesar to return to their original lands, where they were subjected to stringent restrictions on their autonomy and movements. In 15 BC, Tiberius (later the second Roman emperor) and his brother Drusus conquered the Alps, integrating them into the Roman Empire. The area occupied by the Helvetii first became part of Rome&#x27;s Gallia Belgica province and then of its Germania Superior province. The eastern portion of modern Switzerland was integrated into the Roman province of Raetia. Sometime around the start of the Common Era, the Romans maintained a large camp called Vindonissa, now a ruin at the confluence of the Aare and Reuss rivers, near the town of Windisch.

The first and second century AD was an age of prosperity on the Swiss Plateau. Towns such as Aventicum, Iulia Equestris and Augusta Raurica reached a remarkable size, while hundreds of agricultural estates (Villae rusticae) were established in the countryside.

Around 260 AD, the fall of the Agri Decumates territory north of the Rhine transformed today&#x27;s Switzerland into a frontier land of the Empire. Repeated raids by the Alamanni tribes provoked the ruin of the Roman towns and economy, forcing the population to shelter near Roman fortresses, like the Castrum Rauracense near Augusta Raurica. The Empire built another line of defence at the north border (the so-called Donau-Iller-Rhine-Limes). At the end of the fourth century, the increased Germanic pressure forced the Romans to abandon the linear defence concept. The Swiss Plateau was finally open to Germanic tribes.

In the Early Middle Ages, from the end of the fourth century, the western extent of modern-day Switzerland was part of the territory of the Kings of the Burgundians, who introduced the French language to the area. The Alemanni settled the Swiss Plateau in the fifth century and the valleys of the Alps in the eighth century, forming Alemannia. Modern-day Switzerland was then divided between the kingdoms of Alemannia and Burgundy. The entire region became part of the expanding Frankish Empire in the sixth century, following Clovis I&#x27;s victory over the Alemanni at Tolbiac in 504 AD, and later Frankish domination of the Burgundians.

Throughout the rest of the sixth, seventh and eighth centuries, Swiss regions continued under Frankish hegemony (Merovingian and Carolingian dynasties) but after its extension under Charlemagne, the Frankish Empire was divided by the Treaty of Verdun in 843. The territories of present-day Switzerland became divided into Middle Francia and East Francia until they were reunified under the Holy Roman Empire around 1000 AD.

In the 10th century, as the rule of the Carolingians waned, Magyars destroyed Basel in 917 and St. Gallen in 926. In response, Henry the Fowler, the then ruler of East Francia, decreed the fortification of key settlements to defend against these invasions. Large villages and towns, including strategic locations like Zurich and St.Gallen, were fortified. This initiative led to the development of what were essentially early urban strongholds and city governments in Eastern Switzerland.

By 1200, the Swiss Plateau comprised the dominions of the houses of Savoy, Zähringer, Habsburg, and Kyburg. Some regions (Uri, Schwyz, Unterwalden, later known as ) were accorded the Imperial immediacy to grant the empire direct control over the mountain passes. With the extinction of its male line in 1263, the Kyburg dynasty fell in AD 1264. The Habsburgs under King Rudolph I (Holy Roman Emperor in 1273) laid claim to the Kyburg lands and annexed them, extending their territory to the eastern Swiss Plateau.

=== Old Swiss Confederacy ===



The Old Swiss Confederacy was an alliance among the valley communities of the central Alps. The Confederacy was governed by nobles and patricians of various cantons who facilitated management of common interests and ensured peace on mountain trade routes. The Federal Charter of 1291 is considered the confederacy&#x27;s founding document, even though similar alliances likely existed decades earlier. The document was agreed among the rural communes of Uri, Schwyz, and Unterwalden.

By 1353, the three original cantons had joined with the cantons of Glarus and Zug and the Lucerne, Zurich and Bern city-states to form the &quot;Old Confederacy&quot; of eight states that obtained through the end of the 15th century. The expansion led to increased power and wealth for the confederation. By 1460, the confederates controlled most of the territory south and west of the Rhine to the Alps and the Jura mountains, and the University of Basel was founded (with a faculty of medicine) establishing a tradition of chemical and medical research. This increased after victories against the Habsburgs (Battle of Sempach, Battle of Näfels), over Charles the Bold of Burgundy during the 1470s, and the success of the Swiss mercenaries. The Swiss victory in the Swabian War against the Swabian League of Emperor Maximilian I in 1499 amounted to &quot;de facto&quot; independence within the Holy Roman Empire. In 1501, Basel and Schaffhausen joined the Old Swiss Confederacy.

The Confederacy acquired a reputation of invincibility during these earlier wars, but expansion of the confederation suffered a setback in 1515 with the Swiss defeat in the Battle of Marignano. This ended the so-called &quot;heroic&quot; epoch of Swiss history. The success of Zwingli&#x27;s Reformation in some cantons led to inter-cantonal religious conflicts in 1529 and 1531 (Wars of Kappel). It was not until more than one hundred years after these internal wars that, in 1648, under the Peace of Westphalia, European countries recognised Switzerland&#x27;s independence from the Holy Roman Empire and its neutrality.

During the Early Modern period of Swiss history, the growing authoritarianism of the patriciate families combined with a financial crisis in the wake of the Thirty Years&#x27; War led to the Swiss peasant war of 1653. In the background to this struggle, the conflict between Catholic and Protestant cantons persisted, erupting in further violence at the First War of Villmergen, in 1656, and the Toggenburg War (or Second War of Villmergen), in 1712.

=== Napoleonic era ===

In 1798, the revolutionary French government invaded Switzerland and imposed a new unified constitution. This centralised the government of the country, effectively abolishing the cantons: moreover, Mülhausen left Switzerland and the Valtellina valley became part of the Cisalpine Republic. The new regime, known as the Helvetic Republic, was highly unpopular. An invading foreign army had imposed and destroyed centuries of tradition, making Switzerland nothing more than a French satellite state. The fierce French suppression of the Nidwalden Revolt in September 1798 was an example of the oppressive presence of the French Army and the local population&#x27;s resistance to the occupation.

When war broke out between France and its rivals, Russian and Austrian forces invaded Switzerland. The Swiss refused to fight alongside the French in the name of the Helvetic Republic. In 1803 Napoleon organised a meeting of the leading Swiss politicians from both sides in Paris. The Act of Mediation was the result, which largely restored Swiss autonomy and introduced a Confederation of 19 cantons. Henceforth, much of Swiss politics would concern balancing the cantons&#x27; tradition of self-rule with the need for a central government.

In 1815 the Congress of Vienna fully re-established Swiss independence, and the European powers recognised permanent Swiss neutrality. Swiss troops served foreign governments until 1860 when they fought in the siege of Gaeta. The treaty allowed Switzerland to increase its territory, with the admission of the cantons of Valais, Neuchâtel and Geneva. Switzerland&#x27;s borders saw only minor adjustments thereafter.

=== Federal state ===

The restoration of power to the patriciate was only temporary. After a period of unrest with repeated violent clashes, such as the Züriputsch of 1839, civil war (the &quot;Sonderbundskrieg&quot;) broke out in 1847 when some Catholic cantons tried to set up a separate alliance (the &quot;Sonderbund&quot;). The war lasted less than a month, causing fewer than 100 casualties, most of which were through friendly fire. The Sonderbundskrieg had a significant impact on the psychology and society of Switzerland.

The war convinced most Swiss of the need for unity and strength. Swiss from all strata of society, whether Catholic or Protestant, from the liberal or conservative current, realised that the cantons would profit more from merging their economic and religious interests.

Thus, while the rest of Europe saw revolutionary uprisings, the Swiss drew up a constitution that provided for a federal layout, much of it inspired by the American example. This constitution provided central authority while leaving the cantons the right to self-government on local issues. Giving credit to those who favoured the power of the cantons (the Sonderbund Kantone), the national assembly was divided between an upper house (the Council of States, two representatives per canton) and a lower house (the National Council, with representatives elected from across the country). Referendums were made mandatory for any amendments. This new constitution ended the legal power of nobility in Switzerland.
A single system of weights and measures was introduced, and in 1850 the Swiss franc became the Swiss single currency, complemented by the WIR franc in 1934. Article 11 of the constitution forbade sending troops to serve abroad, marking the end of foreign service. It came with the expectation of serving the Holy See, and the Swiss were still obliged to serve Francis II of the Two Sicilies with Swiss Guards present at the siege of Gaeta in 1860.

An important clause of the constitution was that it could be entirely rewritten, if necessary, thus enabling it to evolve as a whole rather than being modified one amendment at a time.

This need soon proved itself when the rise in population and the Industrial Revolution that followed led to calls to modify the constitution accordingly. The population rejected an early draft in 1872, but modifications led to its acceptance in 1874. It introduced the facultative referendum for laws at the federal level. It also established federal responsibility for defence, trade, and legal matters.

In 1891, the constitution was revised with uncommonly strong elements of direct democracy, which remain unique today.

=== Modern history ===
Switzerland was not invaded during either of the world wars. During World War I, Switzerland was home to the revolutionary and founder of the Soviet Union Vladimir Illych Ulyanov (Vladimir Lenin) who remained there until 1917. Swiss neutrality was seriously questioned by the short-lived Grimm–Hoffmann affair in 1917. In 1920, Switzerland joined the League of Nations, which was based in Geneva, after it was exempted from military requirements.

During World War II, detailed invasion plans were drawn up by the Germans, but Switzerland was never attacked. Switzerland was able to remain independent through a combination of military deterrence, concessions to Germany, and good fortune, as larger events during the war intervened. General Henri Guisan, appointed the commander-in-chief for the duration of the war ordered a general mobilisation of the armed forces. The Swiss military strategy changed from static defence at the borders to organised long-term attrition and withdrawal to strong, well-stockpiled positions high in the Alps, known as the Reduit. Switzerland was an important base for espionage by both sides and often mediated communications between the Axis and Allied powers.

Switzerland&#x27;s trade was blockaded by both the Allies and the Axis. Economic cooperation and extension of credit to Nazi Germany varied according to the perceived likelihood of invasion and the availability of other trading partners. Concessions reached a peak after a crucial rail link through Vichy France was severed in 1942, leaving Switzerland (together with Liechtenstein) entirely isolated from the wider world by Axis-controlled territory. Over the course of the war, Switzerland interned over 300,000 refugees aided by the International Red Cross, based in Geneva. Strict immigration and asylum policies and the financial relationships with Nazi Germany raised controversy, only at the end of the 20th century.

During the war, the Swiss Air Force engaged aircraft of both sides, shooting down 11 intruding Luftwaffe planes in May and June 1940, then forcing down other intruders after a change of policy following threats from Germany. Over 100 Allied bombers and their crews were interned. Between 1940 and 1945, Switzerland was bombed by the Allies, causing fatalities and property damage. Among the cities and towns bombed were Basel, Brusio, Chiasso, Cornol, Geneva, Koblenz, Niederweningen, Rafz, Renens, Samedan, Schaffhausen, Stein am Rhein, Tägerwilen, Thayngen, Vals, and Zurich. Allied forces maintained that the bombings, which violated the 96th Article of War, resulted from navigation errors, equipment failure, weather conditions, and pilot errors. The Swiss expressed fear and concern that the bombings were intended to put pressure on Switzerland to end economic cooperation and neutrality with Nazi Germany. Court-martial proceedings took place in England. The US paid SFR 62M for reparations.

Switzerland&#x27;s attitude towards refugees was complicated and controversial; over the course of the war, it admitted as many as 300,000 refugees while refusing tens of thousands more, including Jews persecuted by the Nazis.

After the war, the Swiss government exported credits through the charitable fund known as the and donated to the Marshall Plan to help Europe&#x27;s recovery, efforts that ultimately benefited the Swiss economy.

During the Cold War, Swiss authorities considered the construction of a Swiss nuclear bomb. Leading nuclear physicists at the Federal Institute of Technology Zurich such as Paul Scherrer made this a realistic possibility. In 1988, the Paul Scherrer Institute was founded in his name to explore the therapeutic uses of neutron scattering technologies. Financial problems with the defence budget and ethical considerations prevented the substantial funds from being allocated, and the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty of 1968 was seen as a valid alternative. Plans for building nuclear weapons were dropped by 1988. Switzerland joined the Council of Europe in 1963.
Switzerland was the last Western republic (the Principality of Liechtenstein followed in 1984) to grant women the right to vote. Some Swiss cantons approved this in 1959, while at the federal level, it was achieved in 1971 and, after resistance, in the last canton Appenzell Innerrhoden (one of only two remaining &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot;, along with Glarus) in 1990. After obtaining suffrage at the federal level, women quickly rose in political significance. The first woman on the seven-member Federal Council executive was Elisabeth Kopp, who served from 1984 to 1989, and the first female president was Ruth Dreifuss in 1999.

In 1979 areas from the canton of Bern attained independence from the Bernese, forming the new canton of Jura. On 18 April 1999, the Swiss population and the cantons voted in favour of a completely revised federal constitution.

In 2002 Switzerland became a full member of the United Nations, leaving Vatican City as the last widely recognised state without full UN membership. Switzerland is a founding member of the EFTA but not the European Economic Area (EEA). An application for membership in the European Union was sent in May 1992, but did not advance since rejecting the EEA in December 1992 when Switzerland conducted a referendum on the EEA. Several referendums on the EU issue ensued; due to opposition from the citizens, the membership application was withdrawn. Nonetheless, Swiss law is gradually changing to conform with that of the EU, and the government signed bilateral agreements with the European Union. Switzerland, together with Liechtenstein, has been surrounded by the EU since Austria&#x27;s entry in 1995. On 5 June 2005, Swiss voters agreed by a 55% majority to join the Schengen treaty, a result that EU commentators regarded as a sign of support. In September 2020, a referendum calling for a vote to end the pact that allowed a free movement of people from the European Union was introduced by the Swiss People&#x27;s Party (SVP). However, voters rejected the attempt to retake control of immigration, defeating the motion by a roughly 63%–37% margin.

On 9 February 2014, 50.3% of Swiss voters approved a ballot initiative launched by the Swiss People&#x27;s Party (SVP/UDC) to restrict immigration. This initiative was mostly backed by rural (57.6% approval) and suburban groups (51.2% approval), and isolated towns (51.3% approval) as well as by a strong majority (69.2% approval) in Ticino, while metropolitan centres (58.5% rejection) and the French-speaking part (58.5% rejection) rejected it. In December 2016, a political compromise with the EU was attained that eliminated quotas on EU citizens, but still allowed favourable treatment of Swiss-based job applicants. On 27 September 2020, 62% of Swiss voters rejected the anti-free movement referendum by SVP.

== Geography ==

Extending across the north and south side of the Alps in west-central Europe, Switzerland encompasses diverse landscapes and climates across its .

Switzerland lies between latitudes 45° and 48° N, and longitudes 5° and 11° E. It contains three basic topographical areas: the Swiss Alps to the south, the Swiss Plateau or Central Plateau, and the Jura mountains on the west. The Alps are a mountain range running across the central and south of the country, constituting about 60% of the country&#x27;s area. The majority of the population live on the Swiss Plateau. The Swiss Alps host many glaciers, covering . From these originate the headwaters of several major rivers, such as the Rhine, Inn, Ticino and Rhône, which flow in the four cardinal directions, spreading across Europe. The hydrographic network includes several of the largest bodies of fresh water in Central and Western Europe, among which are Lake Geneva (Lac Léman in French), Lake Constance (Bodensee in German) and Lake Maggiore. Switzerland has more than 1500 lakes and contains 6% of Europe&#x27;s freshwater stock. Lakes and glaciers cover about 6% of the national territory. Lake Geneva is the largest lake and is shared with France. The Rhône is both the main source and outflow of Lake Geneva. Lake Constance is the second largest and, like Lake Geneva, an intermediate step by the Rhine at the border with Austria and Germany. While the Rhône flows into the Mediterranean Sea at the French Camargue region and the Rhine flows into the North Sea at Rotterdam, about apart, both springs are only about apart in the Swiss Alps. 90% of Switzerland&#x27;s 65,000-kilometre-long network of rivers and streams have been straightened, dammed, canalized or channeled underground, in an effort to prevent natural disasters such as flooding, landslides, and avalanches. 80% of all Swiss drinking water comes from groundwater sources.

Forty-eight mountains are or higher in height. At , Monte Rosa is the highest, although the Matterhorn () is the best known. Both are located within the Pennine Alps in the canton of Valais, on the border with Italy. The section of the Bernese Alps above the deep glacial Lauterbrunnen valley, containing 72 waterfalls, is well known for the Jungfrau () Eiger and Mönch peaks, and its many picturesque valleys. In the southeast the long Engadin Valley, encompassing St. Moritz, is also well known; the highest peak in the neighbouring Bernina Alps is Piz Bernina ().

The Swiss Plateau has greater open and hilly landscapes, partly forested, partly open pastures, usually with grazing herds or vegetable and fruit fields, but it is still hilly. Large lakes and the biggest Swiss cities are found there.

Switzerland contains two small enclaves: Büsingen belongs to Germany, while Campione d&#x27;Italia belongs to Italy. Switzerland has no exclaves.

=== Climate ===

The Swiss climate is generally temperate, but can vary greatly across localities, from glacial conditions on the mountaintops to the near-Mediterranean climate at Switzerland&#x27;s southern tip. Some valley areas in the southern part of Switzerland offer cold-hardy palm trees. Summers tend to be warm and humid at times with periodic rainfall, ideal for pastures/grazing. The less humid winters in the mountains may see weeks-long intervals of stable conditions. At the same time, the lower lands tend to suffer from inversion during such periods, hiding the sun.

A weather phenomenon known as the föhn (with an identical effect to the chinook wind) can occur any time and is characterised by an unexpectedly warm wind, bringing low relative humidity air to the north of the Alps during rainfall periods on the south-facing slopes. This works both ways across the alps but is more efficient if blowing from the south due to the steeper step for oncoming wind. Valleys running south to north trigger the best effect. The driest conditions persist in all inner alpine valleys that receive less rain because arriving clouds lose a lot of their moisture content while crossing the mountains before reaching these areas. Large alpine areas such as Graubünden remain drier than pre-alpine areas, and as in the main valley of the Valais, wine grapes are grown there.

The wettest conditions persist in the high Alps and in the Ticino canton, which has much sun yet heavy bursts of rain from time to time. Precipitation tends to be spread moderately throughout the year, with a peak in summer. Autumn is the driest season, winter receives less precipitation than summer, yet the weather patterns in Switzerland are not in a stable climate system. They can vary from year to year with no strict and predictable periods.

=== Environment ===
Switzerland contains two terrestrial ecoregions: Western European broadleaf forests and Alps conifer and mixed forests.

Switzerland&#x27;s many small valleys separated by high mountains often host unique ecologies. The mountainous regions themselves offer a rich range of plants not found at other altitudes. The climatic, geological and topographical conditions of the alpine region make for a fragile ecosystem that is particularly sensitive to climate change. According to the 2014 Environmental Performance Index, Switzerland ranks first among 132 nations in safeguarding the environment, due to its high scores on environmental public health, its heavy reliance on renewable sources of energy (hydropower and geothermal energy), and its level of greenhouse gas emissions. In 2020 it was ranked third out of 180 countries. The country pledged to cut GHG emissions by 50% by 2030 compared to the level of 1990 and plans to reach zero emissions by 2050.

However, access to biocapacity in Switzerland is far lower than the world average. In 2016, Switzerland had 1.0 hectares of biocapacity per person within its territory, 40 per cent less than world average of 1.6. In contrast, in 2016, Swiss consumption required 4.6 hectares of biocapacity – their ecological footprint, 4.6 times as much as Swiss territory can support. The remainder comes from other countries and the shared resources (such as the atmosphere impacted by greenhouse gas emissions). Switzerland had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 3.53/10, ranking it 150th globally out of 172 countries.

Switzerland ranked 9th in the Environmental Performance Index for 2024. It scored well in parameters including air pollution, sanitation and drinking water, waste management, and climate change mitigation.

=== Urbanisation ===


About 85% of the population live in urban areas. Switzerland went from a largely rural country to an urban one from 1930 to 2000. After 1935 urban development claimed as much of the Swiss landscape as it did during the prior 2,000 years. Urban sprawl affects the plateau, the Jura and the Alpine foothills, raising concerns about land use. During the 21st century, population growth in urban areas is higher than in the countryside.

Switzerland has a dense network of complementary large, medium and small towns. The plateau is densely populated with about 400 people per km2 and the landscape shows uninterrupted signs of human presence. The weight of the largest metropolitan areas – Zurich, Geneva–Lausanne, Basel and Bern – tend to increase. The importance of these urban areas is greater than their population suggests. These urban centers are recognised for their high quality of life.

The average population density in 2019 was . In the largest canton by area, Graubünden, lying entirely in the Alps, population density falls to . In the canton of Zurich, with its large urban capital, the density is .

== Government and politics ==

The Federal Constitution adopted in 1848 is the legal foundation of Switzerland&#x27;s federal state. It is regularly modified by referendum and has been completely revised twice, in 1874 and 1999. The constitution outlines rights of individuals and citizen participation in public affairs, divides the powers between the confederation and the cantons and defines federal jurisdiction and authority. Three main bodies govern on the federal level: the Federal Assembly (legislative), the Federal Council (executive) and the federal courts (judicial).

=== Federal Assembly ===
The Federal Assembly is the parliament of Switzerland. It consists of two houses: The Council of States has 46 members, two from each canton and one from each half-canton. The National Council has 200 members, apportioned to reflect the population of each canton, and elected by proportional representation within each canton. Members of both houses serve for four years and work part-time (&quot;Milizsystem&quot;). When both houses are in joint session, they are known collectively as the Federal Assembly. Through optional referendums, citizens may challenge any law passed by parliament.

=== Federal Council ===

The Federal Council is the Swiss executive. It leads the federal administration and serves as a collective head of state. It is a collegial body of seven members, elected to four-year terms by the Federal Assembly, which oversees the council. Each member leads a department of the federal government. Each year, one member of the Council is elected President of the Confederation by the Assembly, with the presidency traditionally rotating between members. The President chairs and represents the government, but has no additional powers and remains the head of their department.

The government has been a coalition of the four major political parties since 1959, each party having a number of seats that roughly reflects its share of the electorate and representation in the federal parliament. This distribution is called the &quot;magic formula&quot;. Since 2003, the seven seats in the Federal Council have been distributed as follows:

* 1 seat for The Centre
* 2 seats for the Free Democratic Party (FDP/PRD)
* 2 seats for the Social Democratic Party (SP/PS)
* 2 seats for the Swiss People&#x27;s Party (SVP/UDC)
=== Supreme Court ===
The function of the Federal Supreme Court is to hear appeals against rulings of cantonal or federal courts. The judges are elected by the Federal Assembly for six-year terms.

=== Direct democracy ===
Direct democracy and federalism are hallmarks of the Swiss political system defined in the Swiss constitution. The Swiss people are subject to three legal jurisdictions: the municipal, cantonal and federal levels. At the federal level, popular rights include the right to submit a federal initiative and a referendum, both of which may overturn parliamentary decisions.

There are three types of federal referendum in Switzerland: 

* An optional referendum challenges a law passed by parliament. It requires gathering 50,000 signatures or the objection of eight cantons within 100 days. Voters decide by a simple majority whether to accept or reject the law.
* A mandatory referendum is required for all constitutional amendments passed by the Federal Assembly. Constitutional amendments require a double majority, i.e. both a majority of the national popular vote and a majority of cantonal votes.
* A popular initiative is an amendment to the constitution proposed by citizens. A petition supporting the initiative must be signed by 100,000 voters within 18 months for a referendum to be held. Popular initiatives also require a double majority to pass.

The Federal Council and the Federal Assembly can supplement a popular initiative with a counterproposal. Voters must then indicate their preference if both proposals are accepted. 

=== Cantons ===

The Swiss Confederation consists of 26 cantons. The cantons are federated states, with permanent constitutional status and a high degree of independence relative to the subnational divisions of most countries. Under the Federal Constitution, all 26 cantons are equal in status, except that six (referred to often as the half-cantons) are represented by one councillor instead of two in the Council of States and have only half a cantonal vote with respect to the required cantonal majority in referendums on constitutional amendments. Each canton has its own constitution and its own parliament, government, police and courts. However, considerable differences define the individual cantons, particularly in terms of population and geographical area. Their populations vary between 16,003 (Appenzell Innerrhoden) and 1,487,969 (Zurich), and their area between (Basel-Stadt) and (Grisons).
*These cantons are known as half-cantons.

==== Municipalities ====

As of 2018 the cantons comprised 2,222 municipalities.

=== Federal City ===
Until 1848, the loosely coupled Confederation did not have a central political organisation. Issues thought to affect the whole Confederation were the subject of periodic meetings in various locations.
In 1848, the federal constitution provided that details concerning federal institutions, such as their locations, should be addressed by the Federal Assembly (BV 1848 Art. 108). Thus on 28 November 1848, the Federal Assembly voted in the majority to locate the seat of government in Bern and, as a prototypical federal compromise, to assign other federal institutions, such as the Federal Polytechnical School (1854, the later ETH) to Zurich, and other institutions to Lucerne, such as the later SUVA (1912) and the Federal Insurance Court (1917). Other federal institutions were subsequently attributed to Lausanne (Federal Supreme Court in 1872, and EPFL in 1969), Bellinzona (Federal Criminal Court, 2004), and St. Gallen (Federal Administrative Court and Federal Patent Court, 2012).

The 1999 Constitution does not mention a Federal City and the Federal Council has yet to address the matter. Thus no city in Switzerland has the &quot;official&quot; status either of capital or of Federal City. Nevertheless, Bern is commonly referred to as &quot;Federal City&quot; (, , ).

=== Foreign relations and international institutions ===
Traditionally, Switzerland avoids alliances that might entail military, political, or direct economic action and has been neutral since the end of its expansion in 1515. Its policy of neutrality was internationally recognised at the Congress of Vienna in 1815. Swiss neutrality has been questioned at times. In 2002 Switzerland became a full member of the United Nations. It was the first state to join it by referendum. Switzerland maintains diplomatic relations with almost all countries and historically has served as an intermediary between other states. Switzerland is not a member of the European Union; the Swiss people have consistently rejected membership since the early 1990s. However, Switzerland does participate in the Schengen Area.

Many international institutions have headquarters in Switzerland, in part because of its policy of neutrality. Geneva is the birthplace of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, the Geneva Conventions and, since 2006, hosts the United Nations Human Rights Council. Even though Switzerland is one of the most recent countries to join the United Nations, the Palace of Nations in Geneva is the second biggest centre for the United Nations after the headquarters in New York. Switzerland was a founding member and hosted the League of Nations.

Apart from the United Nations headquarters, the Swiss Confederation is host to many UN agencies, including the World Health Organization (WHO), the International Labour Organization (ILO), the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and about 200 other international organisations, including the World Trade Organization and the World Intellectual Property Organization. The annual meetings of the World Economic Forum in Davos bring together business and political leaders from Switzerland and foreign countries to discuss important issues. The headquarters of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) moved to Basel in 1930.

Many sports federations and organisations are located in the country, including the International Handball Federation in Basel, the International Basketball Federation in Geneva, the Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) in Nyon, the International Federation of Association Football (FIFA) and the International Ice Hockey Federation both in Zurich, the International Cycling Union in Aigle, and the International Olympic Committee in Lausanne.

Switzerland became a member of the United Nations Security Council for the 2023–2024 period. According to the 2024 Global Peace Index, Switzerland is the 6th most peaceful country in the world.

==== Switzerland and the European Union ====

Although not a member, Switzerland maintains relationships with the EU and European countries through bilateral agreements. The Swiss have brought their economic practices largely into conformity with those of the EU, in an effort to compete internationally. EU membership faces considerable negative popular sentiment. It is opposed by the conservative SVP party, the largest party in the National Council, and not advocated by several other political parties. The membership application was formally withdrawn in 2016. The western French-speaking areas and the urban regions of the rest of the country tend to be more pro-EU, but do not form a significant share of the population.
An Integration Office operates under the Department of Foreign Affairs and the Department of Economic Affairs. Seven bilateral agreements liberalised trade ties, taking effect in 2001. This first series of bilateral agreements included the free movement of persons. A second series of agreements covering nine areas was signed in 2004, including the Schengen Treaty and the Dublin Convention.

In 2006, a referendum approved 1 billion francs of supportive investment in Southern and Central European countries in support of positive ties to the EU as a whole. A further referendum will be needed to approve 300 million francs to support Romania and Bulgaria and their recent admission.

The Swiss have faced EU and international pressure to reduce banking secrecy and raise tax rates to parity with the EU. Preparatory discussions involved four areas: the electricity market, participation in project Galileo, cooperating with the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control and certificates of origin for food products.

Switzerland is a member of the Schengen passport-free zone. Land border checkpoints monitor goods movements, but not people.

=== Military ===

The Swiss Armed Forces, including the Land Forces and the Air Force, are composed mostly of conscripts, male citizens aged from 20 to 34 (in exceptional cases up to 50) years. Being a landlocked country, Switzerland has no navy; however, on lakes bordering neighbouring countries, armed boats patrol. Swiss citizens are prohibited from serving in foreign armies, except for the Swiss Guards of the Vatican, or if they are dual citizens of a foreign country and reside there.

The Swiss militia system stipulates that soldiers keep their army-issued equipment, including fully automatic personal weapons, at home. Women can serve voluntarily. Men usually receive military conscription orders for training at the age of 18. About two-thirds of young Swiss are found suitable for service; for the others, various forms of alternative service are available. Annually, approximately 20,000 persons are trained in recruit centres for 18 to 21 weeks. The reform &quot;Army XXI&quot; was adopted by popular vote in 2003, replacing &quot;Army 95&quot;, reducing the rolls from 400,000 to about 200,000. Of those, 120,000 are active in periodic Army training, and 80,000 are non-training reserves.

The newest reform of the military, (WEA; English: Further development of the Army), started in 2018 and was expected to reduce the number of army personnel to 100,000 by the end of 2022.
Overall, three general mobilisations have been declared to ensure the integrity and neutrality of Switzerland. The first mobilisation was held in response to the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–71; while the second was in response to the First World War outbreak in August 1914; the third mobilisation took place in September 1939 in response to the German attack on Poland.

Because of its neutrality policy, the Swiss army does not take part in armed conflicts in other countries but joins some peacekeeping missions. Since 2000 the armed force department has maintained the Onyx intelligence gathering system to monitor satellite communications.

Gun politics in Switzerland are unique in Europe in that 2–3.5 million guns are in the hands of civilians, giving the nation an estimate of 28–41 guns per 100 people. As per the Small Arms Survey, only 324,484 guns are owned by the military. Only 143,372 are in the hands of soldiers. However, ammunition is no longer issued.

== Economy and labour law ==

Switzerland has a stable, prosperous and high-tech economy. It is the world&#x27;s wealthiest country per capita in multiple rankings. The country ranks as one of the least corrupt countries in the world, while its banking sector is rated as &quot;one of the most corrupt in the world&quot;. It has the world&#x27;s twentieth largest economy by nominal GDP and the thirty-eighth largest by purchasing power parity. As of 2021, it is the thirteenth largest exporter, and the fifth largest per capita. Zurich and Geneva are regarded as global cities, ranked as Alpha and Beta respectively. Basel is the capital of Switzerland&#x27;s pharmaceutical industry, hosting Novartis, Roche, and many other players. It is one of the world&#x27;s most important centres for the life sciences industry.

Switzerland had the second-highest global rating in the Index of Economic Freedom 2023, while also providing significant public services. On a per capita basis, nominal GDP is higher than those of the larger Western and Central European economies and Japan, while adjusted for purchasing power, Switzerland ranked 11th in 2017, fifth in 2018, and ninth in 2020.

The 2016 World Economic Forum&#x27;s Global Competitiveness Report ranked Switzerland&#x27;s economy as the world&#x27;s most competitive; as of 2019, it ranks fifth globally. The European Union labeled it Europe&#x27;s most innovative country. Switzerland has been ranked the most innovative country in the Global Innovation Index in 2024, as it had done in 2023, 2022, 2021, 2020 and 2019. It ranked 20th of 189 countries in the Ease of Doing Business Index. Switzerland&#x27;s slow growth in the 1990s and the early 2000s increased support for economic reforms and harmonisation with the European Union. In 2020, IMD placed Switzerland first in attracting skilled workers.

For much of the 20th century, Switzerland was the wealthiest country in Europe by a considerable margin (per capita GDP). Switzerland has one of the world&#x27;s largest account balances as a percentage of GDP. In 2018, the canton of Basel-City had the highest GDP per capita, ahead of Zug and Geneva. According to Credit Suisse, only about 37% of residents own their own homes, one of the lowest rates of home ownership in Europe. Housing and food price levels were 171% and 145% of the EU-25 index in 2007, compared to 113% and 104% in Germany.

Switzerland is home to several large multinational corporations. The largest by revenue are Glencore, Gunvor, Nestlé, Mediterranean Shipping Company, Novartis, Hoffmann-La Roche, ABB, Mercuria Energy Group and Adecco. Also, notable are UBS, Zurich Insurance, Richemont, Credit Suisse, Barry Callebaut, Swiss Re, Rolex, Tetra Pak, Swatch Group and Swiss International Air Lines.

Switzerland&#x27;s most important economic sector is manufacturing. Manufactured products include specialty chemicals, health and pharmaceutical goods, scientific and precision measuring instruments and musical instruments. The largest exported goods are chemicals (34% of exported goods), machines/electronics (20.9%), and precision instruments/watches (16.9%). The service sector – especially banking and insurance, commodities trading, tourism, and international organisations – is another important industry for Switzerland. Exported services amount to a third of exports.

Agricultural protectionism—a rare exception to Switzerland&#x27;s free trade policies—contributes to high food prices. Product market liberalisation is lagging behind many EU countries according to the OECD. Apart from agriculture, economic and trade barriers between the European Union and Switzerland are minimal, and Switzerland has free trade agreements with many countries. Switzerland is a member of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA).

Switzerland is considered as the &quot;land of Cooperatives&quot; with the ten largest cooperative companies accounting for more than 11% of GDP in 2018. They include Migros and Coop, the two largest retail companies in Switzerland.

=== Taxation and government spending ===
Switzerland is a tax haven. The private sector economy dominates. It features low tax rates; tax revenue to GDP ratio is one of the smallest of developed countries. The Swiss Federal budget reached 62.8 billion Swiss francs in 2010, 11.35% of GDP; however, canton and municipality budgets are not counted as part of the federal budget. Total government spending is closer to 33.8% of GDP. The main sources of income for the federal government are the value-added tax (33% of tax revenue) and the direct federal tax (29%). The main areas of expenditure are in social welfare and finance/taxes. The expenditures of the Swiss Confederation have been growing from 7% of GDP in 1960 to 9.7% in 1990 and 10.7% in 2010. While the social welfare and finance sectors and tax grew from 35% in 1990 to 48.2% in 2010, a significant reduction of expenditures has been occurring in agriculture and national defence; from 26.5% to 12.4% (estimation for the year 2015).

=== Labour force ===

Slightly more than 5 million people work in Switzerland; about 25% of employees belonged to a trade union in 2004. Switzerland has a more flexible labor market than neighbouring countries and the unemployment rate is consistently low. The unemployment rate increased from 1.7% in June 2000 to 4.4% in December 2009. It then decreased to 3.2% in 2014 and held steady for several years, before further dropping to 2.5% in 2018 and 2.3% in 2019; in 2023 it had reached a 20-year low of 2%. Population growth (from net immigration) reached 0.52% of population in 2004, increased in the following years before falling to 0.54% again in 2017. The foreign citizen population was 28.9% in 2015, about the same as in Australia.

In 2016, the median monthly gross income in Switzerland was 6,502 francs per month (equivalent to US$6,597 per month). After rent, taxes and pension contributions, plus spending on goods and services, the average household has about 15% of its gross income left for savings. Though 61% of the population made less than the mean income, income inequality is relatively low with a Gini coefficient of 29.7, placing Switzerland among the top 20 countries. In 2015, the richest 1% owned 35% of the wealth. Wealth inequality increased through 2019.

About 8.2% of the population live below the national poverty line, defined in Switzerland as earning less than CHF3,990 per month for a household of two adults and two children, and a further 15% are at risk of poverty. Single-parent families, those with no post-compulsory education and those out of work are among the most likely to live below the poverty line. Although work is considered a way out of poverty, some 4.3% are considered working poor. One in ten jobs in Switzerland is considered low-paid; roughly 12% of Swiss workers hold such jobs, many of them women and foreigners.

== Education and science ==

Education in Switzerland is diverse, because the constitution of Switzerland delegates the operation for the school system to the cantons. Public and private schools are available, including many private international schools.

=== Primary education ===
The minimum age for primary school is about six years, but most cantons provide a free &quot;children&#x27;s school&quot; starting at age four or five. Primary school continues until grade four, five or six, depending on the school. Traditionally, the first foreign language in school was one of the other Swiss languages, although in 2000, English was elevated in a few cantons. At the end of primary school or at the beginning of secondary school, pupils are assigned according to their capacities into one of several sections (often three). The fastest learners are taught advanced classes to prepare for further studies and the matura, while other students receive an education adapted to their needs.

=== Tertiary education ===
Switzerland hosts 12 universities, ten of which are maintained at cantonal level and usually offer non-technical subjects. It ranked 87th on the 2019 Academic Ranking of World Universities. The largest is the University of Zurich with nearly 25,000 students. The Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich (ETHZ) and the University of Zurich are listed 20th and 54th respectively, on the 2015 Academic Ranking of World Universities.

The federal government sponsors two institutes: the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich (ETHZ) in Zurich, founded in 1855 and the (EPFL) in Lausanne, founded in 1969, formerly associated with the University of Lausanne.

Eight of the world&#x27;s ten best hotel schools are located in Switzerland. In addition, various universities of applied sciences are available. In business and management studies, the University of St. Gallen, (HSG) is ranked 329th in the world according to QS World University Rankings and the International Institute for Management Development (IMD), was ranked first in open programmes worldwide&quot;.&quot; Switzerland has the second highest rate (almost 18% in 2003) of foreign students in tertiary education, after Australia (slightly over 18%).

The Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies, located in Geneva, is continental Europe&#x27;s oldest graduate school of international and development studies. It is widely held to be one of its most prestigious.

=== Science ===

Switzerland is among the countries with the highest number of Nobel laureates, both in total and per capita; of the 28 Swiss nationals who have won the Nobel Prize, 23 were recognised in the sciences. Among the most famous is Albert Einstein, who became a Swiss citizen in 1901 and developed his theory of special relativity in Bern. Among the Nobel laureates born or nautralised in Switzerland are Vladimir Prelog, Heinrich Rohrer, Richard Ernst, Edmond Fischer, Rolf Zinkernagel, Kurt Wüthrich and Jacques Dubochet. Over 100 laureates across all fields have a relationship to Switzerland. The Nobel Peace Prize has been awarded nine times to organisations headquartered in Switzerland.

Geneva and the nearby French department of Ain co-host the world&#x27;s largest laboratory, CERN, dedicated to particle physics research. Another important research centre is the Paul Scherrer Institute, which conducts multi-disciplinary research in the natural and engineering sciences. 

Notable Swiss inventions include lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), diazepam (Valium), Velcro, and the scanning tunnelling microscope (which earned inventors Gerd Binnig and Heinrich Rohrer the 1986 Nobel Prize in Physics. Auguste Piccard became the first person to enter the Stratosphere with his pressurised hydrogen ballon, while his son Jacques Piccard became one of the first people to explore the deepest known part of the world&#x27;s ocean (along with American Don Walsh).

The Swiss Space Office has been involved in various space technologies and programmes. It was one of the 10 founders of the European Space Agency in 1975 and is the seventh largest contributor to the ESA budget. In the private sector, several companies participate in the space industry, such as Oerlikon Space and Maxon Motors.

=== Energy ===


Electricity generated in Switzerland is 56% from hydroelectricity and 39% from nuclear power, producing negligible CO2. On 18 May 2003, two anti-nuclear referendums were defeated: &quot;Moratorium Plus&quot;, aimed at forbidding the building of new nuclear power plants (41.6% supported), and Electricity Without Nuclear (33.7% supported) after a moratorium expired in 2000. After the Fukushima nuclear disaster, in 2011 the government announced plans to end the use of nuclear energy in the following 20 to 30 years. In November 2016, Swiss voters rejected a Green Party referendum to accelerate the phaseout of nuclear power (45.8% supported). The Swiss Federal Office of Energy (SFOE) is responsible for energy supply and energy use within the Federal Department of Environment, Transport, Energy and Communications (DETEC). The agency supports the 2000-watt society initiative to cut the nation&#x27;s energy use by more than half by 2050.

=== Transport ===
The densest rail network in Europe spans and carried 614 million passengers in 2023. In 2015, each Swiss resident travelled on average by rail, more than any other European country. Virtually 100% of the network is electrified. 60% of the network is operated by the Swiss Federal Railways (SBB CFF FFS). Besides the second largest standard gauge railway company, BLS AG, two railways companies operate on narrow gauge networks: the Rhaetian Railway (RhB) in Graubünden, which includes some World Heritage lines, and the Matterhorn Gotthard Bahn (MGB), which co-operates with RhB the Glacier Express between Zermatt and St. Moritz/Davos. Switzerland operates the world&#x27;s longest and deepest railway tunnel and the first flat, low-level route through the Alps, the Gotthard Base Tunnel, the largest part of the New Railway Link through the Alps (NRLA) project.

Switzerland has a publicly managed, toll-free road network financed by highway permits as well as vehicle and petrol taxes. The Swiss autobahn/autoroute system requires the annual purchase of a vignette (toll sticker)—for 40 Swiss francs—to use its roadways, including passenger cars and trucks. The Swiss autobahn/autoroute network stretches for and has one of the highest motorway densities in the world.

Zurich Airport is Switzerland&#x27;s largest international flight gateway; it handled 22.8 million passengers in 2012. The other international airports are Geneva Airport (13.9 million passengers in 2012), EuroAirport Basel Mulhouse Freiburg (located in France), Bern Airport, Lugano Airport, St. Gallen-Altenrhein Airport and Sion Airport. Swiss International Air Lines is the flag carrier. Its main hub is Zurich, but it is legally domiciled in Basel.

=== Environment ===

Switzerland has one of the best environmental records among developed nations. It is a signatory to the Kyoto Protocol. With Mexico and South Korea, it forms the Environmental Integrity Group (EIG).

The country is active in recycling and anti-littering programs and is one of the world&#x27;s top recyclers, recovering 66% to 96% of recyclable materials, varying across the country. The 2014 Global Green Economy Index placed Switzerland among the top 10 green economies.

Switzerland has an economic system for garbage disposal, which is based mostly on recycling and energy-producing incinerators. As in other European countries, the illegal disposal of garbage is heavily fined. In almost all Swiss municipalities, mandatory stickers or dedicated garbage bags allow the identification of disposable garbage.

==Demographics==

In common with other developed countries, the Swiss population increased rapidly during the industrial era, quadrupling between 1800 and 1990, and it has continued to grow.

The population is about 9 million (2023 est.). Population growth is projected to continue to 2035, due mostly to immigration. Like most of Europe, Switzerland faces an ageing population, with a fertility rate close to replacement level. Switzerland has one of the world&#x27;s oldest populations, with an average age of 44.5 years.

According to the World Factbook, ethnic groups in Switzerland are as follows: Swiss 69.2%, German 4.2%, Italian 3.2%, Portuguese 2.5%, French 2.1%, Kosovan 1.1%, Turkish 1%, other 16.7% (2020 est). The Council of Europe figures suggest a population of around 30,000 Romani people in the country.

===Immigration===

In 2023, resident foreigners made up 26.3% of Switzerland&#x27;s population. Most of these (83%) were from European countries. Italy provided the largest single group of foreigners, providing 14.7% of total foreign population, followed closely by Germany (14.0%), Portugal (11.7%), France (6.6%), Kosovo (5.1%), Spain (3.9%), Turkey (3.1%), North Macedonia (3.1%), Serbia (2.8%), Austria (2.0%), United Kingdom (1.9%), Bosnia and Herzegovina (1.3%) and Croatia (1.3%). Immigrants from Sri Lanka (1.3%), most of them former Tamil refugees, were the largest group of Asian origin (7.9%).

2021 figures show that 39.5% (compared to 34.7% in 2012) of the permanent resident population aged 15 or over (around 2.89 million), had an immigrant background. 38% of the population with an immigrant background (1.1 million) held Swiss citizenship.

In the 2000s, domestic and international institutions expressed concern about what was perceived as an increase in xenophobia. In reply to one critical report, the Federal Council noted that &quot;racism unfortunately is present in Switzerland&quot;, but stated that the high proportion of foreign citizens in the country, as well as the generally successful integration of foreigners, underlined Switzerland&#x27;s openness. A follow-up study conducted in 2018 reported that 59% considered racism a serious problem in Switzerland. The proportion of the population that claimed to have been targeted by racial discrimination increased from 10% in 2014 to almost 17% in 2018, according to the Federal Statistical Office.

===Largest cities===

===Languages===

Switzerland has four national languages: mainly German (spoken natively by 62.8% of the population in 2016); French (22.9%) spoken natively in the west; and Italian (8.2%) spoken natively in the south. The fourth national language, Romansh (0.5%), is a Romance language spoken locally in the southeastern trilingual canton of Grisons, and is designated by Article 4 of the Federal Constitution as a national language along with German, French, and Italian. In Article 70 it is mentioned as an official language if the authorities communicate with persons who speak Romansh. However, federal laws and other official acts do not need to be decreed in Romansh.

In 2016, the languages most spoken at home among permanent residents aged 15 and older were Swiss German (59.4%), French (23.5%), Standard German (10.6%), and Italian (8.5%). Other languages spoken at home included English (5.0%), Portuguese (3.8%), Albanian (3.0%), Spanish (2.6%) and Serbian and Croatian (2.5%). 6.9% reported speaking another language at home. In 2014 almost two-thirds (64.4%) of the permanent resident population indicated speaking more than one language regularly.

The federal government is obliged to communicate in the official languages, and in the federal parliament simultaneous translation is provided from and into German, French and Italian.

Aside from the official forms of their respective languages, the four linguistic regions of Switzerland also have local dialectal forms. The role played by dialects in each linguistic region varies dramatically: in German-speaking regions, Swiss German dialects have become more prevalent since the second half of the 20th century, especially in the media, and are used as an everyday language for many, while the Swiss variety of Standard German is almost always used instead of dialect for written communication (c.f. diglossic usage of a language). Conversely, in the French-speaking regions, local Franco-Provençal dialects have almost disappeared (only 6.3% of the population of Valais, 3.9% of Fribourg, and 3.1% of Jura still spoke dialects at the end of the 20th century), while in the Italian-speaking regions, the use of Lombard dialects is mostly limited to family settings and casual conversation.

The principal official languages have terms not used outside of Switzerland, known as Helvetisms. German Helvetisms are, roughly speaking, a large group of words typical of Swiss Standard German that do not appear in Standard German, nor in other German dialects. These include terms from Switzerland&#x27;s surrounding language cultures (German &quot;Billett&quot; from French), from similar terms in another language (Italian &quot;azione&quot; used not only as &quot;act&quot; but also as &quot;discount&quot; from German &quot;Aktion&quot;). Swiss French, while generally close to the French of France, also contains some Helvetisms. The most frequent characteristics of Helvetisms are in vocabulary, phrases, and pronunciation, although certain Helvetisms denote themselves as special in syntax and orthography. Duden, the comprehensive German dictionary, contains about 3000 Helvetisms. Current French dictionaries, such as the Petit Larousse, include several hundred Helvetisms; notably, Swiss French uses different terms than that of France for the numbers 70 (&quot;septante&quot;) and 90 (&quot;nonante&quot;) and often 80 (&quot;huitante&quot;) as well.

Learning one of the other national languages is compulsory for all Swiss pupils, hence many Swiss are supposed to be at least bilingual, especially those belonging to linguistic minority groups. Because the largest part of Switzerland is German-speaking, many French, Italian, and Romansh speakers migrating to the rest of Switzerland and the children of those non-German-speaking Swiss born within the rest of Switzerland speak German. While learning one of the other national languages at school is important, most Swiss learn English to communicate with Swiss speakers of other languages, as it is perceived as a neutral means of communication. English often functions as the de facto lingua franca.

== Health ==

Swiss residents are required to buy health insurance from private insurance companies, which in turn are required to accept every applicant. While the cost of the system is among the highest, its health outcomes compare well with other European countries; patients have been reported as in general, highly satisfied with it. In 2012, life expectancy at birth was 80.4 years for men and 84.7 years for women – the world&#x27;s highest. However, spending on health at 11.4% of GDP (2010) is on par with Germany and France (11.6%) and other European countries, but notably less than the US (17.6%). From 1990, costs steadily increased.

It is estimated that one out of six Swiss persons suffers from mental illness.

According to a survey conducted by Addiction Switzerland, fourteen per cent of men and 6.5% of women between 20 and 24 reported consuming cannabis in the past 30 days in 2020, and 4 Swiss cities were listed among the top 10 European cities for cocaine use as measured in wastewater, down from 5 in 2018.

== Culture ==


Swiss culture is characterised by diversity, which is reflected in diverse traditional customs. A region may be in some ways culturally connected to the neighbouring country that shares its language, all rooted in western European culture. The linguistically isolated Romansh culture in Graubünden in eastern Switzerland constitutes an exception. It survives only in the upper valleys of the Rhine and the Inn and strives to maintain its rare linguistic tradition.

Switzerland is home to notable contributors to literature, art, architecture, music and sciences. In addition, the country attracted creatives during times of unrest or war. Some 1000 museums are found in the country.

Among the most important cultural performances held annually are the Paléo Festival, Lucerne Festival, the Montreux Jazz Festival, the Locarno International Film Festival and Art Basel.

Alpine symbolism played an essential role in shaping Swiss history and the Swiss national identity. Many alpine areas and ski resorts attract visitors for winter sports as well as hiking and mountain biking in summer. The quieter seasons are spring and autumn. A traditional pastoral culture predominates in many areas, and small farms are omnipresent in rural areas. Folk art is nurtured in organisations across the country. Switzerland most directly in appears in music, dance, poetry, wood carving, and embroidery. The alphorn, a trumpet-like musical instrument made of wood has joined yodeling and the accordion as epitomes of traditional Swiss music.

=== Religion ===

Christianity is the predominant religion according to national surveys of Swiss Federal Statistical Office (about 67% of resident population in 2016–2018 and 75% of Swiss citizens), divided between the Catholic Church (35.8% of the population), the Swiss Reformed Church (23.8%), further Protestant churches (2.2%), Eastern Orthodoxy (2.5%), and other Christian denominations (2.2%).

Switzerland has no official state religion, though most of the cantons (except Geneva and Neuchâtel) recognise official churches, either the Catholic Church or the Swiss Reformed Church. These churches, and in some cantons the Old Catholic Church and Jewish congregations, are financed by official taxation of members. In 2020, the Roman Catholic Church had 3,048,475 registered and church tax paying members (corresponding to 35.2% of the total population), while the Swiss Reformed Church had 2,015,816 members (23.3% of the total population).

26.3% of Swiss permanent residents are not affiliated with a religious community.

As of 2020, according to a national survey conducted by the Swiss Federal Statistical Office, Christian minority communities included Neo-Pietism (0.5%), Pentecostalism (0.4%, mostly incorporated in the Schweizer Pfingstmission), Apostolic communities (0.3%), other Protestant denominations (1.1%, including Methodism), the Old Catholic Church (0.1%), other Christian denominations (0.3%). Non-Christian religions are Islam (5.3%), Hinduism (0.6%), Buddhism (0.5%), Judaism (0.25%) and others (0.4%).

Historically, the country was about evenly balanced between Catholic and Protestant, in a complex patchwork. During the Reformation Switzerland became home to many reformers. Geneva converted to Protestantism in 1536, just before John Calvin arrived. In 1541, he founded the &quot;Republic of Geneva&quot; on his own ideals. It became known internationally as the &quot;Protestant Rome&quot; and housed such reformers as Theodore Beza, William Farel or Pierre Viret. Zurich became another reform stronghold around the same time, with Huldrych Zwingli and Heinrich Bullinger taking the lead. Anabaptists Felix Manz and Conrad Grebel also operated there. They were later joined by the fleeing Peter Martyr Vermigli and Hans Denck. Other centres included Basel (Andreas Karlstadt and Johannes Oecolampadius), Bern (Berchtold Haller and Niklaus Manuel), and St. Gallen (Joachim Vadian). One canton, Appenzell, was officially divided into Catholic and Protestant sections in 1597. The larger cities and their cantons (Bern, Geneva, Lausanne, Zurich and Basel) used to be predominantly Protestant. Central Switzerland, the Valais, the Ticino, Appenzell Innerrhodes, the Jura, and Fribourg are traditionally Catholic.

The Swiss Constitution of 1848, under the recent impression of the clashes of Catholic vs Protestant cantons that culminated in the Sonderbundskrieg, consciously defines a consociational state, allowing the peaceful co-existence of Catholics and Protestants. A 1980 initiative calling for the complete separation of church and state was rejected by 78.9% of the voters. Some traditionally Protestant cantons and cities nowadays have a slight Catholic majority, because since about 1970 a steadily growing minority were not affiliated with any religious body (21.4% in Switzerland, 2012) especially in traditionally Protestant regions, such as Basel-City (42%), canton of Neuchâtel (38%), canton of Geneva (35%), canton of Vaud (26%), or Zurich city (city: &gt;25%; canton: 23%).

=== Literature ===
The earliest forms of literature were in German, reflecting the language&#x27;s early predominance. In the 18th century, French became fashionable in Bern and elsewhere, while the influence of the French-speaking allies and subject lands increased.

Among the classic authors of Swiss literature are Jeremias Gotthelf (1797–1854) and Gottfried Keller (1819–1890); later writers are Max Frisch (1911–1991) and Friedrich Dürrenmatt (1921–1990), whose (&quot;The Pledge&quot;) was released as a Hollywood film in 2001, starring Jack Nicholson.

Famous French-speaking writers were Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712–1778) and Germaine de Staël (1766–1817). More recent authors include Charles Ferdinand Ramuz (1878–1947), whose novels describe the lives of peasants and mountain dwellers, set in a harsh environment, and Blaise Cendrars (born Frédéric Sauser, 1887–1961). Italian and Romansh-speaking authors also contributed to the Swiss literary landscape, generally in proportion to their number.

Probably the most famous Swiss literary creation, &quot;Heidi&quot;, the story of an orphan girl who lives with her grandfather in the Alps, is one of the most popular children&#x27;s books and has come to be a symbol of Switzerland. Her creator, Johanna Spyri (1827–1901), wrote a number of books on similar themes.

=== Media ===
Freedom of the press and the right to free expression is guaranteed in the constitution. The Swiss News Agency (SNA) broadcasts information in three of the four national languages—on politics, economics, society and culture. The SNA supplies almost all Swiss media and foreign media with its reporting.

In Switzerland, the most influential newspapers include the German-language and &quot;Neue Zürcher Zeitung&quot;, as well as the French-language &quot;Le Temps&quot;. Additionally, almost every city has at least one local newspaper published in the predominant local language.

The government exerts greater control over broadcast media than print media, especially due to financing and licensing. The Swiss Broadcasting Corporation, whose name was recently changed to SRG SSR, is charged with the production and distribution of radio and television content. SRG SSR studios are distributed across the various language regions. Radio content is produced in six central and four regional studios while video media are produced in Geneva, Zurich, Basel, and Lugano. An extensive cable network allows most Swiss to access content from neighbouring countries.

=== Sports ===
Skiing, snowboarding and mountaineering are among the most popular sports, reflecting the nature of the country Winter sports are practised by natives and visitors. The bobsleigh was invented in St. Moritz. The first world ski championships were held in Mürren (1931) and St. Moritz (1934). The latter town hosted the second Winter Olympic Games in 1928 and the fifth edition in 1948. Among its most successful skiers and world champions are Pirmin Zurbriggen and Didier Cuche.

The most prominently watched sports in Switzerland are football and ice hockey.

The headquarters of the international football&#x27;s and ice hockey&#x27;s governing bodies, the International Federation of Association Football (FIFA) and International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF) are located in Zurich. Many other headquarters of international sports federations are located in Switzerland. For example, the International Olympic Committee (IOC), IOC&#x27;s Olympic Museum and the Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) are located in Lausanne.

Switzerland hosted the 1954 FIFA World Cup and was the joint host, with Austria, of the UEFA Euro 2008 tournament. The Swiss Super League is the nation&#x27;s professional football club league. Europe&#x27;s highest football pitch, at above sea level, is located in Switzerland, the &quot;Ottmar Hitzfeld Stadium&quot;.

Many Swiss follow ice hockey and support one of the 12 teams of the National League, which is the most attended league in Europe. In 2009, Switzerland hosted the IIHF World Championship for the tenth time. It also became World Vice-Champion in 2013 and 2018. Its numerous lakes make Switzerland an attractive sailing destination. The largest, Lake Geneva, is the home of the sailing team Alinghi which was the first European team to win the America&#x27;s Cup in 2003 and which successfully defended the title in 2007.

Swiss tennis player Roger Federer is widely regarded as among the sport&#x27;s greatest players. He won 20 Grand Slam tournaments overall including a record 8 Wimbledon titles. He won six ATP Finals. He was ranked no. 1 in the ATP rankings for a record 237 consecutive weeks. He ended 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007 and 2009 ranked no. 1. Fellow Swiss players Martina Hingis and Stan Wawrinka also won multiple Grand Slam titles. Switzerland won the Davis Cup title in 2014.

Motorsport racecourses and events were banned in Switzerland following the 1955 Le Mans disaster with exceptions for events such as hillclimbing. The country continued to produce successful racing drivers such as Clay Regazzoni, Sébastien Buemi, Jo Siffert, Dominique Aegerter, successful World Touring Car Championship driver Alain Menu, 2014 24 Hours of Le Mans winner Marcel Fässler and 2015 24 Hours Nürburgring winner Nico Müller. Switzerland also won the A1GP World Cup of Motorsport in 2007–08 with driver Neel Jani. Swiss motorcycle racer Thomas Lüthi won the 2005 MotoGP World Championship in the 125cc category. In June 2007 the Swiss National Council, one house of the Federal Assembly of Switzerland, voted to overturn the ban, however the other house, the Swiss Council of States rejected the change and the ban remains in place.

Traditional sports include Swiss wrestling or , a tradition from the rural central cantons and considered the national sport by some. Hornussen is another indigenous Swiss sport, which is like a cross between baseball and golf. is the Swiss variant of stone put, a competition in throwing a heavy stone. Practised only among the alpine population since prehistoric times, it is recorded to have taken place in Basel in the 13th century. It is central to the Unspunnenfest, first held in 1805, with its symbol the 83.5 stone named .

=== Cuisine ===

The cuisine is multifaceted. While dishes such as fondue, raclette or rösti are omnipresent, each region developed its gastronomy according to the varieties of climate and language, for example, , engl.: sliced meat Zurich style. Traditional Swiss cuisine uses ingredients similar to those in other European countries, as well as unique dairy products and cheeses such as Gruyère or Emmental, produced in the valleys of Gruyères and Emmental. The number of fine-dining establishments is high, particularly in western Switzerland.

Chocolate has been made in Switzerland since the 18th century. Its reputation grew at the end of the 19th century with the invention of modern techniques such as conching and tempering, which enabled higher quality. Another breakthrough was the invention of solid milk chocolate in 1875 by Daniel Peter. The Swiss are the world&#x27;s largest chocolate consumers.

The most popular alcoholic drink is wine. Switzerland is notable for its variety of grape varieties, reflecting the large variations in terroirs. Swiss wine is produced mainly in Valais, Vaud (Lavaux), Geneva and Ticino, with a small majority of white wines. Vineyards have been cultivated in Switzerland since the Roman era, even though traces of a more ancient origin can be found. The most widespread varieties are the Chasselas (called Fendant in Valais) and Pinot Noir. Merlot is the main variety produced in Ticino.

== See also ==

* Index of Switzerland-related articles
* Outline of Switzerland
* History of Switzerland since 1914

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==

* Church, Clive H. (2004) &quot;The Politics and Government of Switzerland&quot;. Palgrave Macmillan. .
* Fahrni, Dieter. (2003) &quot;An Outline History of Switzerland. From the Origins to the Present Day&quot;. 8th enlarged edition. Pro Helvetia, Zurich. .
* &quot;Historical Dictionary of Switzerland&quot;. Published electronically (1998–) and in print (2002–) simultaneously in three of the national languages of Switzerland: DHS/HLS/DSS (): online edition in German, French and Italian.
* von Matt, Peter: &quot;Das Kalb vor der Gotthardpost. Zur Literatur und Politik in der Schweiz&quot;. Carl Hanser Verlag, München, 2012, , S. 127–138.
== External links ==
* The Federal Authorities of the Swiss Confederation
* Tourism — Switzerland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="0" end="11" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="28" end="47" title="Switzerland" label="Swiss Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q123480" start="54" end="72" title="landlocked country" label="landlocked country"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="97" end="103" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="123" end="128" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="143" end="149" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="163" end="170" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="189" end="196" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="201" end="214" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q333934" start="276" end="289" title="Swiss Plateau" label="Swiss Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q25220" start="295" end="299" title="Swiss Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q178611" start="308" end="312" title="Jura Mountains" label="Jura"/>
<link wikidata="Q191108" start="469" end="487" title="List of cities in Switzerland" label="its largest cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="520" end="526" title="Zurich" label="Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="528" end="534" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="540" end="548" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q512187" start="569" end="585" title="federal republic" label="federal republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="598" end="608" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="26 cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q70" start="644" end="648" title="Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q13199" start="728" end="735" title="Romansh language" label="Romansh"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="886" end="896" title="federalism" label="federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="901" end="917" title="direct democracy" label="direct democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="923" end="929" title="Alps" label="Alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="1093" end="1105" title="nation state" label="nation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q435583" start="1140" end="1161" title="Old Swiss Confederacy" label="Old Swiss Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="1181" end="1197" title="Late Middle Ages" label="Late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302465" start="1203" end="1236" title="Eidgenossenschaft" label="defensive and commercial alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q662637" start="1242" end="1265" title="Federal Charter of 1291" label="Federal Charter of 1291"/>
<link wikidata="Q668589" start="1345" end="1370" title="Growth of the Old Swiss Confederacy" label="expanded and consolidated"/>
<link wikidata="Q671922" start="1409" end="1439" title="Reformation in Switzerland" label="political and religious strife"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1469" end="1486" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q150995" start="1518" end="1537" title="Peace of Westphalia" label="Peace of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="1610" end="1629" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q238" start="1656" end="1666" title="San Marino" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="1682" end="1697" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="1774" end="1794" title="French Revolution" label="revolutionary France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450451" start="1807" end="1814" title="French invasion of Switzerland" label="imposed"/>
<link wikidata="Q190632" start="1819" end="1829" title="Centralisation" label="centralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q206696" start="1830" end="1847" title="Helvetic Republic" label="Helvetic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="1849" end="1857" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q666909" start="1893" end="1919" title="Act of Mediation" label="reinstated a confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q568452" start="1964" end="2001" title="Restoration and Regeneration in Switzerland" label="restored its pre-revolutionary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q214028" start="2007" end="2014" title="July Revolution" label="by 1830"/>
<link wikidata="Q688297" start="2038" end="2050" title="Sonderbund War" label="and conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q30921" start="2116" end="2140" title="Swiss Federal Constitution" label="new constitution in 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q177581" start="2332" end="2348" title="Swiss neutrality" label="armed neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886026" start="2412" end="2422" title="Switzerland in the Napoleonic era" label="since 1815"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2438" end="2452" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632158" start="2541" end="2555" title="peace building" label="peace building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524235" start="2560" end="2577" title="global governance" label="global governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987345" start="2616" end="2625" title="International Committee of the Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054766" start="2678" end="2704" title="International organisations in Europe" label="international institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="2720" end="2723" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="2729" end="2732" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="2738" end="2741" title="International Labour Organization" label="ILO"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="2743" end="2747" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q170418" start="2753" end="2756" title="World Economic Forum" label="WEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="2801" end="2832" title="European Free Trade Association" label="European Free Trade Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="2860" end="2874" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="2885" end="2907" title="European Economic Area" label="European Economic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="2916" end="2924" title="eurozone" label="eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q955276" start="2958" end="2980" title="European single market" label="European single market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="2989" end="3002" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q176793" start="3044" end="3068" title="List of countries by Human Development Index" label="most developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107550" start="3095" end="3111" title="List of countries by wealth per adult" label="wealth per adult"/>
<link wikidata="Q207987" start="3120" end="3174" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita" label="eighth-highest gross domestic product (GDP) per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055057" start="3179" end="3227" title="International rankings of Switzerland" label="performs highly on several international metrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067257" start="3239" end="3263" title="Global Competitiveness Report" label="economic competitiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q326174" start="3265" end="3286" title="Democracy Index" label="democratic governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="3292" end="3305" title="Freedom of the press" label="press freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="3358" end="3373" title="quality of life" label="quality of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q575619" start="3407" end="3422" title="Cost of living" label="costs of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q124216" start="3704" end="3709" title="Swiss people" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="3836" end="3844" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q131339" start="3942" end="3951" title="Alemannic German" label="Alemannic"/>
<link wikidata="Q68155" start="3993" end="3999" title="Schwyz" label="Schwyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12433" start="4014" end="4034" title="Canton of Schwyz" label="associated territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q435583" start="4087" end="4108" title="Old Swiss Confederacy" label="Old Swiss Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q165136" start="4169" end="4180" title="Swabian War" label="Swabian War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4320" end="4345" title="Data codes for Switzerland#Country" label="data code for Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="4367" end="4372" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="4480" end="4495" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="4555" end="4564" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q387066" start="4817" end="4829" title="Swiss German" label="Swiss German"/>
<link wikidata="Q130989" start="5231" end="5241" title="Neologism" label="neologised"/>
<link wikidata="Q355857" start="5277" end="5307" title="Switzerland as a federal state" label="formation of the federal state"/>
<link wikidata="Q206696" start="5348" end="5365" title="Helvetic Republic" label="Helvetic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30911" start="5416" end="5430" title="Federal Palace of Switzerland" label="Federal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q37431" start="5491" end="5507" title="ISO 4217" label="ISO banking code"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344" start="5532" end="5543" title="Swiss franc" label="Swiss franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q48616" start="5719" end="5727" title="Helvetii" label="Helvetii"/>
<link wikidata="Q273854" start="5737" end="5750" title="Gaulish tribe" label="Gaulish tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q333934" start="5765" end="5778" title="Swiss Plateau" label="Swiss Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q675312" start="5790" end="5799" title="Switzerland in the Roman era" label="Roman era"/>
<link wikidata="Q15317" start="5808" end="5816" title="Helvetia" label="Helvetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142281" start="5837" end="5861" title="national personification" label="national personification"/>
<link wikidata="Q30921" start="6040" end="6066" title="Swiss Federal Constitution" label="Swiss Federal Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="6164" end="6177" title="confederation" label="confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q66500" start="6389" end="6399" title="Gächlingen" label="Gächlingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q202165" start="6463" end="6472" title="Hallstatt culture" label="Hallstatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q208247" start="6477" end="6492" title="La Tène culture" label="La Tène culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q14375" start="6563" end="6577" title="Lake Neuchâtel" label="Lake Neuchâtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="6636" end="6644" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="6688" end="6693" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="6698" end="6706" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48616" start="6772" end="6780" title="Helvetii" label="Helvetii"/>
<link wikidata="Q333934" start="6809" end="6822" title="Swiss Plateau" label="Swiss Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q685035" start="6838" end="6847" title="Rhaetian people" label="Rhaetians"/>
<link wikidata="Q458835" start="6949" end="6958" title="Orgetorix" label="Orgetorix"/>
<link wikidata="Q635028" start="7206" end="7224" title="Battle of Bibracte" label="Battle of Bibracte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="7446" end="7454" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q156778" start="7504" end="7510" title="Nero Claudius Drusus" label="Drusus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="7557" end="7569" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q206443" start="7638" end="7652" title="Gallia Belgica" label="Gallia Belgica"/>
<link wikidata="Q153553" start="7678" end="7695" title="Germania Superior" label="Germania Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="7772" end="7786" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q156789" start="7790" end="7796" title="Raetia" label="Raetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="7831" end="7841" title="Common Era" label="Common Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q667811" start="7885" end="7895" title="Vindonissa" label="Vindonissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675" start="7933" end="7937" title="Aare" label="Aare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4015" start="7942" end="7947" title="Reuss (river)" label="Reuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q69208" start="7973" end="7981" title="Windisch, Switzerland" label="Windisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q670912" start="8077" end="8086" title="Aventicum" label="Aventicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984231" start="8088" end="8103" title="Iulia Equestris" label="Iulia Equestris"/>
<link wikidata="Q610371" start="8108" end="8123" title="Augusta Raurica" label="Augusta Raurica"/>
<link wikidata="Q252021" start="8191" end="8206" title="Villae rusticae" label="Villae rusticae"/>
<link wikidata="Q396547" start="8277" end="8291" title="Agri Decumates" label="Agri Decumates"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="8315" end="8320" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q132990" start="8416" end="8424" title="Alamanni" label="Alamanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q69048" start="8548" end="8566" title="Castrum Rauracense" label="Castrum Rauracense"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="8852" end="8867" title="Germanic tribes" label="Germanic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="8877" end="8894" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q530670" start="9010" end="9034" title="Kingdom of Burgundy" label="Kings of the Burgundians"/>
<link wikidata="Q132990" start="9088" end="9096" title="Alemanni" label="Alemanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644550" start="9152" end="9171" title="valleys of the Alps" label="valleys of the Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208978" start="9203" end="9212" title="Alamannia" label="Alemannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173" start="9292" end="9300" title="Burgundy (region)" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="9349" end="9364" title="Frankish Empire" label="Frankish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q82339" start="9397" end="9405" title="Clovis I" label="Clovis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398" start="9442" end="9449" title="Tolbiac" label="Tolbiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q59488" start="9625" end="9636" title="Merovingians" label="Merovingian"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="9641" end="9652" title="Carolingian Empire" label="Carolingian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="9694" end="9705" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="9711" end="9726" title="Frankish Empire" label="Frankish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q134840" start="9746" end="9762" title="Treaty of Verdun" label="Treaty of Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q468902" start="9834" end="9848" title="Middle Francia" label="Middle Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153080" start="9853" end="9865" title="East Francia" label="East Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="9902" end="9919" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="9997" end="10004" title="Magyars" label="Magyars"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="10015" end="10020" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25607" start="10032" end="10042" title="St. Gallen" label="St. Gallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q150620" start="10064" end="10080" title="Henry the Fowler" label="Henry the Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="10495" end="10500" title="House of Savoy" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q247331" start="10502" end="10511" title="Zähringer" label="Zähringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="10513" end="10521" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q477858" start="10527" end="10533" title="House of Kyburg" label="Kyburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404" start="10549" end="10552" title="Canton of Uri" label="Uri"/>
<link wikidata="Q12433" start="10554" end="10560" title="Canton of Schwyz" label="Schwyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q214069" start="10562" end="10573" title="Unterwalden" label="Unterwalden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341156" start="10610" end="10628" title="Imperial immediacy" label="Imperial immediacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76956" start="10792" end="10806" title="Rudolph I of Germany" label="King Rudolph I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342545" start="11099" end="11105" title="Swiss nobility" label="nobles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095374" start="11110" end="11120" title="Patrician (post-Roman Europe)" label="patricians"/>
<link wikidata="Q662637" start="11235" end="11258" title="Federal Charter of 1291" label="Federal Charter of 1291"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107861" start="11411" end="11425" title="Medieval commune" label="rural communes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404" start="11429" end="11432" title="Canton of Uri" label="Uri"/>
<link wikidata="Q12433" start="11434" end="11440" title="Canton of Schwyz" label="Schwyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q214069" start="11446" end="11457" title="Unterwalden" label="Unterwalden"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="11488" end="11495" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11922" start="11527" end="11533" title="Canton of Glarus" label="Glarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11933" start="11538" end="11541" title="Canton of Zug" label="Zug"/>
<link wikidata="Q4191" start="11550" end="11557" title="Lucerne" label="Lucerne"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="11559" end="11565" title="Zurich" label="Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q70" start="11570" end="11574" title="Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q178611" start="11872" end="11886" title="Jura mountains" label="Jura mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q372608" start="11896" end="11915" title="University of Basel" label="University of Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q661759" start="12070" end="12087" title="Battle of Sempach" label="Battle of Sempach"/>
<link wikidata="Q667460" start="12089" end="12105" title="Battle of Näfels" label="Battle of Näfels"/>
<link wikidata="Q151120" start="12113" end="12129" title="Charles the Bold" label="Charles the Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712" start="12133" end="12141" title="Duchy of Burgundy" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q661787" start="12183" end="12200" title="Swiss mercenaries" label="Swiss mercenaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q165136" start="12227" end="12238" title="Swabian War" label="Swabian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q687124" start="12251" end="12265" title="Swabian League" label="Swabian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="12269" end="12276" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q150726" start="12277" end="12289" title="Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Maximilian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="12355" end="12372" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q668589" start="12527" end="12557" title="Growth of the Old Swiss Confederacy" label="expansion of the confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q330" start="12614" end="12633" title="Battle of Marignano" label="Battle of Marignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q123034" start="12718" end="12725" title="Zwingli" label="Zwingli"/>
<link wikidata="Q671922" start="12733" end="12744" title="Reformation in Switzerland" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q240243" start="12821" end="12835" title="Wars of Kappel" label="Wars of Kappel"/>
<link wikidata="Q150995" start="12934" end="12953" title="Peace of Westphalia" label="Peace of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185963" start="13052" end="13062" title="neutral country" label="neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895113" start="13076" end="13088" title="Early Modern Switzerland" label="Early Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="13222" end="13244" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q670936" start="13256" end="13281" title="Swiss peasant war of 1653" label="Swiss peasant war of 1653"/>
<link wikidata="Q689993" start="13340" end="13348" title="Roman Catholicism in Switzerland" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251666" start="13353" end="13363" title="Protestantism in Switzerland" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267097" start="13419" end="13442" title="First War of Villmergen" label="First War of Villmergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q690096" start="13461" end="13475" title="Toggenburg War" label="Toggenburg War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="13554" end="13574" title="French Revolution" label="revolutionary French"/>
<link wikidata="Q79815" start="13740" end="13749" title="Mulhouse" label="Mülhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q685105" start="13775" end="13785" title="Valtellina" label="Valtellina"/>
<link wikidata="Q213353" start="13812" end="13830" title="Cisalpine Republic" label="Cisalpine Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q325261" start="14023" end="14038" title="satellite state" label="satellite state"/>
<link wikidata="Q12592" start="14077" end="14086" title="Nidwalden" label="Nidwalden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="14161" end="14172" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="14298" end="14306" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="14429" end="14437" title="Napoleon I of France" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q666909" start="14521" end="14537" title="Act of Mediation" label="Act of Mediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="14791" end="14809" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091654" start="14989" end="15003" title="Siege of Gaeta (1860)" label="siege of Gaeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q834" start="15100" end="15106" title="Valais" label="Valais"/>
<link wikidata="Q12738" start="15108" end="15117" title="Canton of Neuchâtel" label="Neuchâtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917" start="15122" end="15128" title="Canton of Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q248743" start="15351" end="15361" title="Züriputsch" label="Züriputsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q688297" start="15392" end="15408" title="Sonderbundskrieg" label="Sonderbundskrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303061" start="15623" end="15636" title="friendly fire" label="friendly fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="16037" end="16060" title="revolutions of 1848" label="revolutionary uprisings"/>
<link wikidata="Q30921" start="16115" end="16129" title="Swiss Federal Constitution" label="federal layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="16158" end="16174" title="United States Constitution" label="American example"/>
<link wikidata="Q637846" start="16425" end="16436" title="upper house" label="upper house"/>
<link wikidata="Q609037" start="16442" end="16459" title="Swiss Council of States" label="Council of States"/>
<link wikidata="Q375928" start="16499" end="16510" title="lower house" label="lower house"/>
<link wikidata="Q676078" start="16516" end="16532" title="National Council of Switzerland" label="National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="16589" end="16599" title="Referendum" label="Referendum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16688" end="16711" title="Swiss nobility#Current situation" label="nobility in Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344" start="16785" end="16796" title="Swiss franc" label="Swiss franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125321" start="16814" end="16829" title="single currency" label="single currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="17021" end="17029" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q206223" start="17073" end="17103" title="Francis II of the Two Sicilies" label="Francis II of the Two Sicilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091654" start="17137" end="17159" title="Siege of Gaeta (1860)" label="siege of Gaeta in 1860"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="17413" end="17434" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17617" end="17639" title="Referendum#Switzerland" label="facultative referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="17827" end="17843" title="direct democracy" label="direct democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="17964" end="17975" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="18038" end="18050" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="18076" end="18090" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q251652" start="18184" end="18205" title="Grimm–Hoffmann affair" label="Grimm–Hoffmann affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="18247" end="18264" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="18285" end="18291" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="18351" end="18363" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q675966" start="18365" end="18388" title="Operation Tannenbaum" label="detailed invasion plans"/>
<link wikidata="Q123497" start="18638" end="18650" title="Henri Guisan" label="Henri Guisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q670860" start="18666" end="18701" title="General (Switzerland)" label="commander-in-chief for the duration"/>
<link wikidata="Q90764" start="18952" end="18958" title="National Redoubt (Switzerland)" label="Reduit"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="19068" end="19072" title="Axis Powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="19077" end="19083" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="19213" end="19225" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="19392" end="19404" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy France"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="19461" end="19474" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987345" start="19629" end="19652" title="International Red Cross" label="International Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q11283415" start="19694" end="19700" title="Right of asylum" label="asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="19913" end="19922" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q690235" start="20121" end="20157" title="Bombings of Switzerland in World War II" label="Switzerland was bombed by the Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="20238" end="20243" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q64580" start="20245" end="20251" title="Brusio" label="Brusio"/>
<link wikidata="Q68111" start="20253" end="20260" title="Chiasso" label="Chiasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q68819" start="20262" end="20268" title="Cornol" label="Cornol"/>
<link wikidata="Q69441" start="20278" end="20285" title="Koblenz, Switzerland" label="Koblenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q66411" start="20287" end="20301" title="Niederweningen" label="Niederweningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q66457" start="20303" end="20307" title="Rafz" label="Rafz"/>
<link wikidata="Q69745" start="20309" end="20315" title="Renens" label="Renens"/>
<link wikidata="Q69085" start="20317" end="20324" title="Samedan" label="Samedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9009" start="20326" end="20338" title="Schaffhausen" label="Schaffhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11939" start="20340" end="20354" title="Stein am Rhein" label="Stein am Rhein"/>
<link wikidata="Q66188" start="20356" end="20366" title="Tägerwilen" label="Tägerwilen"/>
<link wikidata="Q69152" start="20368" end="20376" title="Thayngen" label="Thayngen"/>
<link wikidata="Q64585" start="20378" end="20382" title="Vals, Switzerland" label="Vals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833880" start="20464" end="20478" title="Article of War" label="Article of War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20855" end="20863" title="Switzerland during the World Wars#Refugees" label="refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="21160" end="21173" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q685175" start="21244" end="21257" title="Economy of Switzerland" label="Swiss economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="21271" end="21279" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15846859" start="21299" end="21326" title="Switzerland and weapons of mass destruction" label="considered the construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="21338" end="21350" title="nuclear bomb" label="nuclear bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q11942" start="21386" end="21424" title="ETH Zurich" label="Federal Institute of Technology Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q124236" start="21433" end="21446" title="Paul Scherrer" label="Paul Scherrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q351857" start="21495" end="21518" title="Paul Scherrer Institute" label="Paul Scherrer Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451740" start="21578" end="21596" title="neutron scattering" label="neutron scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q186444" start="21743" end="21775" title="Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty" label="Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="21897" end="21914" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="21971" end="22000" title="Principality of Liechtenstein" label="Principality of Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q665778" start="22022" end="22051" title="Women&amp;#x27;s suffrage in Switzerland" label="grant women the right to vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094" start="22189" end="22210" title="Appenzell Innerrhoden" label="Appenzell Innerrhoden"/>
<link wikidata="Q688561" start="22244" end="22257" title="Landsgemeinde" label="Landsgemeinde"/>
<link wikidata="Q11922" start="22276" end="22282" title="Canton of Glarus" label="Glarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q30917" start="22422" end="22437" title="Federal Council (Switzerland)" label="Federal Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q122063" start="22452" end="22466" title="Elisabeth Kopp" label="Elisabeth Kopp"/>
<link wikidata="Q123902" start="22533" end="22546" title="Ruth Dreifuss" label="Ruth Dreifuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q70" start="22590" end="22594" title="Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q12755" start="22651" end="22665" title="canton of Jura" label="canton of Jura"/>
<link wikidata="Q30921" start="22762" end="22782" title="Swiss Federal Constitution" label="federal constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="22857" end="22869" title="Holy See" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="22974" end="22978" title="European Free Trade Association" label="EFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="22991" end="23013" title="European Economic Area" label="European Economic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="23058" end="23072" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q860490" start="23434" end="23454" title="Bilateralism" label="bilateral agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822795" start="23654" end="23669" title="Schengen treaty" label="Schengen treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="23847" end="23861" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q385258" start="23884" end="23909" title="Swiss People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Swiss People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q335918" start="24099" end="24109" title="Popular initiative (Switzerland)" label="initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302549" start="24165" end="24185" title="Federal popular initiative &amp;quot;Against mass immigration&amp;quot;" label="restrict immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="24821" end="24825" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="24829" end="24833" title="Western Europe" label="west"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256191" start="24955" end="24958" title="45th parallel north" label="45°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256527" start="24963" end="24968" title="48th parallel north" label="48° N"/>
<link wikidata="Q788564" start="24985" end="24987" title="5th meridian east" label="5°"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703483" start="24992" end="24997" title="11th meridian east" label="11° E"/>
<link wikidata="Q25220" start="25048" end="25058" title="Swiss Alps" label="Swiss Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q178611" start="25119" end="25133" title="Jura mountains" label="Jura mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="25458" end="25463" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q14369" start="25465" end="25468" title="Inn (river)" label="Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q14366" start="25470" end="25476" title="Ticino (river)" label="Ticino"/>
<link wikidata="Q602" start="25481" end="25486" title="Rhône" label="Rhône"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403" start="25683" end="25694" title="Lake Geneva" label="Lake Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127" start="25718" end="25732" title="Lake Constance" label="Lake Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q14379" start="25758" end="25771" title="Lake Maggiore" label="Lake Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="26208" end="26225" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q218151" start="26240" end="26248" title="Camargue" label="Camargue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="26285" end="26294" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="26298" end="26307" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="26652" end="26663" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q14668" start="26726" end="26736" title="Monte Rosa" label="Monte Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374" start="26766" end="26776" title="Matterhorn" label="Matterhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270" start="26827" end="26839" title="Pennine Alps" label="Pennine Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q834" start="26857" end="26863" title="Valais" label="Valais"/>
<link wikidata="Q327221" start="26910" end="26922" title="Bernese Alps" label="Bernese Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q64011" start="26946" end="26959" title="Lauterbrunnen" label="Lauterbrunnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15312" start="27016" end="27024" title="Jungfrau" label="Jungfrau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4425" start="27028" end="27033" title="Eiger" label="Eiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q16525" start="27038" end="27043" title="Mönch" label="Mönch"/>
<link wikidata="Q22883" start="27111" end="27118" title="Engadin" label="Engadin"/>
<link wikidata="Q68986" start="27140" end="27150" title="St. Moritz" label="St. Moritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q427415" start="27209" end="27221" title="Bernina Alps" label="Bernina Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q15132" start="27225" end="27236" title="Piz Bernina" label="Piz Bernina"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="27509" end="27516" title="enclave" label="enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q61698" start="27519" end="27527" title="Büsingen" label="Büsingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q244207" start="27554" end="27576" title="Campione d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Campione d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="27673" end="27682" title="temperate climate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="27780" end="27801" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q190096" start="28161" end="28170" title="Inversion (meteorology)" label="inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12314" start="28243" end="28247" title="foehn wind" label="föhn"/>
<link wikidata="Q898845" start="28281" end="28293" title="chinook wind" label="chinook wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q11925" start="28888" end="28898" title="Graubünden" label="Graubünden"/>
<link wikidata="Q834" start="28968" end="28974" title="Valais" label="Valais"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724" start="29065" end="29071" title="Ticino" label="Ticino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079246" start="29526" end="29560" title="Western European broadleaf forests" label="Western European broadleaf forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q27067672" start="29565" end="29595" title="Alps conifer and mixed forests" label="Alps conifer and mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="29925" end="29939" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261772" start="29958" end="29994" title="Environmental Performance Index" label="2014 Environmental Performance Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="30177" end="30187" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q127993" start="30192" end="30202" title="Geothermal energy" label="geothermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="30229" end="30253" title="greenhouse gas emissions" label="greenhouse gas emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="30332" end="30345" title="GHG emissions" label="GHG emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q864404" start="30454" end="30465" title="biocapacity" label="biocapacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q234173" start="30733" end="30753" title="ecological footprint" label="ecological footprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520600" start="30957" end="30989" title="Forest Landscape Integrity Index" label="Forest Landscape Integrity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261772" start="31092" end="31123" title="Environmental Performance Index" label="Environmental Performance Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="31530" end="31542" title="Urban sprawl" label="Urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="31979" end="31985" title="Zurich" label="Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="31994" end="32002" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="32004" end="32009" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q70" start="32014" end="32018" title="Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q11925" start="32262" end="32272" title="Graubünden" label="Graubünden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11943" start="32339" end="32355" title="canton of Zurich" label="canton of Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q30921" start="32440" end="32460" title="Swiss Federal Constitution" label="Federal Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q684719" start="32887" end="32903" title="Federal Assembly (Switzerland)" label="Federal Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q30917" start="32923" end="32938" title="Federal Council (Switzerland)" label="Federal Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440519" start="32959" end="32973" title="Federal courts of Switzerland" label="federal courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q684719" start="33016" end="33032" title="Federal Assembly (Switzerland)" label="Federal Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="33040" end="33050" title="parliament" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q609037" start="33098" end="33115" title="Council of States (Switzerland)" label="Council of States"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="33171" end="33182" title="half-canton" label="half-canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q676078" start="33188" end="33204" title="National Council (Switzerland)" label="National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318013" start="33291" end="33318" title="Panachage" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q684719" start="33503" end="33519" title="Federal Assembly of Switzerland" label="Federal Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q431226" start="33529" end="33549" title="Optional referendum" label="optional referendums"/>
<link wikidata="Q675794" start="33687" end="33709" title="Federal administration of Switzerland" label="federal administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="33737" end="33750" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751358" start="33760" end="33769" title="Collegiality" label="collegial"/>
<link wikidata="Q688230" start="33979" end="34009" title="President of the Swiss Confederation" label="President of the Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q309477" start="34147" end="34167" title="Primus inter pares" label="no additional powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q148417" start="34465" end="34478" title="Magic formula (Swiss politics)" label="magic formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q100934025" start="34585" end="34595" title="The Centre (political party)" label="The Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q13850128" start="34614" end="34635" title="Free Democratic Party of Switzerland" label="Free Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q303745" start="34664" end="34687" title="Social Democratic Party of Switzerland" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q385258" start="34714" end="34739" title="Swiss People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Swiss People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q676553" start="34792" end="34813" title="Federal Supreme Court of Switzerland" label="Federal Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="34973" end="34989" title="Direct democracy" label="Direct democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="34994" end="35004" title="federalism" label="federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q431226" start="35411" end="35430" title="optional referendum" label="optional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382648" start="35580" end="35595" title="majority" label="simple majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q109042768" start="35637" end="35657" title="Mandatory referendums in Switzerland" label="mandatory referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q53463" start="35678" end="35703" title="Constitutional amendment" label="constitutional amendments"/>
<link wikidata="Q732969" start="35772" end="35787" title="double majority" label="double majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q335918" start="35877" end="35895" title="Popular initiative in Switzerland" label="popular initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q107390" start="36394" end="36409" title="federated state" label="federated state"/>
<link wikidata="Q56061" start="36499" end="36510" title="Administrative division" label="subnational"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36650" end="36662" title="Cantons of Switzerland#Half-cantons" label="half-cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q609037" start="36720" end="36737" title="Swiss Council of States" label="Council of States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36823" end="36863" title="Voting in Switzerland#Constitutional referendums (Popular initiatives)" label="referendums on constitutional amendments"/>
<link wikidata="Q11925" start="37209" end="37216" title="Canton of Grisons" label="Grisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q684719" start="37708" end="37724" title="Federal Assembly of Switzerland" label="Federal Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q11942" start="37948" end="37976" title="ETH Zurich" label="Federal Polytechnical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q684011" start="38063" end="38067" title="SUVA" label="SUVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="38174" end="38182" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q676553" start="38184" end="38205" title="Federal Supreme Court of Switzerland" label="Federal Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q262760" start="38219" end="38223" title="École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne" label="EPFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q64044" start="38234" end="38244" title="Bellinzona" label="Bellinzona"/>
<link wikidata="Q641514" start="38246" end="38268" title="Federal Criminal Court of Switzerland" label="Federal Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q25607" start="38281" end="38291" title="St. Gallen" label="St. Gallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q641372" start="38293" end="38321" title="Federal Administrative Court (Switzerland)" label="Federal Administrative Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q677473" start="38326" end="38346" title="Federal Patent Court (Switzerland)" label="Federal Patent Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q668589" start="38855" end="38864" title="Growth of the Old Swiss Confederacy" label="expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q177581" start="38878" end="38898" title="Swiss neutrality" label="policy of neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="38937" end="38955" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962430" start="39113" end="39123" title="2002 Swiss referendums" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="39298" end="39312" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="39437" end="39450" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="39564" end="39570" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="39596" end="39631" title="Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q133536" start="39637" end="39655" title="Geneva Conventions" label="Geneva Conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q205650" start="39683" end="39718" title="United Nations Human Rights Council" label="United Nations Human Rights Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q594846" start="39812" end="39829" title="Palace of Nations, Geneva" label="Palace of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11297" start="39902" end="39914" title="Headquarters of the United Nations" label="headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="39977" end="39994" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="40135" end="40138" title="WHO" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="40180" end="40183" title="International Labour Organization" label="ILO"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="40229" end="40232" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="ITU"/>
<link wikidata="Q132551" start="40286" end="40291" title="United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees" label="UNHCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="40356" end="40380" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q177773" start="40389" end="40429" title="World Intellectual Property Organization" label="World Intellectual Property Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q170418" start="40458" end="40478" title="World Economic Forum" label="World Economic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q68097" start="40482" end="40487" title="Davos" label="Davos"/>
<link wikidata="Q309195" start="40626" end="40660" title="Bank for International Settlements" label="Bank for International Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="40676" end="40681" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q651333" start="40776" end="40809" title="International Handball Federation" label="International Handball Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q46199" start="40824" end="40859" title="International Basketball Federation" label="International Basketball Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="40916" end="40920" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q64027" start="40925" end="40929" title="Nyon" label="Nyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="40985" end="40989" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q190173" start="40999" end="41034" title="International Ice Hockey Federation" label="International Ice Hockey Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="41043" end="41049" title="Zurich" label="Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q48663" start="41055" end="41082" title="Union Cycliste Internationale" label="International Cycling Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q43195" start="41086" end="41091" title="Aigle" label="Aigle"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="41101" end="41132" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="41136" end="41144" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="41182" end="41213" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q327901" start="41262" end="41280" title="Global Peace Index" label="Global Peace Index"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41647" end="41660" title="Future enlargement of the European Union#States not on the agenda" label="EU membership"/>
<link wikidata="Q385258" start="41742" end="41745" title="Swiss People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="SVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q675983" start="42112" end="42141" title="Federal Department of Foreign Affairs" label="Department of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q662528" start="42150" end="42180" title="Federal Department of Economic Affairs" label="Department of Economic Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822795" start="42421" end="42436" title="Schengen Treaty" label="Schengen Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q910554" start="42445" end="42462" title="Dublin Convention" label="Dublin Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q806774" start="42819" end="42834" title="banking secrecy" label="banking secrecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193902" start="42972" end="42979" title="Galileo positioning system" label="Galileo"/>
<link wikidata="Q918501" start="43002" end="43052" title="European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control" label="European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q757292" start="43165" end="43182" title="border checkpoint" label="border checkpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q332844" start="43248" end="43266" title="Swiss Armed Forces" label="Swiss Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q37726" start="43282" end="43293" title="Ground Forces" label="Land Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q688072" start="43302" end="43311" title="Swiss Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162767" start="43317" end="43346" title="Conscription in Switzerland" label="composed mostly of conscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q123480" start="43428" end="43438" title="landlocked" label="landlocked"/>
<link wikidata="Q171504" start="43622" end="43634" title="Pontifical Swiss Guard" label="Swiss Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="43642" end="43649" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q756296" start="43666" end="43678" title="dual citizen" label="dual citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9180311" start="43814" end="43829" title="Automatic firearm" label="fully automatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="44782" end="44801" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="44854" end="44869" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="44966" end="44989" title="German attack on Poland" label="German attack on Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q387115" start="45193" end="45197" title="Onyx (interception system)" label="Onyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q686851" start="45266" end="45293" title="Gun politics in Switzerland" label="Gun politics in Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q466410" start="45664" end="45673" title="high-tech" label="high-tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q210463" start="45790" end="45826" title="Corruption Perceptions Index" label="least corrupt countries in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q674304" start="45834" end="45852" title="Banking in Switzerland" label="its banking sector"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45871" end="45907" title="Corruption in Switzerland#Banking" label="one of the most corrupt in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="45939" end="45964" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="twentieth largest economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="45988" end="46009" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="thirty-eighth largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="46013" end="46036" title="purchasing power parity" label="purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q383715" start="46060" end="46087" title="List of countries by exports" label="thirteenth largest exporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050070" start="46097" end="46110" title="List of countries by exports per capita" label="fifth largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q208511" start="46157" end="46170" title="global city" label="global cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531726" start="46182" end="46196" title="Globalization and World Cities Research Network" label="Alpha and Beta"/>
<link wikidata="Q507154" start="46287" end="46295" title="Novartis" label="Novartis"/>
<link wikidata="Q212646" start="46297" end="46302" title="Roche" label="Roche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931610" start="46470" end="46495" title="Index of Economic Freedom" label="Index of Economic Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q207987" start="46678" end="46707" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita" label="adjusted for purchasing power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067257" start="46814" end="46843" title="Global Competitiveness Report" label="Global Competitiveness Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="46957" end="46971" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="47085" end="47108" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200749" start="47208" end="47236" title="Ease of Doing Business Index" label="Ease of Doing Business Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q667972" start="47393" end="47396" title="International Institute for Management Development" label="IMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744836" start="47624" end="47663" title="List of countries by current account balance as a percentage of GDP" label="account balances as a percentage of GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q372657" start="47769" end="47782" title="Credit Suisse" label="Credit Suisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q98108964" start="47860" end="47874" title="home ownership" label="home ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230874" start="47942" end="47947" title="EU-25" label="EU-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q169339" start="48094" end="48102" title="Glencore" label="Glencore"/>
<link wikidata="Q665870" start="48104" end="48110" title="Gunvor (company)" label="Gunvor"/>
<link wikidata="Q160746" start="48112" end="48118" title="Nestlé" label="Nestlé"/>
<link wikidata="Q869570" start="48120" end="48150" title="Mediterranean Shipping Company" label="Mediterranean Shipping Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q507154" start="48152" end="48160" title="Novartis" label="Novartis"/>
<link wikidata="Q212646" start="48162" end="48179" title="Hoffmann-La Roche" label="Hoffmann-La Roche"/>
<link wikidata="Q52825" start="48181" end="48184" title="ABB" label="ABB"/>
<link wikidata="Q663926" start="48186" end="48207" title="Mercuria Energy Group" label="Mercuria Energy Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q353494" start="48212" end="48218" title="Adecco" label="Adecco"/>
<link wikidata="Q193199" start="48238" end="48241" title="UBS" label="UBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q230426" start="48243" end="48259" title="Zurich Insurance" label="Zurich Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q689240" start="48261" end="48270" title="Richemont" label="Richemont"/>
<link wikidata="Q372657" start="48272" end="48285" title="Credit Suisse" label="Credit Suisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q809018" start="48287" end="48302" title="Barry Callebaut" label="Barry Callebaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q605565" start="48304" end="48312" title="Swiss Re" label="Swiss Re"/>
<link wikidata="Q62288" start="48314" end="48319" title="Rolex" label="Rolex"/>
<link wikidata="Q659200" start="48321" end="48330" title="Tetra Pak" label="Tetra Pak"/>
<link wikidata="Q694107" start="48332" end="48344" title="Swatch Group" label="Swatch Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q156776" start="48349" end="48378" title="Swiss International Air Lines" label="Swiss International Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q207652" start="48489" end="48498" title="chemical industry" label="chemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101307" start="48500" end="48525" title="Pharmaceutical industry in Switzerland" label="health and pharmaceutical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770203" start="48558" end="48578" title="measuring instrument" label="measuring instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q34379" start="48584" end="48602" title="musical instrument" label="musical instrument"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48799" end="48818" title="Economy of Switzerland#Commodities trading" label="commodities trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="48833" end="48860" title="international organization" label="international organisations"/>
<link wikidata="Q117286559" start="48959" end="48985" title="Agriculture in Switzerland" label="Agricultural protectionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886253" start="49065" end="49076" title="food prices" label="food prices"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="49131" end="49143" title="Member state of the European Union" label="EU countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="49161" end="49165" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="49369" end="49400" title="European Free Trade Association" label="European Free Trade Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4539" start="49457" end="49468" title="Cooperative" label="Cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q680727" start="49577" end="49583" title="Migros" label="Migros"/>
<link wikidata="Q432564" start="49588" end="49592" title="Coop (Switzerland)" label="Coop"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="49702" end="49711" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529105" start="49778" end="49825" title="List of countries by tax revenue to GDP ratio" label="tax revenue to GDP ratio is one of the smallest"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="49829" end="49848" title="developed country" label="developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440516" start="49854" end="49874" title="Federal budget of Switzerland" label="Swiss Federal budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929688" start="50027" end="50046" title="government spending" label="government spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q128635" start="50136" end="50151" title="value-added tax" label="value-added tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q28161" start="50809" end="50821" title="job market" label="labor market"/>
<link wikidata="Q20717478" start="51303" end="51329" title="List of countries by immigrant population" label="foreign citizen population"/>
<link wikidata="Q162455" start="51761" end="51777" title="Gini coefficient" label="Gini coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235864" start="51967" end="51992" title="Poverty in Switzerland" label="the national poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q30921" start="52594" end="52621" title="constitution of Switzerland" label="constitution of Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="52675" end="52682" title="Canton of Switzerland" label="cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q694222" start="53431" end="53437" title="matura" label="matura"/>
<link wikidata="Q688134" start="53551" end="53566" title="List of universities in Switzerland" label="12 universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="53599" end="53607" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="cantonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q478743" start="53683" end="53721" title="Academic Ranking of World Universities" label="Academic Ranking of World Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q206702" start="53742" end="53762" title="University of Zurich" label="University of Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q11942" start="53796" end="53840" title="Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich" label="Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q206702" start="53856" end="53876" title="University of Zurich" label="University of Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q478743" start="53928" end="53966" title="Academic Ranking of World Universities" label="Academic Ranking of World Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q11942" start="54021" end="54065" title="Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich" label="Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="54076" end="54082" title="Zurich" label="Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="54118" end="54126" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q658975" start="54174" end="54196" title="University of Lausanne" label="University of Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365560" start="54297" end="54329" title="Universities of Applied Sciences" label="universities of applied sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q673354" start="54385" end="54409" title="University of St. Gallen" label="University of St. Gallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790510" start="54459" end="54487" title="QS World University Rankings" label="QS World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q667972" start="54496" end="54546" title="International Institute for Management Development" label="International Institute for Management Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q691686" start="54759" end="54818" title="Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies" label="Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="54831" end="54837" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q218964" start="55029" end="55081" title="List of Nobel laureates by country" label="countries with the highest number of Nobel laureates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="55156" end="55167" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="55230" end="55245" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="55310" end="55328" title="special relativity" label="special relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q83501" start="55403" end="55418" title="Vladimir Prelog" label="Vladimir Prelog"/>
<link wikidata="Q123029" start="55420" end="55435" title="Heinrich Rohrer" label="Heinrich Rohrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q122272" start="55437" end="55450" title="Richard R. Ernst" label="Richard Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q109726" start="55452" end="55466" title="Edmond H. Fischer" label="Edmond Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q116064" start="55468" end="55484" title="Rolf Zinkernagel" label="Rolf Zinkernagel"/>
<link wikidata="Q110957" start="55486" end="55499" title="Kurt Wüthrich" label="Kurt Wüthrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q41585344" start="55504" end="55520" title="Jacques Dubochet" label="Jacques Dubochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="55599" end="55616" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083" start="55736" end="55739" title="Ain" label="Ain"/>
<link wikidata="Q42944" start="55785" end="55789" title="CERN" label="CERN"/>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="55804" end="55820" title="particle physics" label="particle physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q351857" start="55872" end="55895" title="Paul Scherrer Institute" label="Paul Scherrer Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q849359" start="55912" end="55930" title="Interdisciplinarity" label="multi-disciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q31855" start="55931" end="55939" title="Research institute" label="research"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="55947" end="55954" title="Natural science" label="natural"/>
<link wikidata="Q770766" start="55959" end="55979" title="Engineering physics" label="engineering sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="56016" end="56042" title="lysergic acid diethylamide" label="lysergic acid diethylamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q210402" start="56050" end="56058" title="diazepam" label="diazepam"/>
<link wikidata="Q207649" start="56069" end="56075" title="Velcro" label="Velcro"/>
<link wikidata="Q175646" start="56085" end="56115" title="scanning tunneling microscope" label="scanning tunnelling microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q76766" start="56140" end="56151" title="Gerd Binnig" label="Gerd Binnig"/>
<link wikidata="Q123029" start="56156" end="56171" title="Heinrich Rohrer" label="Heinrich Rohrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="56181" end="56203" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q210719" start="56205" end="56220" title="Auguste Piccard" label="Auguste Piccard"/>
<link wikidata="Q108376" start="56258" end="56270" title="Stratosphere" label="Stratosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q315231" start="56323" end="56338" title="Jacques Piccard" label="Jacques Piccard"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="56424" end="56429" title="ocean" label="ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q714483" start="56451" end="56460" title="Don Walsh" label="Don Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357330" start="56468" end="56486" title="Swiss Space Office" label="Swiss Space Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="56588" end="56609" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q667060" start="56760" end="56774" title="Oerlikon Space" label="Oerlikon Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="56860" end="56876" title="hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="56890" end="56903" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q574580" start="56951" end="56963" title="anti-nuclear" label="anti-nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q134447" start="57060" end="57080" title="nuclear power plants" label="nuclear power plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q171178" start="57196" end="57222" title="Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster" label="Fukushima nuclear disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q659739" start="57371" end="57382" title="Green Party of Switzerland" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q678661" start="57558" end="57629" title="Federal Department of Environment, Transport, Energy and Communications" label="Federal Department of Environment, Transport, Energy and Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q211168" start="57663" end="57680" title="2000-watt society" label="2000-watt society"/>
<link wikidata="Q629025" start="57786" end="57798" title="Rail transport in Switzerland" label="rail network"/>
<link wikidata="Q83835" start="58040" end="58062" title="Swiss Federal Railways" label="Swiss Federal Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="58105" end="58119" title="standard gauge" label="standard gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q246824" start="58137" end="58143" title="BLS AG" label="BLS AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="58179" end="58191" title="narrow gauge" label="narrow gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q177598" start="58206" end="58222" title="Rhaetian Railway" label="Rhaetian Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q666922" start="58294" end="58318" title="Matterhorn Gotthard Bahn" label="Matterhorn Gotthard Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q661561" start="58357" end="58372" title="Glacier Express" label="Glacier Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q27494" start="58381" end="58388" title="Zermatt" label="Zermatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q68986" start="58393" end="58403" title="St. Moritz" label="St. Moritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q68097" start="58404" end="58409" title="Davos" label="Davos"/>
<link wikidata="Q263229" start="58436" end="58483" title="List of longest tunnels" label="world&amp;#x27;s longest and deepest railway tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q193002" start="58542" end="58562" title="Gotthard Base Tunnel" label="Gotthard Base Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q674152" start="58588" end="58628" title="NRLA" label="New Railway Link through the Alps (NRLA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q260866" start="58833" end="58841" title="vignette (road tax)" label="vignette"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344" start="58864" end="58875" title="Swiss franc" label="Swiss franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q15114" start="59047" end="59061" title="Zurich Airport" label="Zurich Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q289972" start="59203" end="59217" title="Geneva Airport" label="Geneva Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q156971" start="59253" end="59288" title="EuroAirport Basel Mulhouse Freiburg" label="EuroAirport Basel Mulhouse Freiburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q619845" start="59310" end="59322" title="Bern Airport" label="Bern Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q661389" start="59324" end="59338" title="Lugano Airport" label="Lugano Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q689836" start="59340" end="59369" title="St. Gallen-Altenrhein Airport" label="St. Gallen-Altenrhein Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q687463" start="59374" end="59386" title="Sion Airport" label="Sion Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q156776" start="59388" end="59417" title="Swiss International Air Lines" label="Swiss International Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="59627" end="59641" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739853" start="59685" end="59714" title="Environmental Integrity Group" label="Environmental Integrity Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q622772" start="60110" end="60121" title="incinerator" label="incinerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q439112" start="60696" end="60713" title="aging population" label="ageing population"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="60746" end="60763" title="Replacement fertility rate" label="replacement level"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="60878" end="60892" title="World Factbook" label="World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="61063" end="61080" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="61127" end="61140" title="Romani people" label="Romani people"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="61518" end="61533" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="61662" end="61671" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815623" start="61700" end="61705" title="Sri Lankan Tamil" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="62131" end="62141" title="xenophobia" label="xenophobia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62507" end="62546" title="Immigration to Switzerland#Racism" label="racism a serious problem in Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q319972" start="62797" end="62814" title="national language" label="national language"/>
<link wikidata="Q13199" start="63008" end="63015" title="Romansh language" label="Romansh"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="63029" end="63045" title="Romance languages" label="Romance language"/>
<link wikidata="Q11925" start="63092" end="63109" title="canton of Grisons" label="canton of Grisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q387066" start="63527" end="63539" title="Swiss German" label="Swiss German"/>
<link wikidata="Q279350" start="63565" end="63580" title="Standard German" label="Standard German"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="63666" end="63676" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="63685" end="63693" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="63721" end="63741" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbian and Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q387066" start="64350" end="64362" title="Swiss German" label="Swiss German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366643" start="64524" end="64556" title="Swiss Standard German" label="Swiss variety of Standard German"/>
<link wikidata="Q59203" start="64630" end="64659" title="Diglossia" label="diglossic usage of a language"/>
<link wikidata="Q15087" start="64712" end="64728" title="Franco-Provençal" label="Franco-Provençal"/>
<link wikidata="Q33754" start="64941" end="64948" title="Lombard language" label="Lombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q268487" start="65107" end="65116" title="Helvetism" label="Helvetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366643" start="65194" end="65215" title="Swiss Standard German" label="Swiss Standard German"/>
<link wikidata="Q279350" start="65238" end="65253" title="Standard German" label="Standard German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480152" start="65567" end="65579" title="Swiss French" label="Swiss French"/>
<link wikidata="Q43091" start="65825" end="65836" title="orthography" label="orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q511823" start="65838" end="65843" title="Duden" label="Duden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074085" start="65955" end="65969" title="Petit Larousse" label="Petit Larousse"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="66313" end="66322" title="Multilingualism" label="bilingual"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="66875" end="66888" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q334911" start="66941" end="66957" title="health insurance" label="health insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="67602" end="67616" title="mental illness" label="mental illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032600" start="67747" end="67765" title="Cannabis in Switzerland" label="consuming cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270247" start="67863" end="67874" title="Legal status of cocaine" label="cocaine use"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377906" start="68162" end="68178" title="Culture of Europe" label="European culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q13199" start="68208" end="68215" title="Romansh language" label="Romansh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11925" start="68227" end="68237" title="Graubünden" label="Graubünden"/>
<link wikidata="Q143390" start="68694" end="68708" title="Paléo Festival" label="Paléo Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q115854" start="68710" end="68726" title="Lucerne Festival" label="Lucerne Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q669118" start="68732" end="68754" title="Montreux Jazz Festival" label="Montreux Jazz Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q502053" start="68760" end="68795" title="Locarno International Film Festival" label="Locarno International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q684443" start="68800" end="68809" title="Art Basel" label="Art Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q130003" start="68934" end="68944" title="ski resort" label="ski resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q204686" start="68967" end="68980" title="winter sports" label="winter sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q520611" start="69003" end="69018" title="mountain biking" label="mountain biking"/>
<link wikidata="Q685206" start="69334" end="69341" title="alphorn" label="alphorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q41923" start="69401" end="69406" title="yodel" label="yodel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082510" start="69455" end="69466" title="Music of Switzerland" label="Swiss music"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="69775" end="69785" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="69803" end="69820" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="69900" end="69914" title="state religion" label="state religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="69935" end="69942" title="cantons of Switzerland" label="cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917" start="69951" end="69957" title="Canton of Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q12738" start="69962" end="69971" title="Canton of Neuchâtel" label="Neuchâtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q689993" start="70013" end="70028" title="Roman Catholicism in Switzerland" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q338309" start="70036" end="70057" title="Swiss Reformed Church" label="Swiss Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169816" start="70099" end="70118" title="Old Catholic Church" label="Old Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195104" start="70255" end="70265" title="church tax" label="church tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q193664" start="70640" end="70647" title="Pietism" label="Pietism"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="70656" end="70670" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433241" start="70705" end="70729" title="Schweizer Pfingstmission" label="Schweizer Pfingstmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q512232" start="70732" end="70753" title="New Apostolic Church" label="Apostolic communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="70810" end="70819" title="Methodism" label="Methodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169816" start="70826" end="70845" title="Old Catholic Church" label="Old Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q692138" start="70920" end="70925" title="Islam in Switzerland" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="70934" end="70942" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="70951" end="70959" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="71124" end="71135" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q763779" start="71168" end="71177" title="Protestant Reformers" label="reformers"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="71179" end="71185" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q37577" start="71234" end="71245" title="John Calvin" label="John Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917" start="71285" end="71303" title="Republic of Geneva" label="Republic of Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q314981" start="71425" end="71438" title="Theodore Beza" label="Theodore Beza"/>
<link wikidata="Q435456" start="71440" end="71453" title="William Farel" label="William Farel"/>
<link wikidata="Q123337" start="71457" end="71469" title="Pierre Viret" label="Pierre Viret"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="71471" end="71477" title="Zurich" label="Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906109" start="71478" end="71484" title="Reformation in Zurich" label="became"/>
<link wikidata="Q123034" start="71538" end="71554" title="Huldrych Zwingli" label="Huldrych Zwingli"/>
<link wikidata="Q123839" start="71559" end="71577" title="Heinrich Bullinger" label="Heinrich Bullinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q124188" start="71607" end="71617" title="Felix Manz" label="Felix Manz"/>
<link wikidata="Q115638" start="71622" end="71635" title="Conrad Grebel" label="Conrad Grebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q598060" start="71695" end="71716" title="Peter Martyr Vermigli" label="Peter Martyr Vermigli"/>
<link wikidata="Q72693" start="71721" end="71731" title="Hans Denck" label="Hans Denck"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="71756" end="71761" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60589" start="71763" end="71780" title="Andreas Karlstadt" label="Andreas Karlstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q123450" start="71785" end="71807" title="Johannes Oecolampadius" label="Johannes Oecolampadius"/>
<link wikidata="Q70" start="71810" end="71814" title="Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q88381" start="71816" end="71832" title="Berchtold Haller" label="Berchtold Haller"/>
<link wikidata="Q670805" start="71837" end="71851" title="Niklaus Manuel" label="Niklaus Manuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25607" start="71858" end="71868" title="St. Gallen" label="St. Gallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q116098" start="71870" end="71884" title="Joachim Vadian" label="Joachim Vadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q30978" start="72096" end="72115" title="Central Switzerland" label="Central Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q834" start="72121" end="72127" title="Valais" label="Valais"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724" start="72133" end="72139" title="Ticino" label="Ticino"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094" start="72141" end="72162" title="Appenzell Innerrhoden" label="Appenzell Innerrhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12755" start="72168" end="72172" title="Canton of Jura" label="Jura"/>
<link wikidata="Q12640" start="72178" end="72186" title="Canton of Fribourg" label="Fribourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q30921" start="72220" end="72238" title="Swiss Constitution" label="Swiss Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q688297" start="72348" end="72364" title="Sonderbundskrieg" label="Sonderbundskrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414948" start="72388" end="72408" title="consociational state" label="consociational state"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="72518" end="72548" title="separation of church and state" label="separation of church and state"/>
<link wikidata="Q122358" start="73315" end="73332" title="Jeremias Gotthelf" label="Jeremias Gotthelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q122370" start="73349" end="73365" title="Gottfried Keller" label="Gottfried Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q115483" start="73397" end="73407" title="Max Frisch" label="Max Frisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q23481" start="73424" end="73444" title="Friedrich Dürrenmatt" label="Friedrich Dürrenmatt"/>
<link wikidata="" start="73471" end="73481" title="The Pledge: Requiem for the Detective Novel" label="The Pledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="73593" end="73614" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Jean-Jacques Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q123041" start="73631" end="73648" title="Germaine de Staël" label="Germaine de Staël"/>
<link wikidata="Q123635" start="73690" end="73713" title="Charles Ferdinand Ramuz" label="Charles Ferdinand Ramuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q123080" start="73826" end="73841" title="Blaise Cendrars" label="Blaise Cendrars"/>
<link wikidata="Q271697" start="74062" end="74067" title="Heidi" label="Heidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q123053" start="74253" end="74266" title="Johanna Spyri" label="Johanna Spyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="74338" end="74358" title="Freedom of the press" label="Freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="74376" end="74391" title="free expression" label="free expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q430109" start="74431" end="74448" title="Schweizerische Depeschenagentur" label="Swiss News Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q658945" start="74728" end="74748" title="Neue Zürcher Zeitung" label="Neue Zürcher Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q673324" start="74793" end="74801" title="Le Temps" label="Le Temps"/>
<link wikidata="Q651410" start="75111" end="75118" title="Swiss Broadcasting Corporation" label="SRG SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="75371" end="75377" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="75379" end="75385" title="Zurich" label="Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="75387" end="75392" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024" start="75398" end="75404" title="Lugano" label="Lugano"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="75514" end="75520" title="Skiing" label="Skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178131" start="75522" end="75534" title="snowboarding" label="snowboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="75539" end="75553" title="mountaineering" label="mountaineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q177275" start="75683" end="75692" title="bobsleigh" label="bobsleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q68986" start="75709" end="75719" title="St. Moritz" label="St. Moritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q943691" start="75731" end="75754" title="FIS Alpine World Ski Championships" label="world ski championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q675392" start="75768" end="75774" title="Mürren" label="Mürren"/>
<link wikidata="Q9591" start="75832" end="75859" title="1928 Winter Olympics" label="second Winter Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q9615" start="75876" end="75889" title="1948 Winter Olympics" label="fifth edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12074" start="75956" end="75973" title="Pirmin Zurbriggen" label="Pirmin Zurbriggen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41678" start="75978" end="75990" title="Didier Cuche" label="Didier Cuche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054684" start="76048" end="76056" title="Football in Switzerland" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q869692" start="76061" end="76071" title="Schweizerischer Eishockeyverband" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="76172" end="76220" title="International Federation of Association Football" label="International Federation of Association Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q190173" start="76232" end="76267" title="International Ice Hockey Federation" label="International Ice Hockey Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="76403" end="76434" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q598646" start="76453" end="76467" title="Olympic Museum" label="Olympic Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q659499" start="76476" end="76506" title="Court of Arbitration for Sport" label="Court of Arbitration for Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="76528" end="76536" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q131075" start="76562" end="76581" title="1954 FIFA World Cup" label="1954 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q241864" start="76627" end="76641" title="UEFA Euro 2008" label="UEFA Euro 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q202699" start="76658" end="76676" title="Swiss Super League" label="Swiss Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="76878" end="76888" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q688866" start="76928" end="76943" title="National League (ice hockey)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361801" start="77022" end="77045" title="2009 IIHF World Championship" label="IIHF World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4428" start="77081" end="77100" title="2013 IIHF World Championship" label="World Vice-Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403" start="77203" end="77214" title="Lake Geneva" label="Lake Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q688545" start="77248" end="77255" title="Alinghi" label="Alinghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q467557" start="77301" end="77319" title="America&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="America&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="77400" end="77413" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q102113" start="77487" end="77497" title="Grand Slam (tennis)" label="Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="77539" end="77548" title="The Championships, Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q270907" start="77568" end="77578" title="ATP Finals" label="ATP Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571500" start="77607" end="77619" title="ATP rankings" label="ATP rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q300011" start="77692" end="77696" title="2009 ATP World Tour" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q134720" start="77732" end="77746" title="Martina Hingis" label="Martina Hingis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193661" start="77751" end="77764" title="Stan Wawrinka" label="Stan Wawrinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="77822" end="77831" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="77848" end="77858" title="Motorsport" label="Motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698266" start="77923" end="77944" title="1955 Le Mans disaster" label="1955 Le Mans disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q820141" start="77980" end="77992" title="hillclimbing" label="hillclimbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q173284" start="78061" end="78075" title="Clay Regazzoni" label="Clay Regazzoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q171310" start="78077" end="78092" title="Sébastien Buemi" label="Sébastien Buemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171531" start="78094" end="78104" title="Jo Siffert" label="Jo Siffert"/>
<link wikidata="Q676293" start="78106" end="78124" title="Dominique Aegerter" label="Dominique Aegerter"/>
<link wikidata="Q966353" start="78137" end="78167" title="World Touring Car Championship" label="World Touring Car Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q118237" start="78175" end="78185" title="Alain Menu" label="Alain Menu"/>
<link wikidata="Q14860087" start="78187" end="78211" title="2014 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="2014 24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q116294" start="78219" end="78233" title="Marcel Fässler (racing driver)" label="Marcel Fässler"/>
<link wikidata="Q216323" start="78243" end="78263" title="24 Hours Nürburgring" label="24 Hours Nürburgring"/>
<link wikidata="Q115950" start="78271" end="78282" title="Nico Müller" label="Nico Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q279809" start="78284" end="78295" title="A1 Team Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q279588" start="78309" end="78337" title="A1 Grand Prix" label="A1GP World Cup of Motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086968" start="78341" end="78348" title="2007–08 A1 Grand Prix season" label="2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q115552" start="78361" end="78370" title="Neel Jani" label="Neel Jani"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163326" start="78378" end="78394" title="motorcycle racer" label="motorcycle racer"/>
<link wikidata="Q665958" start="78395" end="78407" title="Thomas Lüthi" label="Thomas Lüthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q850292" start="78421" end="78427" title="MotoGP" label="MotoGP"/>
<link wikidata="Q676078" start="78487" end="78509" title="Swiss National Council" label="Swiss National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q684719" start="78528" end="78559" title="Federal Assembly of Switzerland" label="Federal Assembly of Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q609037" start="78617" end="78640" title="Swiss Council of States" label="Swiss Council of States"/>
<link wikidata="Q669810" start="78826" end="78835" title="Hornussen" label="Hornussen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619078" start="78944" end="78953" title="stone put" label="stone put"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="79045" end="79062" title="prehistory" label="prehistoric times"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="79102" end="79107" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q684158" start="79150" end="79163" title="Unspunnenfest" label="Unspunnenfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q190531" start="79292" end="79298" title="fondue" label="fondue"/>
<link wikidata="Q20748" start="79300" end="79308" title="raclette" label="raclette"/>
<link wikidata="Q627331" start="79312" end="79317" title="rösti" label="rösti"/>
<link wikidata="Q185217" start="79579" end="79592" title="dairy product" label="dairy product"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376488" start="79614" end="79621" title="Gruyère (cheese)" label="Gruyère"/>
<link wikidata="Q932214" start="79625" end="79633" title="Emmental (cheese)" label="Emmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q69600" start="79662" end="79670" title="Gruyères" label="Gruyères"/>
<link wikidata="Q684648" start="79675" end="79683" title="Emmental" label="Emmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q869700" start="79773" end="79782" title="Swiss chocolate" label="Chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123967" start="79935" end="79943" title="conching" label="conching"/>
<link wikidata="Q19830069" start="79948" end="79957" title="Tempering chocolate" label="tempering"/>
<link wikidata="Q118173" start="80063" end="80075" title="Daniel Peter" label="Daniel Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q627003" start="80274" end="80281" title="terroir" label="terroir"/>
<link wikidata="Q674376" start="80284" end="80294" title="Swiss wine" label="Swiss wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q834" start="80317" end="80323" title="Valais (wine region)" label="Valais"/>
<link wikidata="Q12771" start="80325" end="80329" title="Vaud" label="Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q688060" start="80331" end="80337" title="Lavaux" label="Lavaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917" start="80340" end="80346" title="Geneva (wine region)" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q939724" start="80560" end="80569" title="Chasselas" label="Chasselas"/>
<link wikidata="Q939724" start="80578" end="80585" title="Fendant" label="Fendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q223701" start="80601" end="80611" title="Pinot noir" label="Pinot Noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q213338" start="80613" end="80619" title="Merlot" label="Merlot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112470" start="80679" end="80716" title="Index of Switzerland-related articles" label="Index of Switzerland-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112470" start="80719" end="80741" title="Outline of Switzerland" label="Outline of Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137141" start="80744" end="80777" title="History of Switzerland since 1914" label="History of Switzerland since 1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q642074" start="81098" end="81134" title="Historical Dictionary of Switzerland" label="Historical Dictionary of Switzerland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="26750" wikidata="Q854" url="?curid=26750" title="Sri Lanka">
<text>Sri Lanka, historically known as Ceylon, and officially the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, is an island country in South Asia. It lies in the Indian Ocean, southwest of the Bay of Bengal, separated from the Indian peninsula by the Gulf of Mannar and the Palk Strait. It shares a maritime border with the Maldives in the southwest and India in the northwest. Sri Jayawardenepura Kotte is the legislative capital of Sri Lanka and the largest city, Colombo is the administrative and judicial capital which is the nation&#x27;s political, financial and cultural centre. Kandy is the second-largest urban area and also the capital of the last native kingdom of Sri Lanka. The most spoken language Sinhala, is spoken by the majority of the population (approximately 17 million). Tamil is also spoken by approximately five million people, making it the second most-spoken language in Sri Lanka.

Sri Lanka has a population of approximately 22 million and is home to several cultures, languages and ethnicities. The Sinhalese people form the majority of the population, followed by the Sri Lankan Tamils, who are the largest minority group and are concentrated in northern Sri Lanka; both groups have played an influential role in the island&#x27;s history. Other long-established groups include the Moors, Indian Tamils, Burghers, Malays, Chinese, and Vedda.

Sri Lanka&#x27;s documented history goes back 3,000 years, with evidence of prehistoric human settlements dating back 125,000 years. The earliest known Buddhist writings of Sri Lanka, known collectively as the Pali Canon, date to the fourth Buddhist council, which took place in 29 BCE. Also called the &quot;Pearl of the Indian Ocean&quot;, or the &quot;Granary of the East&quot;, Sri Lanka&#x27;s geographic location and deep harbours have made it of great strategic importance, from the earliest days of the ancient Silk Road trade route to today&#x27;s so-called maritime Silk Road. Because its location made it a major trading hub, it was already known to both East Asians and Europeans as long ago as the Anuradhapura period. During a period of great political crisis in the Kingdom of Kotte, the Portuguese arrived in Sri Lanka and sought to control its maritime trade, with a part of Sri Lanka subsequently becoming a Portuguese possession. After the Sinhalese–Portuguese War, the Dutch colonial empire and the Kingdom of Kandy took control of those areas. Dutch Ceylon was taken by the British Empire, which extended control over the whole island, colonising it as British Ceylon from 1815 to 1948. A national movement for political independence arose in the early 20th century, and in 1948, Ceylon became a dominion. It was succeeded by the republic of Sri Lanka in 1972. Sri Lanka&#x27;s more recent history was marred by the 26-year Sri Lankan Civil War, which began in 1983 and ended in 2009, when the Sri Lanka Armed Forces defeated the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam.

Sri Lanka is a developing country, ranking 78th on the Human Development Index. It is the highest-ranked South Asian nation in terms of development and has the second-highest per capita income in South Asia. The country has had a long history of engagement with modern international groups; it is a founding member of the SAARC, the G77 and the Non-Aligned Movement, as well as a member of the United Nations and the Commonwealth of Nations.

== Toponymy ==
In antiquity, Sri Lanka was known to travellers by a variety of names. According to the &quot;Mahāvaṃsa&quot;, the legendary Prince Vijaya named the island Tambapaṇṇĩ (&quot;copper-red hands&quot; or &quot;copper-red earth&quot;), because his followers&#x27; hands were reddened by the red soil of the area where he landed. In Hindu mythology, the term &quot;Lankā&quot; (&quot;Island&quot;) appears but it is unknown whether it refers to the island. The Tamil term Eelam () was used to designate the whole island in Sangam literature. The island was known under Chola rule as &quot;Mummudi Cholamandalam&quot; (&quot;realm of the three crowned Cholas&quot;).

Ancient Greek geographers called it &quot;Taprobanā&quot; () or &quot;Taprobanē&quot; () from the word &quot;Tambapanni&quot;. The Persians and Arabs referred to it as &quot;Sarandīb&quot; (the origin of the word &quot;serendipity&quot;) from Sanskrit &quot;Siṃhaladvīpaḥ&quot;. &quot;Ceilão&quot;, the name given to Sri Lanka by the Portuguese when they arrived in 1505, was transliterated into English as &quot;Ceylon&quot;. As a British crown colony, the island was known as Ceylon; it achieved independence as the Dominion of Ceylon in 1948.

The country is now known in Sinhala as &#x27; () and in Tamil as &#x27; (, ). In 1972, its formal name was changed to &quot;Free, Sovereign and Independent Republic of Sri Lanka&quot;. Later, on 7 September 1978, it was changed to the &quot;Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka&quot;. As the name Ceylon still appears in the names of a number of organisations, the Sri Lankan government announced in 2011 a plan to rename all those over which it has authority.

== History ==
=== Prehistory ===

The pre-history of Sri Lanka goes back 125,000 years and possibly even as far back as 500,000 years. The era spans the Palaeolithic, Mesolithic, and early Iron Ages. Among the Paleolithic human settlements discovered in Sri Lanka, Pahiyangala (37,000 BP), named after the Chinese traveller monk Faxian; Batadombalena (28,500 BP); and Belilena (12,000 BP) are the most important. In these caves, archaeologists have found the remains of anatomically modern humans which they have named Balangoda Man, and other evidence suggesting that they may have engaged in agriculture and kept domestic dogs for driving game.

The earliest inhabitants of Sri Lanka were probably ancestors of the Vedda people, an indigenous people numbering approximately 2,500 living in modern-day Sri Lanka.

During the protohistoric period (1000–500 BCE) Sri Lanka was culturally united with southern India, and shared the same megalithic burials, pottery, iron technology, farming techniques and megalithic graffiti. This cultural complex spread from southern India along with Dravidian clans such as the Velir, prior to the migration of Prakrit speakers.

One of the first written references to the island is found in the Indian epic Ramayana, which provides details of a kingdom named &quot;Lanka&quot; that was created by the divine sculptor Vishvakarma for Kubera, the God of Wealth. It is said that Kubera was overthrown by his rakshasa stepbrother, Ravana.

=== Ancient history ===

According to the &quot;Mahāvaṃsa&quot;, a Pāḷi chronicle written in the 5th century CE, the original inhabitants of Sri Lanka are said to be the Yakshas and Nagas. Sinhalese history traditionally starts in 543 BCE with the arrival of Prince Vijaya, a semi-legendary prince who sailed with 700 followers to Sri Lanka, after being expelled from Vanga kingdom (present-day Bengal). He established the Kingdom of Tambapanni, near modern-day Mannar. Vijaya (Singha) is the first of the approximately 189 monarchs of Sri Lanka described in chronicles such as the &quot;Dīpavaṃsa&quot;, &quot;Mahāvaṃsa&quot;, &quot;Cūḷavaṃsa&quot;, and &quot;Rājāvaliya&quot;.

Once Prakrit speakers had attained dominance on the island, the &quot;Mahāvaṃsa&quot; further recounts the later migration of royal brides and service castes from the Tamil Pandya kingdom to the Anuradhapura kingdom in the early historic period.

The Anuradhapura period (377 BCE1017 CE) began with the establishment of the Anuradhapura kingdom in 380 BCE during the reign of Pandukabhaya. Thereafter, Anuradhapura served as the capital city of the country for nearly 1,400 years. Ancient Sri Lankans excelled at building certain types of structures such as tanks, dagobas and palaces. Society underwent a major transformation during the reign of Devanampiya Tissa, with the arrival of Buddhism from India. In 250 BCE, Mahinda, a bhikkhu and the son of the Mauryan Emperor Ashoka arrived in Mihintale carrying the message of Buddhism. His mission won over the monarch, who embraced the faith and propagated it throughout the Sinhalese population.

Succeeding kingdoms of Sri Lanka would maintain many Buddhist schools and monasteries and support the propagation of Buddhism into other countries in Southeast Asia. Sri Lankan Bhikkhus studied in India&#x27;s famous ancient Buddhist University of Nalanda, which was destroyed by Bakhtiyar Khalji. It is probable that many of the scriptures from Nalanda are preserved in Sri Lanka&#x27;s many monasteries and that the written form of the Tripiṭaka, including Sinhalese Buddhist literature, were part of the University of Nalanda. In 245 BCE, bhikkhunī Sanghamitta arrived with the Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi tree, which is considered to be a sapling from the historical Bodhi Tree under which Gautama Buddha became enlightened. It is considered the oldest human-planted tree (with a continuous historical record) in the world. (Bodhivaṃsa)

Sri Lanka experienced the first of many foreign invasions during the reign of Suratissa, who was defeated by two horse traders named Sena and Guttika from South India. The next invasion came immediately in 205 BCE by a Chola named Elara, who overthrew Asela and ruled the country for 44 years. Dutugamunu, the eldest son of the southern regional sub-king, Kavan Tissa, defeated Elara in the Battle of Vijithapura. During its two and a half millennia of existence, the Sinhala kingdom was invaded at least eight times by neighbouring South Indian dynasties such as the Chola, Pandya, and Pallava. There also were incursions by the kingdoms of Kalinga (modern Odisha) and from the Malay Peninsula as well.

The Fourth Theravāda Council was held at the Anuradhapura Maha Viharaya in Sri Lanka under the patronage of Valagamba in 25 BCE. The council was held in response to a year in which the harvests in Sri Lanka were particularly poor and many Buddhist monks subsequently died of starvation. Because the Pali Canon was at that time oral literature maintained in several recensions by &quot;dhammabhāṇaka&quot;s (dharma reciters), the surviving monks recognised the danger of not writing it down so that even if some of the monks whose duty it was to study and remember parts of the Canon for later generations died, the teachings would not be lost. After the council, palm-leaf manuscripts containing the completed Canon were taken to other countries such as Burma, Thailand, Cambodia and Laos.

Sri Lanka was the first Asian country known to have a female ruler: Anula of Anuradhapura (r. 47–42 BCE). Sri Lankan monarchs undertook some remarkable construction projects such as Sigiriya, the so-called &quot;Fortress in the Sky&quot;, built during the reign of Kashyapa I, who ruled between 477 and 495. The Sigiriya rock fortress is surrounded by an extensive network of ramparts and moats. Inside this protective enclosure were gardens, ponds, pavilions, palaces and other structures.

In 993 CE, the invasion of Chola emperor Rajaraja I forced the then Sinhalese ruler Mahinda V to flee to the southern part of Sri Lanka. Taking advantage of this situation, Rajendra I, son of Rajaraja I, launched a large invasion in 1017. Mahinda V was captured and taken to India, and the Cholas sacked the city of Anuradhapura causing the fall of Anuradhapura kingdom. Subsequently, they moved the capital to Polonnaruwa.

=== Post-classical period ===

Following a 17-year-long campaign, Vijayabahu I successfully drove the Chola out of Sri Lanka in 1070, reuniting the country for the first time in over a century. Upon his request, ordained monks were sent from Burma to Sri Lanka to re-establish Buddhism, which had almost disappeared from the country during the Chola reign. During the medieval period, Sri Lanka was divided into three sub-territories, namely, Ruhunu, Pihiti and Maya.
Sri Lanka&#x27;s irrigation system was extensively expanded during the reign of Parākramabāhu the Great (1153–1186). This period is considered as a time when Sri Lanka was at the height of its power. He built 1,470 reservoirs – the highest number by any ruler in Sri Lanka&#x27;s history – repaired 165 dams, 3,910 canals, 163 major reservoirs, and 2,376 mini-reservoirs. His most famous construction is the Parakrama Samudra, the largest irrigation project of medieval Sri Lanka. Parākramabāhu&#x27;s reign is memorable for two major campaigns – in the south of India as part of a Pandyan war of succession, and a punitive strike against the kings of Ramanna (Burma) for various perceived insults to Sri Lanka.

After his demise, Sri Lanka gradually decayed in power. In 1215, Kalinga Magha, an invader with uncertain origins, identified as the founder of the Jaffna kingdom, invaded and captured the Kingdom of Polonnaruwa. He sailed from Kalinga 690 nautical miles on 100 large ships with a 24,000 strong army. Unlike previous invaders, he looted, ransacked and destroyed everything in the ancient Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa Kingdoms beyond recovery. His priorities in ruling were to extract as much as possible from the land and overturn as many of the traditions of Rajarata as possible. His reign saw the massive migration of native Sinhalese people to the south and west of Sri Lanka, and into the mountainous interior, in a bid to escape his power.

Sri Lanka never really recovered from the effects of Kalinga Magha&#x27;s invasion. King Vijayabâhu III, who led the resistance, brought the kingdom to Dambadeniya. The north, in the meanwhile, eventually evolved into the Jaffna kingdom. The Jaffna kingdom never came under the rule of any kingdom of the south except on one occasion; in 1450, following the conquest led by king Parâkramabâhu VI&#x27;s adopted son, Prince Sapumal. He ruled the North from 1450 to 1467 CE.

The next three centuries starting from 1215 were marked by kaleidoscopically shifting collections of capitals in south and central Sri Lanka, including Dambadeniya, Yapahuwa, Gampola, Raigama, Kotte, Sitawaka, and finally, Kandy. In 1247, the Malay kingdom of Tambralinga which was a vassal of Sri Vijaya led by their king Chandrabhanu briefly invaded Sri Lanka from Insular Southeast Asia. They were then expelled by the South Indian Pandyan dynasty. However, this temporary invasion reinforced the steady flow of the presence of various Austronesian merchant ethnic groups, from Sumatrans (Indonesia) to Lucoes (Philippines) into Sri Lanka which occurred since 200 BCE. Chinese admiral Zheng He and his naval expeditionary force landed at Galle, Sri Lanka in 1409 and got into battle with the local king Vira Alakesvara of Gampola. Zheng He captured King Vira Alakesvara and later released him. Zheng He erected the Galle Trilingual Inscription, a stone tablet at Galle written in three languages (Chinese, Tamil, and Persian), to commemorate his visit. The stele was discovered by S. H. Thomlin at Galle in 1911 and is now preserved in the Colombo National Museum.

=== Early modern period ===


The early modern period of Sri Lanka begins with the arrival of Portuguese soldier and explorer Lourenço de Almeida, the son of Francisco de Almeida, in 1505. In 1517, the Portuguese built a fort at the port city of Colombo and gradually extended their control over the coastal areas. In 1592, after decades of intermittent warfare with the Portuguese, Vimaladharmasuriya I moved his kingdom to the inland city of Kandy, a location he thought more secure from attack. In 1619, succumbing to attacks by the Portuguese, the independent existence of the Jaffna kingdom came to an end.

During the reign of the Rajasinha II, Dutch explorers arrived on the island. In 1638, the king signed a treaty with the Dutch East India Company to get rid of the Portuguese who ruled most of the coastal areas. The following Dutch–Portuguese War resulted in a Dutch victory, with Colombo falling into Dutch hands by 1656. The Dutch remained in the areas they had captured, thereby violating the treaty they had signed in 1638. The Burgher people, a distinct ethnic group, emerged as a result of intermingling between the Dutch and native Sri Lankans in this period.

The Kingdom of Kandy was the last independent monarchy of Sri Lanka. In 1595, Vimaladharmasurya brought the sacred Tooth Relic—the traditional symbol of royal and religious authority amongst the Sinhalese—to Kandy and built the Temple of the Tooth. In spite of on-going intermittent warfare with Europeans, the kingdom survived. Later, a crisis of succession emerged in Kandy upon king Vira Narendra Sinha &#x27;s death in 1739. He was married to a Telugu-speaking Nayakkar princess from South India (Madurai) and was childless by her.

Eventually, with the support of bhikkhu Weliwita Sarankara and ignoring the right of &quot;Unambuwe Bandara&quot;, the crown passed to the brother of one of Narendrasinha&#x27;s princesses, overlooking Narendrasinha&#x27;s own son by a Sinhalese concubine. The new king was crowned Sri Vijaya Rajasinha later that year. Kings of the Nayakkar dynasty launched several attacks on Dutch controlled areas, which proved to be unsuccessful.
During the Napoleonic Wars, fearing that French control of the Netherlands might deliver Sri Lanka to the French, the British Empire occupied the coastal areas of the island (which they called the colony of British Ceylon) with little difficulty in 1796. Two years later, in 1798, Sri Rajadhi Rajasinha, third of the four Nayakkar kings of Sri Lanka, died of a fever. Following his death, a nephew of Rajadhi Rajasinha, eighteen-year-old Kannasamy, was crowned. The young king, now named Sri Vikrama Rajasinha, faced a British invasion in 1803 but successfully retaliated. The First Kandyan War ended in a stalemate.

By then the entire coastal area was under the British East India Company as a result of the Treaty of Amiens. On 14 February 1815, Kandy was occupied by the British in the Second Kandyan War, ending Sri Lanka&#x27;s independence. Sri Vikrama Rajasinha, the last native monarch of Sri Lanka, was exiled to India. The Kandyan Convention formally ceded the entire country to the British Empire. Attempts by Sri Lankan noblemen to undermine British power in 1818 during the Uva Rebellion were thwarted by Governor Robert Brownrigg.

The beginning of the modern period of Sri Lanka is marked by the Colebrooke–Cameron reforms of 1833. They introduced a utilitarian and liberal political culture to the country based on the rule of law and amalgamated the Kandyan and maritime provinces as a single unit of government. An executive council and a legislative council were established, later becoming the foundation of a representative legislature. By this time, experiments with coffee plantations were largely successful.

Soon, coffee became the primary commodity export of Sri Lanka. Falling coffee prices as a result of the depression of 1847 stalled economic development and prompted the governor to introduce a series of taxes on firearms, dogs, shops, boats, etc., and to reintroduce a form of &quot;rajakariya&quot;, requiring six days free labour on roads or payment of a cash equivalent. These harsh measures antagonised the locals, and another rebellion broke out in 1848. A devastating leaf disease, &quot;Hemileia vastatrix&quot;, struck the coffee plantations in 1869, destroying the entire industry within fifteen years. The British quickly found a replacement: abandoning coffee, they began cultivating tea instead. Tea production in Sri Lanka thrived in the following decades. Large-scale rubber plantations began in the early 20th century.
By the end of the 19th century, a new educated social class transcending race and caste arose through British attempts to staff the Ceylon Civil Service and the legal, educational, engineering, and medical professions with natives. New leaders represented the various ethnic groups of the population in the Ceylon Legislative Council on a communal basis. Buddhist and Hindu revivalists reacted against Christian missionary activities. The first two decades in the 20th century are noted by the unique harmony among Sinhalese and Tamil political leadership, which has since been lost.

The 1906 malaria outbreak in Ceylon actually started in the early 1900s, but the first case was documented in 1906.

In 1919, major Sinhalese and Tamil political organisations united to form the Ceylon National Congress, under the leadership of Ponnambalam Arunachalam, pressing colonial masters for more constitutional reforms. But without massive popular support, and with the governor&#x27;s encouragement for &quot;communal representation&quot; by creating a &quot;Colombo seat&quot; that dangled between Sinhalese and Tamils, the Congress lost momentum towards the mid-1920s.

The Donoughmore reforms of 1931 repudiated the communal representation and introduced universal adult franchise (the franchise stood at 4% before the reforms). This step was strongly criticised by the Tamil political leadership, who realised that they would be reduced to a minority in the newly created State Council of Ceylon, which succeeded the legislative council. In 1937, Tamil leader G. G. Ponnambalam demanded a 50–50 representation (50% for the Sinhalese and 50% for other ethnic groups) in the State Council. However, this demand was not met by the Soulbury reforms of 1944–45.

=== Contemporary history ===


The Soulbury constitution ushered in dominion status, with independence proclaimed on 4 February 1948. D. S. Senanayake became the first Prime Minister of Ceylon. Prominent Tamil leaders including Ponnambalam and Arunachalam Mahadeva joined his cabinet. The British Royal Navy remained stationed at Trincomalee until 1956. A countrywide popular demonstration against withdrawal of the rice rations resulted in the resignation of prime minister Dudley Senanayake.

S. W. R. D. Bandaranaike was elected prime minister in 1956. His three-year rule had a profound influence through his self-proclaimed role of &quot;defender of the besieged Sinhalese culture&quot;. He introduced the controversial Sinhala Only Act, recognising Sinhala as the only official language of the government. Although partially reversed in 1958, the bill posed a grave concern for the Tamil community, which perceived in it a threat to their language and culture.

The Federal Party (FP) launched a movement of non-violent resistance (satyagraha) against the bill, which prompted Bandaranaike to reach an agreement (Bandaranaike–Chelvanayakam Pact) with S. J. V. Chelvanayakam, leader of the FP, to resolve the looming ethnic conflict. The pact proved ineffective in the face of ongoing protests by opposition and the Buddhist clergy. The bill, together with various government colonisation schemes, contributed much towards the political rancour between Sinhalese and Tamil political leaders. Bandaranaike was assassinated by an extremist Buddhist monk in 1959.

Sirimavo Bandaranaike, the widow of Bandaranaike, took office as prime minister in 1960, and withstood an attempted coup d&#x27;état in 1962. During her second term as prime minister, the government instituted socialist economic policies, strengthening ties with the Soviet Union and China, while promoting a policy of non-alignment. In 1971, Ceylon experienced a Marxist insurrection, which was quickly suppressed. In 1972, the country became a republic named Sri Lanka, repudiating its dominion status. Prolonged minority grievances and the use of communal emotionalism as an election campaign weapon by both Sinhalese and Tamil leaders abetted a fledgling Tamil militancy in the north during the 1970s. The policy of standardisation by the Sirimavo government to rectify disparities created in university enrolment, which was in essence an affirmative action to assist geographically disadvantaged students to obtain tertiary education, resulted in reducing the proportion of Tamil students at university level and acted as the immediate catalyst for the rise of militancy. The assassination of Jaffna Mayor Alfred Duraiyappah in 1975 by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) marked a crisis point.

The government of J. R. Jayawardene swept to power in 1977, defeating the United Front government. Jayawardene introduced a new constitution, together with a free-market economy and a powerful executive presidency modelled after that of France. It made Sri Lanka the first South Asian country to liberalise its economy. Beginning in 1983, ethnic tensions were manifested in an on-and-off insurgency against the government by the LTTE. An LTTE attack on 13 soldiers resulted in the start of a civil war, and in response anti-Tamil race riots took place, allegedly backed by Sinhalese hard-line ministers, which resulted in more than 150,000 Tamil civilians fleeing the island, seeking asylum in other countries.

Lapses in foreign policy resulted in India strengthening the Tigers by providing arms and training. In 1987, the Indo-Sri Lanka Accord was signed and the Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) was deployed in northern Sri Lanka to stabilise the region by neutralising the LTTE. The same year, the JVP launched its second insurrection in Southern Sri Lanka, necessitating redeployment of the IPKF in 1990. In October 1990, the LTTE expelled Sri Lankan Moors (Muslims by religion) from northern Sri Lanka. In 2002, the Sri Lankan government and LTTE signed a Norwegian-mediated ceasefire agreement.

The 2004 Asian tsunami killed over 30,000 and displaced over 500,000 people in Sri Lanka. From 1985 to 2006, the Sri Lankan government and Tamil insurgents held four rounds of peace talks without success. Both LTTE and the government resumed fighting in 2006, and the government officially backed out of the ceasefire in 2008. In 2009, under the Presidency of Mahinda Rajapaksa, the Sri Lanka Armed Forces defeated the LTTE, bringing an end to the 26 year long civil war on 19 May 2009, and re-established control of the entire country by the Sri Lankan Government. Overall, between 60,000 and 100,000 people were killed during the course of the 26 year long conflict.

2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings carried out by the terrorist group National Thowheeth Jama&#x27;ath on 21 April 2019 resulted in the brutal death of 261 innocent people. On 26 April 2019 an anti terrorist operation was carried out against the National Thowheeth Jama&#x27;ath by the Sri Lanka Army with the operation being successful and National Thowheeth Jama&#x27;ath&#x27;s insurgency ending.

Economic troubles in Sri Lanka began in 2019, when a severe economic crisis occurred caused by rapidly increasing foreign debt, massive government budget deficits due to tax cuts, falling foreign remittances, a food crisis caused by mandatory organic farming along with a ban on chemical fertilizers, and a multitude of other factors. The Sri Lankan Government officially declared the ongoing crisis to be the worst economic crisis in the country in 73 years. In August 2021, a food emergency was declared. In June 2022, Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe declared the collapse of the Sri Lankan economy in parliament. The crisis resulted in Sri Lanka defaulting on its $51 billion sovereign debt for the first time in its history, along with double-digit inflation, a crippling energy crisis that led to approximately 15 hour power cuts, severe fuel shortages leading to the suspension of fuel to all non-essential vehicles, and more such economic disorder. Due to the crisis, massive street protests erupted all over the country, with protesters demanding the resignation of the President Gotabaya Rajapaksa. The protests culminated with the storming and siege of the President&#x27;s House on July 9, 2022, and resulted in President Gotabaya Rajapaksa fleeing to Singapore and later emailing his resignation to parliament, formally announcing his resignation and making him the first Sri Lankan president to resign in the middle of his term. On the same day the President&#x27;s House was stormed, protesters besieged and stormed the private residence of the prime minister and burnt it down.

After Parliament elected the new president as Ranil Wickremesinghe on 20 July 2022, Wickremesinghe took oath as the ninth President of Sri Lanka. He implemented various economic reforms in efforts to stabilize Sri Lanka&#x27;s economy, which has shown slight improvement since. On 23 September 2024, Anura Kumara Dissanayake was sworn in as Sri Lanka&#x27;s new president after winning the presidential election as a left-wing candidate. On 14 November 2024, President Anura Kumara Dissanayake&#x27;s National People&#x27;s Power (NPP), a left-leaning alliance, received a two-thirds majority in parliament in Sri Lankan parliamentary election.

== Geography ==

Sri Lanka, an island in South Asia shaped as a teardrop or a pear/mango, lies on the Indian Plate, a major tectonic plate that was formerly part of the Indo-Australian Plate. It is in the Indian Ocean southwest of the Bay of Bengal, between latitudes 5° and 10° N, and longitudes 79° and 82° E. Sri Lanka is separated from the mainland portion of the Indian subcontinent by the Gulf of Mannar and Palk Strait. According to Hindu mythology, a land bridge existed between the Indian mainland and Sri Lanka. It now amounts to only a chain of limestone shoals remaining above sea level. Legends claim that it was passable on foot up to 1480 CE, until cyclones deepened the channel. Portions are still as shallow as , hindering navigation. The island consists mostly of flat to rolling coastal plains, with mountains rising only in the south-central part. The highest point is Pidurutalagala, reaching above sea level.

Sri Lanka has 103 rivers. The longest of these is the Mahaweli River, extending . These waterways give rise to 51 natural waterfalls of or more. The highest is Bambarakanda Falls, with a height of . Sri Lanka&#x27;s coastline is long. Sri Lanka claims an exclusive economic zone extending 200 nautical miles, which is approximately 6.7 times Sri Lanka&#x27;s land area. The coastline and adjacent waters support highly productive marine ecosystems such as fringing coral reefs and shallow beds of coastal and estuarine seagrasses.

Sri Lanka has 45 estuaries and 40 lagoons. Sri Lanka&#x27;s mangrove ecosystem spans over 7,000 hectares and played a vital role in buffering the force of the waves in the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami. The island is rich in minerals such as ilmenite, feldspar, graphite, silica, kaolin, mica and thorium. Existence of petroleum and gas in the Gulf of Mannar has also been confirmed, and the extraction of recoverable quantities is underway.

=== Climate ===

The climate is tropical and warm because of moderating effects of ocean winds. Mean temperatures range from in the Central Highlands, where frost may occur for several days in the winter, to a maximum of in low-altitude areas. Average yearly temperatures range from to nearly . Day and night temperatures may vary by to .

The rainfall pattern is influenced by monsoon winds from the Indian Ocean and Bay of Bengal. The &quot;wet zone&quot; and some of the windward slopes of the central highlands receive up to of rain each year, but the leeward slopes in the east and northeast receive little rain. Most of the east, southeast, and northern parts of Sri Lanka constitute the &quot;dry zone&quot;, which receives between of rain annually.

The arid northwest and southeast coasts receive the least rain at per year. Periodic squalls occur and sometimes tropical cyclones bring overcast skies and rains to the southwest, northeast, and eastern parts of the island. Humidity is typically higher in the southwest and mountainous areas and depends on the seasonal patterns of rainfall. An increase in average rainfall coupled with heavier rainfall events has resulted in recurrent flooding and related damages to infrastructure, utility supply and the urban economy.

=== Flora and fauna ===


Western Ghats of India and Sri Lanka were included among the first 18 global biodiversity hotspots due to high levels of species endemism. The number of biodiversity hotspots has now increased to 34. Sri Lanka has the highest biodiversity per unit area among Asian countries for flowering plants and all vertebrate groups except birds. A remarkably high proportion of the species among its flora and fauna, 27% of the 3,210 flowering plants and 22% of the mammals, are endemic. Sri Lanka supports a rich avifauna of that stands at 453 species and this include 240 species of birds that are known to breed in the country. 33 species are accepted by some ornithologists as endemic while some ornithologists consider only 27 are endemic and the remaining six are considered as proposed endemics. Sri Lanka&#x27;s protected areas are administrated by two government bodies; The Department of Forest Conservation and the Department of Wildlife Conservation. Department of Wildlife Conservation administrates 61 wildlife sanctuaries, 22 national parks, four nature reserves, three strict nature reserves, and one jungle corridor while Department of Forest Conservation oversees 65 conservation forests and one national heritage wilderness area. 26.5% of the country&#x27;s land area is legally protected. This is a higher percentage of protected areas when compared to the rest of Asia.

Sri Lanka contains four terrestrial ecoregions: Sri Lanka lowland rain forests, Sri Lanka montane rain forests, Sri Lanka dry-zone dry evergreen forests, and Deccan thorn scrub forests. Flowering acacias flourish on the arid Jaffna Peninsula. Among the trees of the dry-land forests are valuable species such as satinwood, ebony, ironwood, mahogany and teak. The wet zone is a tropical evergreen forest with tall trees, broad foliage, and a dense undergrowth of vines and creepers. Subtropical evergreen forests resembling those of temperate climates flourish in the higher altitudes.
Yala National Park in the southeast protects herds of elephant, deer, and peacocks. The Wilpattu National Park in the northwest, the largest national park, preserves the habitats of many water birds such as storks, pelicans, ibis, and spoonbills. The island has four biosphere reserves: Bundala, Hurulu Forest Reserve, the Kanneliya-Dediyagala-Nakiyadeniya, and Sinharaja. Sinharaja is home to 26 endemic birds and 20 rainforest species, including the elusive red-faced malkoha, the green-billed coucal and the Sri Lanka blue magpie. The untapped genetic potential of Sinharaja flora is enormous. Of the 211 woody trees and lianas within the reserve, 139 (66%) are endemic. The total vegetation density, including trees, shrubs, herbs, and seedlings, has been estimated at 240,000 individuals per hectare. The Minneriya National Park borders the Minneriya Tank, which is an important source of water for elephants inhabiting the surrounding forests. Dubbed &quot;The Gathering&quot;, the congregation of elephants can be seen on the tank-bed in the late dry season (August to October) as the surrounding water sources steadily disappear. The park also encompasses a range of micro-habitats which include classic dry zone tropical monsoonal evergreen forest, thick stands of giant bamboo, hilly pastures (patanas), and grasslands (talawas).

During the Mahaweli Program of the 1970s and 1980s in northern Sri Lanka, the government set aside four areas of land totalling as national parks. Statistics of Sri Lanka&#x27;s forest cover show rapid deforestation from 1956 to 2010. In 1956, 44.2 percent of the country&#x27;s land area had forest cover. Forest cover depleted rapidly in recent decades; 29.6 percent in 1999, 28.7 percent in 2010.

== Government and politics ==


Sri Lanka is a democratic republic and a unitary state which is governed by a semi-presidential system. Sri Lanka is the oldest democracy in Asia. Most provisions of the constitution can be amended by a two-thirds majority in parliament. The amendment of certain fundamental features, including clauses on national symbols, religion, term limits, the reference to Sri Lanka as a unitary state, and the entrenchment mechanism itself, requires both a two-thirds majority in Parliament and approval in a nationwide referendum. The Constitution of Sri Lanka officially declares it to be a socialist state.

In common with many democracies, the Sri Lankan government has three branches:
* Executive: The President of Sri Lanka is the head of state; the commander in chief of the armed forces; chief executive, and is popularly elected for a five-year term. The president heads the cabinet and appoints ministers from elected members of parliament. The president is immune from legal proceedings while in the office with respect to any acts done or omitted to be done by him or her in either an official or private capacity. Following the passage of the 19th amendment to the constitution in 2015, the president has two terms, which previously stood at no term limit.
* Legislative: The Parliament of Sri Lanka is a unicameral 225-member legislature with 196 members elected from 22 multi-seat constituencies and 29 elected by proportional representation. Members are elected by universal suffrage for a five-year term. The president may summon, suspend, or end a legislative session and dissolve Parliament at any time after four and a half years. The parliament reserves the power to make all laws. The president&#x27;s deputy and head of government, the prime minister, leads the ruling party in parliament and shares many executive responsibilities, mainly in domestic affairs.

* Judicial: Sri Lanka&#x27;s judiciary consists of a Supreme Court – the highest and final superior court of record, a Court of Appeal, High Courts and a number of subordinate courts. The highly complex legal system reflects diverse cultural influences. Criminal law is based almost entirely on British law. Basic civil law derives from Roman-Dutch law. Laws pertaining to marriage, divorce, and inheritance are communal. Because of ancient customary practices and religion, the Sinhala customary law (Kandyan law), the Thesavalamai, and Sharia law are followed in special cases. The president appoints judges to the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal, and the High Courts. A judicial service commission, composed of the chief justice and two Supreme Court judges, appoints, transfers, and dismisses lower court judges.

=== Politics ===

The current political culture in Sri Lanka is a contest between two rival coalitions led by the centre-left and progressive United People&#x27;s Freedom Alliance (UPFA), an offspring of Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP), and the comparatively right-wing and pro-capitalist United National Party (UNP). After 2018, two major political parties have split from these two parties: The Samagi Jana Balawegaya split from the UNP, and the Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna split from the UPFA. The third wing party Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna has gained popularity after 2022.

 Sri Lanka is essentially a multi-party democracy with many smaller Buddhist, socialist, and Tamil nationalist political parties. As of July 2011, the number of registered political parties in the country is 67. Of these, the Lanka Sama Samaja Party (LSSP), established in 1935, is the oldest.

The UNP, established by D. S. Senanayake in 1946, was until recently the largest single political party. It is the only political group which had representation in all parliaments since independence. SLFP was founded by S. W. R. D. Bandaranaike in July 1951. SLFP registered its first victory in 1956, defeating the ruling UNP in the 1956 Parliamentary election. Following the parliamentary election in July 1960, Sirimavo Bandaranaike became the prime minister and the world&#x27;s first elected female head of government.

G. G. Ponnambalam, the Tamil nationalist counterpart of S. W. R. D. Bandaranaike, founded the All Ceylon Tamil Congress (ACTC) in 1944. Objecting to Ponnambalam&#x27;s cooperation with D. S. Senanayake, a dissident group led by S.J.V. Chelvanayakam broke away in 1949 and formed the Illankai Tamil Arasu Kachchi (ITAK), also known as the Federal Party, becoming the main Tamil political party in Sri Lanka for next two decades. The Federal Party advocated a more aggressive stance toward the Sinhalese. With the constitutional reforms of 1972, the ACTC and ITAK created the Tamil United Front (later Tamil United Liberation Front). Following a period of turbulence as Tamil militants rose to power in the late 1970s, these Tamil political parties were succeeded in October 2001 by the Tamil National Alliance. Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna, a Marxist–Leninist political party founded by Rohana Wijeweera in 1965, serves as a third force in the current political context. It endorses leftist policies which are more radical than the traditionalist leftist politics of the LSSP and the Communist Party. Founded in 1981, the Sri Lanka Muslim Congress is the largest Muslim political party in Sri Lanka.

President Mahinda Rajapaksa lost the 2015 presidential elections, ending his ten-year presidency. However, his successor as Sri Lankan President, Maithripala Sirisena, decided not to seek re-election in 2019. The Rajapaksa family regained power in November 2019 presidential elections when Mahinda&#x27;s younger brother and former wartime defence chief Gotabaya Rajapaksa won the election, and he was later sworn in as the new president of Sri Lanka. Their firm grip of power was consolidated in the parliamentary elections in August 2020. The family&#x27;s political party, Sri Lanka People&#x27;s Front (known by its Sinhala initials SLPP), obtained a landslide victory and a clear majority in the parliament. Five members of the Rajapaksa family won seats in the new parliament. Former president Mahinda Rajapaksa became the new prime minister.

In 2022, a political crisis started due to the power struggle between President Gotabaya Rajapaksa and the Parliament of Sri Lanka. The crisis was fuelled by anti-government protests and demonstrations by the public and also due to the worsening economy of Sri Lanka since 2019. The anti-government sentiment across various parts of Sri Lanka has triggered unprecedented political instability, creating shockwaves in the political arena.

On July 20, 2022, Ranil Wickremesinghe was elected as the ninth President via a parliamentarian election. President Ranil Wickremesinghe was defeated by left-leaning Anura Kumara Dissanayake in 2024 presidential elections.

== Administrative divisions ==
For administrative purposes, Sri Lanka is divided into nine provinces and twenty-five districts.

=== Provinces ===
Provinces in Sri Lanka have existed since the 19th century, but they had no legal status until 1987 when the 13th Amendment of the 1978 constitution established provincial councils after several decades of increasing demand for a decentralisation of the government. Each provincial council is an autonomous body not under the authority of any ministry. Some of its functions had been undertaken by central government ministries, departments, corporations, and statutory authorities, but authority over land and police is not as a rule given to provincial councils. Between 1989 and 2006, the Northern and Eastern provinces were temporarily merged to form the North-East Province. Prior to 1987, all administrative tasks for the provinces were handled by a district-based civil service which had been in place since colonial times. Now each province is administered by a directly elected provincial council:

=== Districts and local authorities ===
Each district is administered under a district secretariat. The districts are further subdivided into 256 divisional secretariats, and these to approximately 14,008 Grama Niladhari divisions. The districts are known in Sinhala as &quot;disa&quot; and in Tamil as &quot;māwaddam&quot;. Originally, a &quot;disa&quot; (usually rendered into English as Dissavony) was a duchy, notably Matale and Uva.

There are three other types of local authorities: municipal councils (18), urban councils (13) and pradeshiya sabha, also called pradesha sabhai (256). Local authorities were originally based on feudal counties named &quot;korale&quot; and &quot;rata&quot;, and were formerly known as &quot;D.R.O. divisions&quot; after the divisional revenue officer. Later, the D.R.O.s became &quot;assistant government agents&quot;, and the divisions were known as &quot;A.G.A. divisions&quot;. These divisional secretariats are currently administered by a divisional secretary.

== Foreign relations ==

Sri Lanka is a founding member of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). While ensuring that it maintains its independence, Sri Lanka has cultivated relations with India. Sri Lanka became a member of the United Nations in 1955. Today, it is also a member of the Commonwealth, the SAARC, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the Asian Development Bank, and the Colombo Plan.

The United National Party has traditionally favoured links with the West, while the Sri Lanka Freedom Party has favoured links with the East. Sri Lankan Finance Minister J. R. Jayewardene, together with then Australian Foreign Minister Sir Percy Spencer, proposed the Colombo Plan at the Commonwealth Foreign Minister&#x27;s Conference held in Colombo in 1950. At the San Francisco Peace Conference in 1951, while many countries were reluctant, Sri Lanka argued for a free Japan and refused to accept payment of reparations for World War II damage because it believed it would harm Japan&#x27;s economy. Sri Lanka-China relations started as soon as the People&#x27;s Republic of China was formed in 1949. The two countries signed an important Rubber-Rice Pact in 1952. Sri Lanka played a vital role at the Asian–African Conference in 1955, which was an important step in the crystallisation of the NAM.

The Bandaranaike government of 1956 significantly changed the pro-western policies set by the previous UNP government. It recognised Cuba under Fidel Castro in 1959. Shortly afterward, Cuba&#x27;s revolutionary Che Guevara paid a visit to Sri Lanka. The Sirima-Shastri Pact of 1964 and Sirima-Gandhi Pact of 1974 were signed between Sri Lankan and Indian leaders in an attempt to solve the long-standing dispute over the status of plantation workers of Indian origin. In 1974, Kachchatheevu, a small island in Palk Strait, was formally ceded to Sri Lanka. By this time, Sri Lanka was strongly involved in the NAM, and the fifth NAM summit was held in Colombo in 1976. The relationship between Sri Lanka and India became tense under the government of J. R. Jayawardene. As a result, India intervened in the Sri Lankan Civil War and subsequently deployed an Indian Peace Keeping Force in 1987. In the present, Sri Lanka enjoys extensive relations with China, Russia, and Pakistan.

== Military ==
The Sri Lanka Armed Forces, comprising the Sri Lanka Army, the Sri Lanka Navy, and the Sri Lanka Air Force, come under the purview of the Ministry of Defence. The total strength of the three services is around 346,000 personnel, with nearly 36,000 reserves. Sri Lanka has not enforced military conscription. Paramilitary units include the Special Task Force, the Civil Security Force, and the Sri Lanka Coast Guard.

Since independence in 1948, the primary focus of the armed forces has been internal security, crushing three major insurgencies, two by Marxist militants of the JVP and a 26-year-long conflict with the LTTE. The armed forces have been in a continuous mobilised state for the last 30 years. The Sri Lankan Armed Forces have engaged in United Nations peacekeeping operations since the early 1960s, contributing forces to permanent contingents deployed in several UN peacekeeping missions in Chad, Lebanon, and Haiti.

Sri Lanka is the 100th most peaceful country in the world, according to the 2024 Global Peace Index.

== Economy ==


According to the International Monetary Fund, Sri Lanka&#x27;s GDP in terms of purchasing power parity is the second highest in the South Asian region in terms of per capita income. In the 19th and 20th centuries, Sri Lanka became a plantation economy famous for its production and export of cinnamon, rubber, and Ceylon tea, which remains a trademark national export. The development of modern ports under British rule raised the strategic importance of the island as a centre of trade. From 1948 to 1977, socialism strongly influenced the government&#x27;s economic policies. Colonial plantations were dismantled, industries were nationalised, and a welfare state established. In 1977, the free market economy was introduced to the country, incorporating privatisation, deregulation, and the promotion of private enterprise.

While the production and export of tea, rubber, coffee, sugar, and other commodities remain important, industrialisation has increased the importance of food processing, textiles, telecommunications, and finance. The country&#x27;s main economic sectors are tourism, tea export, clothing, rice production, and other agricultural products. In addition to these economic sectors, overseas employment, especially in the Middle East, contributes substantially in foreign exchange.

, the service sector makes up 59.7% of GDP, the industrial sector 26.2%, and the agriculture sector 8.4%. The private sector accounts for 85% of the economy. China, India and the United States are Sri Lanka&#x27;s largest trading partners. Economic disparities exist between the provinces with the Western Province contributing 45.1% of the GDP and the Southern Province and the Central Province contributing 10.7% and 10%, respectively. With the end of the war, the Northern Province reported a record 22.9% GDP growth in 2010.
The per capita income of Sri Lanka doubled from 2005 to 2011. During the same period, poverty dropped from 15.2% to 7.6%, unemployment rate dropped from 7.2% to 4.9%, market capitalisation of the Colombo Stock Exchange quadrupled, and the budget deficit doubled. 99% of the households in Sri Lanka are electrified; 93.2% of the population have access to safe drinking water; and 53.1% have access to pipe-borne water. Income inequality has also dropped in recent years, indicated by a Gini coefficient of 0.36 in 2010.

The 2011 Global Competitiveness Report, published by the World Economic Forum, described Sri Lanka&#x27;s economy as transitioning from the factor-driven stage to the efficiency-driven stage and that it ranked 52nd in global competitiveness. Also, out of the 142 countries surveyed, Sri Lanka ranked 45th in health and primary education, 32nd in business sophistication, 42nd in innovation, and 41st in goods market efficiency. In 2016, Sri Lanka ranked 5th in the World Giving Index, registering high levels of contentment and charitable behaviour in its society. In 2010, &quot;The New York Times&quot; placed Sri Lanka at the top of its list of 31 places to visit. S&amp;P Dow Jones Indices classifies Sri Lanka as a frontier market as of 2018. Sri Lanka ranks well above other South Asian countries in the Human Development Index (HDI) with an index of 0.750.

By 2016, the country&#x27;s debt soared as it was developing its infrastructure to the point of near bankruptcy which required a bailout from the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The IMF had agreed to provide a US$1.5 billion bailout loan in April 2016 after Sri Lanka provided a set of criteria intended to improve its economy. By the fourth quarter of 2016, the debt was estimated to be $64.9 billion. Additional debt had been incurred in the past by state-owned organisations and this was said to be at least $9.5 billion. Since early 2015, domestic debt increased by 12% and external debt by 25%. In November 2016, the IMF reported that the initial disbursement was larger than US$150 million originally planned, a full US$162.6 million (SDR 119.894 million). The agency&#x27;s evaluation for the first tranche was cautiously optimistic about the future. Under the program, the Sri Lankan government implemented a new Inland Revenue Act and an automatic fuel pricing formula which was noted by the IMF in its fourth review. In 2018 China agreed to bail out Sri Lanka with a loan of $1.25 billion to deal with foreign debt repayment spikes in 2019 to 2021.

In September 2021, Sri Lanka declared a major economic crisis. The Chief of its Central Bank has stepped down amid the crisis. The Parliament has declared emergency regulations due to the crisis, seeking to ban &quot;food hoarding&quot;.

Tourism, which provided the economy with an input of foreign currency, has significantly declined as a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.

=== Transport ===
Sri Lanka has an extensive road network for inland transportation. With more than of paved roads, it has one of the highest road densities in the world ( of paved roads per every of land). The road network consists of 35 A-Grade highways and four controlled-access highways. A and B grade roads are national (arterial) highways administered by Road Development Authority. C and D grade roads are provincial roads coming under the purview of the Provincial Road Development Authority of the respective province. The other roads are local roads falling under local government authorities.

The railway network, operated by the state-run National Railway operator Sri Lanka Railways, spans . Sri Lanka also has three deep-water ports at Colombo, Galle, and Trincomalee, in addition to the newest port being built at Hambantota.

=== Transition to biological agriculture ===

In June 2021, Sri Lanka imposed a nationwide ban on inorganic fertilisers and pesticides. The program was welcomed by its advisor Vandana Shiva, but ignored critical voices from scientific and farming community who warned about possible collapse of farming, including financial crisis due to devaluation of national currency pivoted around tea industry. The situation in the tea industry was described as critical, with farming under the organic program being described as ten times more expensive and producing half of the yield by the farmers. In September 2021 the government declared an economic emergency, as the situation was further aggravated by falling national currency exchange rate, inflation rising as a result of high food prices, and pandemic restrictions in tourism which further decreased country&#x27;s income.

In November 2021, Sri Lanka abandoned its plan to become the world&#x27;s first organic farming nation following rising food prices and weeks of protests against the plan. As of December 2021, the damage to agricultural production was already done, with prices having risen substantially for vegetables in Sri Lanka, and time needed to recover from the crisis. The ban on fertiliser has been lifted for certain crops, but the price of urea has risen internationally due to the price for oil and gas. Jeevika Weerahewa, a senior lecturer at the University of Peradeniya, predicted that the ban would reduce the paddy harvest in 2022 by an unprecedented 50%.

===Tourism===

Sri Lanka&#x27;s tourism industry is recovering, with tourism revenue reaching over $1.5 billion in the first half of 2024, a 78% increase year-on-year. Tourist arrivals also increased to 1.01 million, up 62% from the same period in 2023. This growth is attributed to the government&#x27;s proactive measures and improvements from SriLankan Airlines. The government launched a global tourism marketing campaign and offered visa-free entry for visitors from several countries to encourage tourism. A free tourist visa program was introduced for visitors from selected countries, allowing them to stay for up to 30 days.

== Demographics ==

Sri Lanka has roughly 22,156,000 people and an annual population growth rate of 0.5%. The birth rate is 13.8 births per 1,000 people, and the death rate is 6.0 deaths per 1,000 people. Population density is highest in western Sri Lanka, especially in and around the capital. Sinhalese constitute the largest ethnic group in the country, with 74.8% of the total population. Sri Lankan Tamils are the second major ethnic group in the island, with a percentage of 11.2%. Moors comprise 9.2%. There are also small ethnic groups such as the Burghers (of mixed European descent) and Malays from Southeast Asia. Moreover, there is a small population of Vedda people who are believed to be the original indigenous group to inhabit the island.

===Largest cities===
=== Languages ===
Sinhala and Tamil are the two official languages. The constitution defines English as the link language. English is widely used for education, scientific and commercial purposes. Members of the Burgher community speak variant forms of Portuguese Creole and Dutch with varying proficiency, while members of the Malay community speak a form of Creole Malay that is unique to the island.

=== Religion ===


Buddhism is the largest and is considered as an &quot;Official religion&quot; of Sri Lanka under Chapter II, Article 9, &quot;The Republic of Sri Lanka shall give to Buddhism the foremost place and accordingly it shall be the duty of the State to protect and foster the Buddha Sasana&quot;.
Buddhism is practised by 70.2% of the Sri Lankan population with most being predominantly from Theravada school of thought. Most Buddhists are of the Sinhalese ethnic group with minority Tamils. Buddhism was introduced to Sri Lanka in the 2nd century BCE by Mahinda Maurya. A sapling of the Bodhi Tree under which the Buddha attained enlightenment was brought to Sri Lanka during the same time. The Pāli Canon (&quot;Thripitakaya&quot;), having previously been preserved as an oral tradition, was first committed to writing in Sri Lanka around 30 BCE. Sri Lanka has the longest continuous history of Buddhism of any predominantly Buddhist nation. During periods of decline, the Sri Lankan monastic lineage was revived through contact with Thailand and Burma.

Although Hindus in Sri Lanka form a religious minority, Hinduism has been present in Sri Lanka at least since the 2nd century BCE. Hinduism was the dominant religion in Sri Lanka before the arrival of Buddhism in the 3rd century BCE. Buddhism was introduced into Sri Lanka by Mahinda, the son of Emperor Ashoka, during the reign of King Devanampiya Tissa; the Sinhalese embraced Buddhism and Tamils remain Hindus in Sri Lanka. However, it was activity from across the Palk Strait that truly set the scene for Hinduism&#x27;s survival in Sri Lanka. Shaivism (devotional worship of Lord Shiva) was the dominant branch practised by the Tamil peoples, thus most of the traditional Hindu temple architecture and philosophy of Sri Lanka drew heavily from this particular strand of Hinduism. Thirugnanasambanthar mentioned the names of several Sri Lankan Hindu temples in his works.

Islam is the third most prevalent religion in the country, having first been brought to the island by Arab traders over the course of many centuries, starting around the mid or late 7th century CE. Most followers on the island today are Sunni who follow the Shafi&#x27;i school and are believed to be descendants of Arab traders and the local women whom they married.

Christianity reached the country at least as early as the fifth century (and possibly in the first), gaining a wider foothold through Western colonists who began to arrive early in the 16th century. Around 7.4% of the Sri Lankan population are Christians, of whom 82% are Roman Catholics who trace their religious heritage directly to the Portuguese. Tamil Catholics attribute their religious heritage to St. Francis Xavier as well as Portuguese missionaries. The remaining Christians are evenly split between the Anglican Church of Ceylon and other Protestant denominations.

There is also a small population of Zoroastrian immigrants from India (Parsis) who settled in Ceylon during the period of British rule. This community has steadily dwindled in recent years.

Religion plays a prominent role in the life and culture of Sri Lankans. The Buddhist majority observe Poya Days each month according to the Lunar calendar, and Hindus and Muslims also observe their own holidays. In a 2008 Gallup poll, Sri Lanka was ranked the third most religious country in the world, with 99% of Sri Lankans saying religion was an important part of their daily life.

=== Health ===

Sri Lankans have a life expectancy of 75.5 years at birth, which is 10% higher than the world average. The infant mortality rate stands at 8.5 per 1,000 births and the maternal mortality rate at 0.39 per 1,000 births, which is on par with figures from developed countries. The universal &quot;pro-poor&quot; health care system adopted by the country has contributed much towards these figures. Sri Lanka ranks first among southeast Asian countries with respect to deaths by suicide, with 33 deaths per 100,000 persons. According to the Department of Census and Statistics, poverty, destructive pastimes, and inability to cope with stressful situations are the main causes behind the high suicide rates.
On 8 July 2020, the World Health Organization declared that Sri Lanka had successfully eliminated rubella and measles ahead of their 2023 target.

=== Education ===

With a literacy rate of 92.9%, Sri Lanka has one of the most literate populations amongst developing nations. Its youth literacy rate stands at 98.8%, computer literacy rate at 35%, and primary school enrollment rate at over 99%. An education system which dictates nine years of compulsory schooling for every child is in place.

The free education system established in 1945 is a result of the initiative of C. W. W. Kannangara and A. Ratnayake. It is one of the few countries in the world that provide universal free education from primary to tertiary stage. Kannangara led the establishment of the Madhya Vidyalayas (central schools) in different parts of the country in order to provide education to Sri Lanka&#x27;s rural children. In 1942, a special education committee proposed extensive reforms to establish an efficient and quality education system for the people. However, in the 1980s changes to this system separated the administration of schools between the central government and the provincial government. Thus the elite national schools are controlled directly by the ministry of education and the provincial schools by the provincial government. Sri Lanka has approximately 10,155 government schools, 120 private schools and 802 pirivenas.

Sri Lanka has 17 public universities. A lack of responsiveness of the education system to labour market requirements, disparities in access to quality education, lack of an effective linkage between secondary and tertiary education remain major challenges for the education sector. A number of private, degree awarding institutions have emerged in recent times to fill in these gaps, yet the participation at tertiary level education remains at 5.1%. Sri Lanka was ranked 89th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024.

== Human rights and media ==
The Sri Lanka Broadcasting Corporation (formerly Radio Ceylon) is the oldest-running radio station in Asia, established in 1923 by Edward Harper just three years after broadcasting began in Europe. The station broadcasts services in Sinhala, Tamil, English and Hindi. Since the 1980s, many private radio stations have also been introduced. Broadcast television was introduced in 1979 when the Independent Television Network was launched. Initially, all television stations were state-controlled, but private television networks began broadcasting in 1992.

, 192 newspapers (122 Sinhala, 24 Tamil, 43 English, 3 multilingual) are published and 25 TV stations and 58 radio stations are in operation. In recent years, freedom of the press in Sri Lanka has been alleged by media freedom groups to be amongst the poorest in democratic countries. Alleged abuse of a newspaper editor by a senior government minister achieved international notoriety because of the unsolved murder of the editor&#x27;s predecessor, Lasantha Wickrematunge, who had been a critic of the government and had presaged his own death in a posthumously published article.

Officially, the constitution of Sri Lanka guarantees human rights as ratified by the United Nations. However, several groups, such as Amnesty International, Freedom from Torture, Human Rights Watch, as well as the British government and the United States Department of State have criticised human rights violations in Sri Lanka. The Sri Lankan Government and the LTTE have both been accused of violating human rights. A report by an advisory panel to the UN secretary-general accused both the LTTE and the Sri Lankan government of war crimes during final stages of the civil war. Corruption remains a problem in Sri Lanka, and there is little protection for those who stand up against corruption. The 135-year-old Article 365 of the Sri Lankan Penal Code criminalises homosexual acts, with a penalty of up to ten years in prison.

The UN Human Rights Council has documented over 12,000 named individuals who have disappeared after detention by security forces in Sri Lanka, the second-highest figure in the world since the Working Group came into being in 1980. The Sri Lankan government confirmed that 6,445 of these died. Allegations of human rights abuses have not ended with the close of the ethnic conflict.

UN Human Rights Commissioner Navanethem Pillay visited Sri Lanka in May 2013. After her visit, she said: &quot;The war may have ended [in Sri Lanka], but in the meantime, democracy has been undermined and the rule of law eroded.&quot; Pillay spoke about the military&#x27;s increasing involvement in civilian life and reports of military land grabbing. She also said that, while in Sri Lanka, she had been allowed to go wherever she wanted, but that Sri Lankans who came to meet her were harassed and intimidated by security forces.

In 2012, the UK charity Freedom from Torture reported that it had received 233 referrals of torture survivors from Sri Lanka for clinical treatment or other services provided by the charity. In the same year, the group published &quot;Out of the Silence&quot;, which documents evidence of torture in Sri Lanka and demonstrates that the practice has continued long after the end of the civil war in 2009. On 29 July 2020, Human Rights Watch said that the Sri Lanka government has targeted lawyers, human rights defenders, and journalists to suppress criticism against the government.

== Culture ==

The culture of Sri Lanka is influenced primarily by Buddhism and Hinduism. Sri Lanka is the home to two main traditional cultures: the Sinhalese (centred in Kandy and Anuradhapura) and the Tamil (centred in Jaffna). Tamils co-existed with the Sinhalese people since then, and the early mixing rendered the two ethnic groups almost physically indistinguishable. Ancient Sri Lanka is marked for its genius in hydraulic engineering and architecture. The British colonial culture has also influenced the locals. The rich cultural traditions shared by all Sri Lankan cultures is the basis of the country&#x27;s long life expectancy, advanced health standards, and high literacy rate.

=== Food and festivals ===

Dishes include rice and curry, pittu, kiribath, wholemeal roti, string hoppers, watalappam (a rich pudding of Malay origin made with coconut milk, jaggery, cashews, eggs, and spices including cinnamon and nutmeg), kottu, and appam. Jackfruit may sometimes replace rice. Traditionally food is served on a plantain leaf or lotus leaf. Middle Eastern influences and practices are found in traditional Moor dishes, while Dutch and Portuguese influences are found with the island&#x27;s Burgher community preserving their culture through traditional dishes such as lamprais (rice cooked in stock and baked in a banana leaf), breudher (Dutch holiday biscuit), and Bolo fiado (Portuguese-style layer cake).

In April, Sri Lankans celebrate the Buddhist and Hindu new year festivals. Esala Perahera is a symbolic Buddhist festival consisting of dances and decorated elephants held in Kandy in July and August. Fire dances, whip dances, Kandyan dances and various other cultural dances are integral parts of the festival. Christians celebrate Christmas on 25 December to celebrate the birth of Jesus Christ and Easter to celebrate the resurrection of Jesus. Tamils celebrate Thai Pongal and Maha Shivaratri, and Muslims celebrate Hajj and Ramadan.

=== Visual, literary and performing arts ===


The movie &quot;Kadawunu Poronduwa&quot; (&quot;The Broken Promise&quot;), produced by S. M. Nayagam of Chitra Kala Movietone, heralded the coming of Sri Lankan cinema in 1947. &quot;Ranmuthu Duwa&quot; (&quot;Island of Treasures&quot;) marked the transition of cinema from black-and-white to colour. In recent years, movies have featured subjects such as family melodrama, social transformation and the years of conflict between the military and the LTTE. The Sri Lankan cinematic style is similar to Bollywood movies. In 1979, movie attendance rose to an all-time high but has been in a steady decline since then.

An influential filmmaker is Lester James Peiris, who has directed a number of movies which led to global acclaim, including &quot;Rekava&quot; (&quot;Line of Destiny&quot;, 1956), &quot;Gamperaliya&quot; (&quot;The Changing Village&quot;, 1964), &quot;Nidhanaya&quot; (&quot;The Treasure&quot;, 1970) and &quot;Golu Hadawatha&quot; (&quot;Cold Heart&quot;, 1968). Sri Lankan-Canadian poet Rienzi Crusz, is the subject of a documentary on his life in Sri Lanka. His work is published in Sinhala and English. Naturalised Canadian Michael Ondaatje is well known for his English-language novels and three films.

The earliest music in Sri Lanka came from theatrical performances such as &quot;Kolam&quot;, &quot;Sokari&quot; and &quot;Nadagam&quot;. Traditional music instruments such as &quot;Béra&quot;, &quot;Thammátama&quot;, &quot;Daŭla&quot; and &quot;Răbān&quot; were performed at these dramas. The first music album, &quot;Nurthi&quot;, recorded in 1903, was released through Radio Ceylon. Songwriters like Mahagama Sekara and Ananda Samarakoon and musicians such as W. D. Amaradeva, Victor Ratnayake, Nanda Malini and Clarence Wijewardene have contributed much towards the progression of Sri Lankan music. Baila music originated among Kaffirs or the Afro-Sinhalese community.
There are three main styles of Sri Lankan classical dance. They are, the Kandyan dances, low country dances and Sabaragamuwa dances. Of these, the Kandyan style is most prominent. It is a sophisticated form of dance that consists of five sub-categories: &quot;Ves dance&quot;, &quot;Naiyandi dance&quot;, &quot;Udekki dance&quot;, &quot;Pantheru dance&quot; and &quot;18 Vannam&quot;. An elaborate headdress is worn by the male dancers, and a drum called &quot;Geta Béraya&quot; is used to assist the dancers to keep on rhythm.

The history of Sri Lankan painting and sculpture can be traced as far back as to the 2nd or 3rd century BCE. The earliest mention about the art of painting on Mahāvaṃsa, is to the drawing of a palace on cloth using cinnabar in the 2nd century BCE. The chronicles have a description of various paintings in relic chambers of Buddhist stupas and in monastic residences.

Theatre came to the country when a Parsi theatre company from Mumbai introduced &quot;Nurti&quot;, a blend of European and Indian theatrical conventions to the Colombo audience in the 19th century. The golden age of Sri Lankan drama and theatre began with the staging of &quot;Maname&quot;, a play written by Ediriweera Sarachchandra in 1956. It was followed by a series of popular dramas like &quot;Sinhabāhu&quot;, &quot;Pabāvatī&quot;, &quot;Mahāsāra&quot;, &quot;Muudu Puththu&quot; and &quot;Subha saha Yasa&quot;.

Sri Lankan literature spans at least two millennia and is heir to the Aryan literary tradition as embodied in the hymns of the Rigveda. The Pāli Canon, the standard collection of scriptures in the Theravada Buddhist tradition, was written down in Sri Lanka during the Fourth Buddhist council, at the Alulena cave temple, Kegalle, as early as 29 BCE. Chronicles such as the &quot;Mahāvaṃsa&quot;, written in the 6th century, provide vivid descriptions of Sri Lankan dynasties. According to the German philosopher Wilhelm Geiger, the chronicles are based on Sinhala Atthakatha (commentary). The oldest surviving prose work is the &quot;Dhampiya-Atuva-Getapadaya&quot;, compiled in the 9th century CE. The greatest literary feats of medieval Sri Lanka include &quot;Sandesha Kāvya&quot; (poetic messages) such as &quot;Girā Sandeshaya&quot; (parrot message), &quot;Hansa Sandeshaya&quot; (swan message) and &quot;Salalihini Sandeshaya&quot; (myna message). Poetry including &quot;Kavsilumina&quot;, &quot;Kavya-Sekharaya&quot; (&quot;Diadem of Poetry&quot;) and proses such as &quot;Saddharma-Ratnāvaliya&quot;, &quot;Amāvatura&quot; (&quot;Flood of Nectar&quot;) and &quot;Pujāvaliya&quot; are also notable works of this period, which is considered to be the golden age of Sri Lankan literature. The first modern-day novel, &quot;Meena&quot; by Simon de Silva appeared in 1905 and was followed by several revolutionary literary works. Martin Wickramasinghe, the author of &quot;Madol Doova&quot; is considered the iconic figure of Sri Lankan literature.

=== Sport ===
While the national sport is volleyball, by far the most popular sport in the country is Cricket. Rugby union also enjoys extensive popularity, as do association football, netball and tennis. Aquatic sports such as boating, surfing, swimming, kitesurfing and scuba diving attract many Sri Lankans and foreign tourists. There are two styles of martial arts native to Sri Lanka: Cheena di and Angampora.
The Sri Lanka national cricket team achieved considerable success beginning in the 1990s, rising from underdog status to winning the 1996 Cricket World Cup, defeating Australia in the final on 17 March 1996. They also won the 2014 ICC World Twenty20 played in Bangladesh, beating India in the final. In addition, Sri Lanka became the runners-up of the Cricket World Cup in 2007 and 2011, and of the ICC World Twenty20 in 2009 and 2012. Former Sri Lankan off-spinner Muttiah Muralitharan has been rated as the greatest test match bowler ever by &quot;Wisden Cricketers&#x27; Almanack&quot;, and four Sri Lankan cricketers ranked 2nd (Sangakkara), 4th (Jayasuriya), 5th (Jayawardene) and 11th (Dilshan) highest ODI run scorers of all time, which is the second best by a team. As of June 2022, Muttiah Muralitharan has the highest aggregate wickets in Test Cricket with a record 800 wickets, a feat he achieved in a Test Match against India in July 2010 that Sri Lanka had won by 10 Wickets. Sri Lanka has won the Asia Cup in 1986, 1997, 2004, 2008, 2014. and 2022. Sri Lanka once held the highest team score in all three formats of cricket. The country co-hosted the Cricket World Cup in 1996 and 2011 and hosted the 2012 ICC World Twenty20.

Sri Lankans have won two medals at Olympic Games: one silver, by Duncan White at the 1948 London Olympics for men&#x27;s 400 metres hurdles; and one silver by Susanthika Jayasinghe at the 2000 Sydney Olympics for women&#x27;s 200 metres. In 1973, Muhammad Lafir won the World Billiards Championship, the highest feat by a Sri Lankan in a Cue sport. Sri Lanka has also won the Carrom World Championship titles twice in 2012, 2016 and 2018, the men&#x27;s team becoming champions and the women&#x27;s team winning second place. The Sri Lankan National Badminton Championships was annually held between 1953 and 2011.

Sri Lanka national football team also won the prestigious 1995 South Asian Gold Cup.

== See also ==

* Outline of Sri Lanka
* List of cities in Sri Lanka
== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
===Sources and further reading===
* 
* Ganguly, Sumit. &quot;Ending the Sri Lankan civil war.&quot; &quot;Dædalus&quot; 147.1 (2018): 78–89. online
* Peebles, Patrick. &quot;The History of Sri Lanka&quot; (Greenwood, 2005).
* 
== External links ==

===Government===
* Official Sri Lankan Government Web Portal, a gateway to government sites.
* Official website of the Parliament of Sri Lanka.
* Official Government News Portal
* Official website of the President of Sri Lanka.
* Official website of the Prime Minister of Sri Lanka / Prime Minister&#x27;s Office.
* Official website of the Office of the Cabinet of Ministers of Sri Lanka.
* Official website of the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka.

===Overviews and data===
* Sri Lanka. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Official site of the Department of Census and Statistics.
* Annual Report 2010 from the Ministry of Finance and Planning.
* Sri Lanka from &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot;.
* Sri Lanka profile from the BBC News.
* Sri Lanka in the Encyclopædia Britannica.
* Introducing Sri Lanka Overview of the country from Lonely Planet.
* Key Development Forecasts for Sri Lanka from International Futures.

===History===
* Mahavamsa an ancient Sri Lankan chronicle written in the 6th century.
* Sketches of the Natural History of Ceylon by Sir James Emerson Tennent, 1861.

===Maps===
* 
* Sri Lanka Map in Google Maps.
* Old maps of Sri Lanka, Eran Laor Cartographic Collection, The National Library of Israel

===Trade===
* World Bank Summary Trade Statistics Sri Lanka</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="0" end="9" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="33" end="39" title="Sri Lanka" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="60" end="102" title="Sri Lanka" label="Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q112099" start="110" end="124" title="island country" label="island country"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="128" end="138" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="155" end="167" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="186" end="199" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="220" end="236" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q622811" start="244" end="258" title="Gulf of Mannar" label="Gulf of Mannar"/>
<link wikidata="Q186299" start="267" end="278" title="Palk Strait" label="Palk Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089219" start="292" end="307" title="maritime border" label="maritime border"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="317" end="325" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="347" end="352" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q41963" start="371" end="396" title="Sri Jayawardenepura Kotte" label="Sri Jayawardenepura Kotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q35381" start="459" end="466" title="Colombo" label="Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q203197" start="579" end="584" title="Kandy" label="Kandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13267" start="705" end="712" title="Sinhala language" label="Sinhala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="786" end="791" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q932244" start="1021" end="1037" title="Sinhalese people" label="Sinhalese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815623" start="1091" end="1108" title="Sri Lankan Tamils" label="Sri Lankan Tamils"/>
<link wikidata="Q998494" start="1305" end="1310" title="Sri Lankan Moors" label="Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661549" start="1312" end="1325" title="Indian Tamils of Sri Lanka" label="Indian Tamils"/>
<link wikidata="Q206642" start="1327" end="1335" title="Burgher people" label="Burghers"/>
<link wikidata="Q58187" start="1337" end="1343" title="Sri Lankan Malays" label="Malays"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100890" start="1345" end="1352" title="Chinese people in Sri Lanka" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q369883" start="1358" end="1363" title="Vedda" label="Vedda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000970" start="1518" end="1548" title="Buddhism in Sri Lanka" label="Buddhist writings of Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q215685" start="1576" end="1586" title="Pali Canon" label="Pali Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q752404" start="1600" end="1623" title="Fourth Theravāda Council" label="fourth Buddhist council"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="1885" end="1894" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149509" start="1933" end="1951" title="maritime Silk Road" label="maritime Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q13627537" start="2077" end="2096" title="Anuradhapura period" label="Anuradhapura period"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754596" start="2117" end="2139" title="Crisis of the Sixteenth Century" label="great political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589163" start="2147" end="2163" title="Kingdom of Kotte" label="Kingdom of Kotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="2169" end="2179" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709007" start="2292" end="2313" title="Portuguese Ceylon" label="Portuguese possession"/>
<link wikidata="Q17034772" start="2325" end="2349" title="Sinhalese–Portuguese War" label="Sinhalese–Portuguese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q130654" start="2355" end="2376" title="Dutch colonial empire" label="Dutch colonial empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530762" start="2385" end="2401" title="Kingdom of Kandy" label="Kingdom of Kandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1841483" start="2431" end="2443" title="Dutch Ceylon" label="Dutch Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="2461" end="2475" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q918153" start="2540" end="2554" title="British Ceylon" label="British Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2683" end="2691" title="dominion#Ceylon" label="dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="2717" end="2725" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q213394" start="2811" end="2831" title="Sri Lankan civil war" label="Sri Lankan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579178" start="2881" end="2903" title="Sri Lanka Armed Forces" label="Sri Lanka Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q80312" start="2917" end="2949" title="Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam" label="Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="2967" end="2985" title="developing country" label="developing country"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="3007" end="3030" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q108977" start="3127" end="3144" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal) per capita" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q145700" start="3274" end="3279" title="South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation" label="SAARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q477328" start="3285" end="3288" title="Group of 77" label="G77"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="3297" end="3317" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3346" end="3360" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="3369" end="3392" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782817" start="3504" end="3513" title="Mahāvaṃsa" label="Mahāvaṃsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q888673" start="3535" end="3548" title="Prince Vijaya" label="Prince Vijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932084" start="3566" end="3576" title="Kingdom of Tambapanni" label="Tambapaṇṇĩ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722041" start="3584" end="3594" title="Copper (color)" label="copper-red"/>
<link wikidata="Q17127302" start="3696" end="3704" title="red soil" label="red soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q878062" start="3737" end="3752" title="Hindu mythology" label="Hindu mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q721272" start="3763" end="3780" title="Lanka" label="&amp;quot;Lankā&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q930548" start="3876" end="3881" title="Eelam" label="Eelam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219940" start="3927" end="3944" title="Sangam literature" label="Sangam literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104273" start="3967" end="3983" title="Chola conquest of Anuradhapura" label="under Chola rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424377" start="4041" end="4054" title="Three Crowned Kings" label="three crowned"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="4071" end="4084" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002951" start="4113" end="4122" title="Taprobana" label="Taprobanā"/>
<link wikidata="Q166039" start="4290" end="4301" title="serendipity" label="serendipity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="4314" end="4322" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="4511" end="4523" title="crown colony" label="crown colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670092" start="4589" end="4607" title="Dominion of Ceylon" label="Dominion of Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="5239" end="5251" title="Palaeolithic" label="Palaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="5253" end="5263" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="5275" end="5283" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="5296" end="5307" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721993" start="5351" end="5362" title="Fa Hien Cave" label="Pahiyangala"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501380" start="5392" end="5399" title="Chinese people" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q854997" start="5410" end="5414" title="Bhikkhu" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q312978" start="5415" end="5421" title="Faxian" label="Faxian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25343805" start="5423" end="5436" title="Batadombalena" label="Batadombalena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882839" start="5454" end="5462" title="Belilena" label="Belilena"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="5556" end="5568" title="anatomy" label="anatomically"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="5576" end="5582" title="humans" label="humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626170" start="5605" end="5618" title="Balangoda Man" label="Balangoda Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="5680" end="5691" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q369883" start="5803" end="5815" title="Vedda people" label="Vedda people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525323" start="6041" end="6048" title="Black and red ware culture" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000497" start="6090" end="6109" title="megalithic graffiti symbols" label="megalithic graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919043" start="6199" end="6204" title="Velir" label="Velir"/>
<link wikidata="Q192170" start="6232" end="6239" title="Prakrit" label="Prakrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="6324" end="6328" title="Epic poetry" label="epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37293" start="6329" end="6337" title="Ramayana" label="Ramayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q721272" start="6387" end="6392" title="Lanka" label="Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q61078183" start="6439" end="6450" title="Vishwakarma" label="Vishvakarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q223617" start="6455" end="6461" title="Kubera" label="Kubera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049467" start="6527" end="6535" title="rakshasa" label="rakshasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q235102" start="6549" end="6555" title="Ravana" label="Ravana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782817" start="6606" end="6615" title="Mahāvaṃsa" label="Mahāvaṃsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="6625" end="6629" title="Pali" label="Pāḷi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011093" start="6728" end="6734" title="Yaksha" label="Yaksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q12985009" start="6740" end="6745" title="Naga people (Lanka)" label="Nagas"/>
<link wikidata="Q888673" start="6817" end="6830" title="Prince Vijaya" label="Prince Vijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q845478" start="6926" end="6939" title="Vanga kingdom" label="Vanga kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="6953" end="6959" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932084" start="6981" end="7002" title="Kingdom of Tambapanni" label="Kingdom of Tambapanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280127" start="7020" end="7026" title="Mannar, Sri Lanka" label="Mannar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840869" start="7078" end="7103" title="List of Sri Lankan monarchs" label="189 monarchs of Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379164" start="7146" end="7155" title="Dīpavaṃsa" label="Dīpavaṃsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379238" start="7192" end="7201" title="Cūḷavaṃsa" label="Cūḷavaṃsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q192170" start="7243" end="7250" title="Prakrit" label="Prakrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782817" start="7308" end="7317" title="Mahāvaṃsa" label="Mahāvaṃsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q844910" start="7411" end="7425" title="Pandya kingdom" label="Pandya kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965597" start="7433" end="7453" title="Anuradhapura kingdom" label="Anuradhapura kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q13627537" start="7489" end="7508" title="Anuradhapura period" label="Anuradhapura period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965597" start="7562" end="7582" title="Anuradhapura kingdom" label="Anuradhapura kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130763" start="7614" end="7626" title="Pandukabhaya" label="Pandukabhaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752951" start="7777" end="7787" title="Ancient constructions of Sri Lanka" label="structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q19720009" start="7796" end="7801" title="Sri Lankan irrigation network" label="tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="7803" end="7810" title="Stupa" label="dagobas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025383" start="7885" end="7902" title="Devanampiya Tissa" label="Devanampiya Tissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q587284" start="7957" end="7964" title="Mahinda (Buddhist monk)" label="Mahinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q854997" start="7968" end="7975" title="bhikkhu" label="bhikkhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="7995" end="8002" title="Maurya Empire" label="Mauryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="8011" end="8017" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478212" start="8029" end="8038" title="Mihintale" label="Mihintale"/>
<link wikidata="Q932244" start="8163" end="8183" title="Sinhalese people" label="Sinhalese population"/>
<link wikidata="Q222516" start="8239" end="8255" title="schools of Buddhism" label="Buddhist schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q216243" start="8434" end="8441" title="Nalanda" label="Nalanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698200" start="8466" end="8482" title="Muhammad Bakhtiyar Khalji" label="Bakhtiyar Khalji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321432" start="8624" end="8633" title="Tripiṭaka" label="Tripiṭaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q854979" start="8728" end="8737" title="bhikkhunī" label="bhikkhunī"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462385" start="8738" end="8749" title="Sanghamitta" label="Sanghamitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q944175" start="8767" end="8786" title="Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi" label="Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q321437" start="8849" end="8859" title="Bodhi Tree" label="Bodhi Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="8872" end="8886" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Gautama Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4090037" start="9007" end="9017" title="Bodhivaṃsa" label="Bodhivaṃsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645465" start="9098" end="9107" title="Suratissa of Anuradhapura" label="Suratissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449928" start="9153" end="9169" title="Sena and Guttika" label="Sena and Guttika"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806806" start="9239" end="9244" title="Chola" label="Chola"/>
<link wikidata="Q540008" start="9251" end="9256" title="Elara (monarch)" label="Elara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804127" start="9272" end="9277" title="Asela of Anuradhapura" label="Asela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284871" start="9314" end="9324" title="Dutugamunu" label="Dutugamunu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379074" start="9376" end="9387" title="Kavan Tissa, Prince of Ruhuna" label="Kavan Tissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872671" start="9411" end="9432" title="Battle of Vijithapura" label="Battle of Vijithapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524320" start="9488" end="9503" title="Sinhala kingdom" label="Sinhala kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q151148" start="9588" end="9593" title="Chola dynasty" label="Chola"/>
<link wikidata="Q844910" start="9595" end="9601" title="Pandya dynasty" label="Pandya"/>
<link wikidata="Q466803" start="9607" end="9614" title="Pallava dynasty" label="Pallava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150706" start="9662" end="9669" title="Kalinga (region)" label="Kalinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="9678" end="9684" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="9699" end="9714" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malay Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q752404" start="9729" end="9753" title="Fourth Theravāda Council" label="Fourth Theravāda Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q542107" start="9770" end="9796" title="Anuradhapura Maha Viharaya" label="Anuradhapura Maha Viharaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7909202" start="9833" end="9842" title="Valagamba" label="Valagamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q854997" start="9964" end="9978" title="bhikkhu" label="Buddhist monks"/>
<link wikidata="Q215685" start="10024" end="10034" title="Pali Canon" label="Pali Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q986539" start="10052" end="10067" title="oral literature" label="oral literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q134293" start="10132" end="10138" title="dharma" label="dharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641020" start="10388" end="10408" title="palm-leaf manuscript" label="palm-leaf manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="10479" end="10484" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="10486" end="10494" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="10496" end="10504" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="10509" end="10513" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610668" start="10584" end="10605" title="Anula of Anuradhapura" label="Anula of Anuradhapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q272153" start="10698" end="10706" title="Sigiriya" label="Sigiriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6374490" start="10781" end="10791" title="Kashyapa I" label="Kashyapa I"/>
<link wikidata="Q151148" start="11035" end="11048" title="Chola dynasty" label="Chola emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2128757" start="11049" end="11059" title="Rajaraja I" label="Rajaraja I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6734027" start="11092" end="11101" title="Mahinda V" label="Mahinda V"/>
<link wikidata="Q211483" start="11181" end="11191" title="Rajendra I" label="Rajendra I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104273" start="11305" end="11336" title="Chola conquest of Anuradhapura" label="sacked the city of Anuradhapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965597" start="11357" end="11377" title="Anuradhapura kingdom" label="Anuradhapura kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q394443" start="11419" end="11430" title="Polonnaruwa" label="Polonnaruwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536135" start="11499" end="11511" title="Vijayabahu I of Polonnaruwa" label="Vijayabahu I"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="11675" end="11680" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977260" start="11876" end="11882" title="Principality of Ruhuna" label="Ruhunu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796728" start="11895" end="11899" title="Maya Rata" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q19720009" start="11918" end="11935" title="Sri Lankan irrigation network" label="irrigation system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610015" start="11981" end="12004" title="Parakramabahu I of Polonnaruwa" label="Parākramabāhu the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134855" start="12309" end="12326" title="Parakrama Samudra" label="Parakrama Samudra"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="12562" end="12567" title="Myanmar" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534920" start="12679" end="12692" title="Kalinga Magha" label="Kalinga Magha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3167772" start="12803" end="12825" title="Kingdom of Polonnaruwa" label="Kingdom of Polonnaruwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150706" start="12842" end="12849" title="Kalinga (historical region)" label="Kalinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q192623" start="12944" end="12950" title="Looting" label="looted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337275" start="13174" end="13182" title="Rajarata" label="Rajarata"/>
<link wikidata="Q932244" start="13242" end="13258" title="Sinhalese people" label="Sinhalese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136869" start="13513" end="13524" title="Kingdom of Dambadeniya" label="Dambadeniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311219" start="13583" end="13597" title="Jaffna kingdom" label="Jaffna kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134858" start="13740" end="13756" title="Parakramabahu VI of Kotte" label="Parâkramabâhu VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902303" start="13777" end="13791" title="Bhuvanaikabahu VI of Kotte" label="Prince Sapumal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522473" start="14000" end="14008" title="Yapahuwa" label="Yapahuwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8264065" start="14010" end="14017" title="Gampola" label="Gampola"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412581" start="14019" end="14026" title="Raigama" label="Raigama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589163" start="14028" end="14033" title="Kingdom of Kotte" label="Kotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136850" start="14035" end="14043" title="Kingdom of Sitawaka" label="Sitawaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530762" start="14058" end="14063" title="Kingdom of Kandy" label="Kandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509414" start="14095" end="14106" title="Tambralinga" label="Tambralinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q234197" start="14129" end="14139" title="Sri Vijaya" label="Sri Vijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570421" start="14158" end="14170" title="Chandrabhanu" label="Chandrabhanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="14202" end="14224" title="Insular Southeast Asia" label="Insular Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="14374" end="14386" title="Austronesian people" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q58187" start="14416" end="14425" title="Sri Lankan Malays" label="Sumatrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q15633689" start="14441" end="14447" title="Philippines–Sri Lanka relations" label="Lucoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333" start="14523" end="14531" title="Zheng He" label="Zheng He"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864869" start="14614" end="14620" title="Ming-Kotte War" label="battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q28708544" start="14641" end="14667" title="Vira Alakesvara of Gampola" label="Vira Alakesvara of Gampola"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518913" start="14753" end="14781" title="Galle Trilingual Inscription" label="Galle Trilingual Inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q319366" start="14801" end="14806" title="Galle" label="Galle"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="14824" end="14833" title="languages" label="languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="14835" end="14842" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="14844" end="14849" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="14855" end="14862" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178743" start="14895" end="14900" title="stele" label="stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033487" start="14978" end="15001" title="National Museum of Colombo" label="Colombo National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657862" start="15130" end="15149" title="Lourenço de Almeida" label="Lourenço de Almeida"/>
<link wikidata="Q337066" start="15162" end="15182" title="Francisco de Almeida" label="Francisco de Almeida"/>
<link wikidata="Q35381" start="15250" end="15257" title="Colombo" label="Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529329" start="15387" end="15407" title="Vimaladharmasuriya I" label="Vimaladharmasuriya I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530762" start="15448" end="15453" title="Kingdom of Kandy" label="Kandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="15540" end="15550" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311219" start="15585" end="15599" title="Jaffna kingdom" label="Jaffna kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454159" start="15641" end="15653" title="Rajasinha II" label="Rajasinha II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16851529" start="15721" end="15727" title="Kandyan Treaty of 1638" label="treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="15737" end="15761" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q377269" start="15842" end="15862" title="Dutch–Portuguese War" label="Dutch–Portuguese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q206642" start="16048" end="16062" title="Burgher people" label="Burgher people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609463" start="16299" end="16310" title="Relic of the tooth of the Buddha" label="Tooth Relic"/>
<link wikidata="Q932244" start="16379" end="16388" title="Sinhalese people" label="Sinhalese"/>
<link wikidata="Q289175" start="16412" end="16431" title="Temple of the Tooth" label="Temple of the Tooth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16570" end="16590" title="Vira Narendra Sinha " label="Vira Narendra Sinha "/>
<link wikidata="Q8097" start="16633" end="16639" title="Telugu language" label="Telugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530838" start="16649" end="16657" title="Nayaks of Madurai" label="Nayakkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q228405" start="16685" end="16692" title="Madurai" label="Madurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q854997" start="16753" end="16760" title="bhikkhu" label="bhikkhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q188790" start="16967" end="16976" title="Concubinage" label="concubine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586336" start="17003" end="17023" title="Sri Vijaya Rajasinha" label="Sri Vijaya Rajasinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="17167" end="17182" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="17274" end="17288" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q918153" start="17363" end="17377" title="British Ceylon" label="British Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285609" start="17437" end="17458" title="Sri Rajadhi Rajasinha" label="Sri Rajadhi Rajasinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q785131" start="17644" end="17665" title="Sri Vikrama Rajasinha" label="Sri Vikrama Rajasinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="17675" end="17682" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="17820" end="17846" title="British East India Company" label="British East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q112183" start="17866" end="17882" title="Treaty of Amiens" label="Treaty of Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530762" start="17905" end="17910" title="Kingdom of Kandy" label="Kandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6361719" start="17946" end="17964" title="Second Kandyan War" label="Second Kandyan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538392" start="18090" end="18108" title="Kandyan Convention" label="Kandyan Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534806" start="18244" end="18257" title="Great Rebellion of 1817–1818" label="Uva Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739017" start="18275" end="18283" title="governors of British Ceylon" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342428" start="18284" end="18300" title="Robert Brownrigg" label="Robert Brownrigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806478" start="18368" end="18394" title="Colebrooke–Cameron Commission" label="Colebrooke–Cameron reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="18422" end="18433" title="Utilitarianism" label="utilitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="18438" end="18445" title="Liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="18492" end="18503" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419819" start="18590" end="18607" title="Executive Council of Ceylon" label="executive council"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149424" start="18614" end="18633" title="Legislative Council of Ceylon" label="legislative council"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="18746" end="18752" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11802662" start="18895" end="18913" title="Panic of 1847" label="depression of 1847"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339486" start="19214" end="19231" title="Matale rebellion" label="another rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568601" start="19285" end="19303" title="Hemileia vastatrix" label="Hemileia vastatrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376911" start="19499" end="19526" title="Tea production in Sri Lanka" label="Tea production in Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="19672" end="19684" title="social class" label="social class"/>
<link wikidata="Q484416" start="19707" end="19712" title="caste" label="caste"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065782" start="19757" end="19777" title="Ceylon Civil Service" label="Ceylon Civil Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149424" start="19932" end="19958" title="Legislative Council of Ceylon" label="Ceylon Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q51647" start="20027" end="20047" title="Christian missionary" label="Christian missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q173491" start="20154" end="20159" title="Tamils" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q104876154" start="20214" end="20245" title="1906 malaria outbreak in Ceylon" label="1906 malaria outbreak in Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396263" start="20455" end="20478" title="Ponnambalam Arunachalam" label="Ponnambalam Arunachalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q389044" start="20796" end="20815" title="Donoughmore Constitution" label="Donoughmore reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="20878" end="20903" title="Universal suffrage" label="universal adult franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q11157510" start="21096" end="21119" title="State Council of Ceylon" label="State Council of Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093055" start="21184" end="21201" title="G. G. Ponnambalam" label="G. G. Ponnambalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564439" start="21352" end="21368" title="Soulbury Commission" label="Soulbury reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670092" start="21450" end="21465" title="Dominion of Ceylon" label="dominion status"/>
<link wikidata="Q663001" start="21516" end="21532" title="Don Stephen Senanayake" label="D. S. Senanayake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758894" start="21550" end="21574" title="Prime Minister of Sri Lanka" label="Prime Minister of Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q173491" start="21586" end="21591" title="Tamils" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802196" start="21626" end="21646" title="Arunachalam Mahadeva" label="Arunachalam Mahadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="21671" end="21689" title="Royal Navy" label="British Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q323873" start="21712" end="21723" title="Trincomalee" label="Trincomalee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5674296" start="21750" end="21771" title="1953 Ceylonese Hartal" label="popular demonstration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150570" start="21857" end="21874" title="Dudley Senanayake" label="Dudley Senanayake"/>
<link wikidata="Q313997" start="21877" end="21901" title="S. W. R. D. Bandaranaike" label="S. W. R. D. Bandaranaike"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534911" start="22107" end="22123" title="Sinhala Only Act" label="Sinhala Only Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q13267" start="22137" end="22144" title="Sinhala language" label="Sinhala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522458" start="22354" end="22367" title="Illankai Tamil Arasu Kachchi" label="Federal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q194279" start="22420" end="22430" title="satyagraha" label="satyagraha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854445" start="22501" end="22532" title="Bandaranaike–Chelvanayakam Pact" label="Bandaranaike–Chelvanayakam Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q442636" start="22539" end="22561" title="S. J. V. Chelvanayakam" label="S. J. V. Chelvanayakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586135" start="22763" end="22783" title="Sri Lankan state-sponsored colonisation schemes" label="colonisation schemes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22896" end="22908" title="S. W. R. D. Bandaranaike#Assassination" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q194291" start="22949" end="22970" title="Sirimavo Bandaranaike" label="Sirimavo Bandaranaike"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570700" start="23055" end="23081" title="1962 Ceylonese coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt" label="attempted coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="23216" end="23228" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574531" start="23313" end="23333" title="1971 JVP insurrection" label="Marxist insurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="23395" end="23403" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209702" start="23659" end="23684" title="policy of standardisation" label="policy of standardisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q214244" start="23792" end="23810" title="affirmative action" label="affirmative action"/>
<link wikidata="Q215277" start="24047" end="24053" title="Jaffna" label="Jaffna"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="24054" end="24059" title="Mayor" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529303" start="24060" end="24078" title="Alfred Duraiyappah" label="Alfred Duraiyappah"/>
<link wikidata="Q80312" start="24094" end="24126" title="Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam" label="Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam"/>
<link wikidata="Q469661" start="24176" end="24193" title="J. R. Jayawardene" label="J. R. Jayawardene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887791" start="24232" end="24244" title="United Front (Sri Lanka)" label="United Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679022" start="24282" end="24298" title="Constitution of Sri Lanka" label="new constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="24316" end="24335" title="free-market economy" label="free-market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419944" start="24351" end="24371" title="Executive president" label="executive presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="24431" end="24441" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="24454" end="24464" title="Liberalism" label="liberalise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475172" start="24491" end="24495" title="Four Four Bravo" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q213394" start="24535" end="24556" title="Sri Lankan civil war" label="on-and-off insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475172" start="24596" end="24622" title="Four Four Bravo" label="LTTE attack on 13 soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640918" start="24688" end="24698" title="Black July" label="race riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524321" start="24731" end="24750" title="Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism" label="Sinhalese hard-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025579" start="24983" end="25004" title="Indo-Sri Lanka Accord" label="Indo-Sri Lanka Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358912" start="25024" end="25050" title="Indian Peace Keeping Force" label="Indian Peace Keeping Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682545" start="25162" end="25165" title="Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna" label="JVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584263" start="25179" end="25198" title="1987–89 JVP Insurrection" label="second insurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524059" start="25296" end="25321" title="Expulsion of Muslims from the Northern province by LTTE" label="expelled Sri Lankan Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="25467" end="25485" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami" label="2004 Asian tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914380" start="25809" end="25819" title="President of Sri Lanka" label="Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q57338" start="25823" end="25840" title="Mahinda Rajapaksa" label="Mahinda Rajapaksa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579178" start="25846" end="25868" title="Sri Lanka Armed Forces" label="Sri Lanka Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q63245644" start="26133" end="26163" title="2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings" label="2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q63254180" start="26199" end="26231" title="National Thowheeth Jama&amp;#x27;ath" label="National Thowheeth Jama&amp;#x27;ath"/>
<link wikidata="Q63367799" start="26327" end="26346" title="Sainthamaruthu shootout" label="terrorist operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607844" start="26415" end="26429" title="Sri Lanka Army" label="Sri Lanka Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q107410571" start="26583" end="26605" title="2019–present Sri Lankan economic crisis" label="severe economic crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043780" start="26946" end="26976" title="Economy of Sri Lanka" label="economic crisis in the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q983402" start="27066" end="27086" title="Ranil Wickremesinghe" label="Ranil Wickremesinghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q111458253" start="27517" end="27532" title="2022 Sri Lankan protests" label="street protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538702" start="27622" end="27640" title="Gotabaya Rajapaksa" label="Gotabaya Rajapaksa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241156" start="27701" end="27723" title="President&amp;#x27;s House, Colombo" label="President&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q55600339" start="28068" end="28107" title="115 Fifth Lane" label="private residence of the prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450753" start="28134" end="28144" title="Parliament of Sri Lanka" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q983402" start="28174" end="28194" title="Ranil Wickremesinghe" label="Ranil Wickremesinghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q110654562" start="28198" end="28210" title="2022 Sri Lankan presidential election" label="20 July 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777855" start="28428" end="28452" title="Anura Kumara Dissanayake" label="Anura Kumara Dissanayake"/>
<link wikidata="Q113317674" start="28531" end="28539" title="2024 Sri Lankan presidential election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q104901719" start="28629" end="28657" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Power" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q124333683" start="28749" end="28772" title="2024 Sri Lankan parliamentary election" label="parliamentary election."/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="28815" end="28825" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q169" start="28857" end="28862" title="mango" label="mango"/>
<link wikidata="Q499481" start="28876" end="28888" title="Indian Plate" label="Indian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="28898" end="28912" title="plate tectonics" label="tectonic plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q844163" start="28943" end="28964" title="Indo-Australian Plate" label="Indo-Australian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="29009" end="29022" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q663028" start="29042" end="29044" title="5th parallel north" label="5°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255736" start="29049" end="29054" title="10th parallel north" label="10° N"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702600" start="29071" end="29074" title="79th meridian east" label="79°"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702765" start="29079" end="29084" title="82nd meridian east" label="82° E"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="29142" end="29161" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q622811" start="29169" end="29183" title="Gulf of Mannar" label="Gulf of Mannar"/>
<link wikidata="Q186299" start="29188" end="29199" title="Palk Strait" label="Palk Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q878062" start="29214" end="29229" title="Hindu mythology" label="Hindu mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q201743" start="29321" end="29346" title="Adam&amp;#x27;s Bridge" label="chain of limestone shoals"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="29363" end="29372" title="sea level" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q79602" start="29438" end="29445" title="cyclone" label="cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146327" start="29663" end="29677" title="Pidurutalagala" label="Pidurutalagala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518007" start="29760" end="29774" title="Mahaweli River" label="Mahaweli River"/>
<link wikidata="Q37540" start="29866" end="29884" title="Bambarakanda Falls" label="Bambarakanda Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="29961" end="29984" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q93318" start="29999" end="30012" title="nautical mile" label="nautical mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999990" start="30162" end="30170" title="Fringing reef" label="fringing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="30171" end="30181" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="30215" end="30224" title="Estuary" label="estuarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q646660" start="30225" end="30233" title="seagrass" label="seagrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="30255" end="30264" title="Estuary" label="estuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="30272" end="30278" title="lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="30298" end="30306" title="mangrove" label="mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q35852" start="30334" end="30341" title="hectare" label="hectare"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="30410" end="30435" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami" label="2004 Indian Ocean tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q190729" start="30476" end="30484" title="ilmenite" label="ilmenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="30486" end="30494" title="feldspar" label="feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="30496" end="30504" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="30506" end="30512" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q223197" start="30514" end="30520" title="kaolin" label="kaolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q114675" start="30522" end="30526" title="mica" label="mica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115" start="30531" end="30538" title="thorium" label="thorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="30553" end="30562" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q135712" start="30709" end="30717" title="Tropical climate" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q422941" start="30809" end="30826" title="Central Highlands of Sri Lanka" label="Central Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="31055" end="31062" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="31548" end="31564" title="tropical cyclone" label="tropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4527" start="31985" end="31998" title="Western Ghats" label="Western Ghats"/>
<link wikidata="Q864294" start="32062" end="32082" title="biodiversity hotspot" label="biodiversity hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="32454" end="32461" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6618864" start="32606" end="32616" title="List of endemic birds of Sri Lanka" label="33 species"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044729" start="32859" end="32892" title="Department of Forest Conservation (Sri Lanka)" label="Department of Forest Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q667246" start="32901" end="32936" title="Department of Wildlife Conservation (Sri Lanka)" label="Department of Wildlife Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586005" start="33415" end="33445" title="Sri Lanka lowland rain forests" label="Sri Lanka lowland rain forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530317" start="33447" end="33477" title="Sri Lanka montane rain forests" label="Sri Lanka montane rain forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586003" start="33479" end="33519" title="Sri Lanka dry-zone dry evergreen forests" label="Sri Lanka dry-zone dry evergreen forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248866" start="33525" end="33551" title="Deccan thorn scrub forests" label="Deccan thorn scrub forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q81666" start="33563" end="33569" title="acacia" label="acacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495624" start="33592" end="33608" title="Jaffna Peninsula" label="Jaffna Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q13055458" start="33679" end="33688" title="Chloroxylon" label="satinwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q156005" start="33690" end="33695" title="ebony" label="ebony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001737" start="33697" end="33705" title="Mesua ferrea" label="ironwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q239788" start="33707" end="33715" title="mahogany" label="mahogany"/>
<link wikidata="Q156938" start="33720" end="33724" title="teak" label="teak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530863" start="33952" end="33970" title="Yala National Park" label="Yala National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524793" start="34040" end="34062" title="Wilpattu National Park" label="Wilpattu National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="34219" end="34237" title="Nature reserve" label="biosphere reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003663" start="34239" end="34246" title="Bundala National Park" label="Bundala"/>
<link wikidata="Q12989600" start="34248" end="34269" title="Hurulu Forest Reserve" label="Hurulu Forest Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364032" start="34275" end="34308" title="Kanneliya-Dediyagala-Nakiyadeniya" label="Kanneliya-Dediyagala-Nakiyadeniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q375634" start="34314" end="34323" title="Sinharaja Forest Reserve" label="Sinharaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067009" start="34412" end="34429" title="red-faced malkoha" label="red-faced malkoha"/>
<link wikidata="Q777724" start="34435" end="34454" title="green-billed coucal" label="green-billed coucal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315428" start="34463" end="34484" title="Sri Lanka blue magpie" label="Sri Lanka blue magpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16897099" start="34798" end="34812" title="Minneriya Tank" label="Minneriya Tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="35741" end="35751" title="Democracy" label="democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="35752" end="35760" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="35767" end="35780" title="unitary state" label="unitary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="35804" end="35828" title="semi-presidential system" label="semi-presidential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362323" start="35929" end="35948" title="Supermajority" label="two-thirds majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450753" start="35952" end="35962" title="Parliament of Sri Lanka" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q17990855" start="35981" end="36009" title="Entrenched clause" label="certain fundamental features"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="36238" end="36248" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q842112" start="36311" end="36326" title="socialist state" label="socialist state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914380" start="36425" end="36447" title="President of Sri Lanka" label="President of Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="36455" end="36468" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="36474" end="36492" title="Commander-in-chief" label="commander in chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139109" start="36514" end="36529" title="Chief executive (gubernatorial)" label="chief executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q640506" start="36602" end="36609" title="cabinet (government)" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q83307" start="36623" end="36632" title="minister (government)" label="ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="36646" end="36667" title="Member of parliament" label="members of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q19842145" start="36874" end="36908" title="Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution of Sri Lanka" label="19th amendment to the constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450753" start="37007" end="37030" title="Parliament of Sri Lanka" label="Parliament of Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="37036" end="37046" title="Unicameralism" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="37147" end="37174" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="37453" end="37471" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758894" start="37477" end="37491" title="Prime Minister of Sri Lanka" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346215" start="37503" end="37515" title="ruling party" label="ruling party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702908" start="37656" end="37669" title="Supreme Court of Sri Lanka" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="37898" end="37909" title="English law" label="British law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395172" start="37940" end="37955" title="Roman-Dutch law" label="Roman-Dutch law"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="38015" end="38023" title="Common law" label="communal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016661" start="38123" end="38135" title="Thesavalamai" label="Thesavalamai"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="38141" end="38147" title="Sharia" label="Sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096802" start="38324" end="38337" title="Chief Justice of Sri Lanka" label="chief justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q737014" start="38538" end="38549" title="Centre-left politics" label="centre-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="38554" end="38565" title="Progressivism" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724491" start="38566" end="38603" title="United People&amp;#x27;s Freedom Alliance" label="United People&amp;#x27;s Freedom Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591064" start="38628" end="38651" title="Sri Lanka Freedom Party" label="Sri Lanka Freedom Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="38682" end="38692" title="Right-wing politics" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="38701" end="38711" title="Capitalism" label="capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321770" start="38712" end="38733" title="United National Party" label="United National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q85847146" start="38820" end="38842" title="Samagi Jana Balawegaya" label="Samagi Jana Balawegaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456145" start="38871" end="38898" title="Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna" label="Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682545" start="38941" end="38966" title="Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna" label="Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716578" start="39228" end="39251" title="Lanka Sama Samaja Party" label="Lanka Sama Samaja Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q313997" start="39517" end="39541" title="S. W. R. D. Bandaranaike" label="S. W. R. D. Bandaranaike"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065814" start="39631" end="39658" title="1956 Ceylonese parliamentary election" label="1956 Parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065817" start="39700" end="39709" title="July 1960 Ceylonese parliamentary election" label="July 1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q194291" start="39711" end="39732" title="Sirimavo Bandaranaike" label="Sirimavo Bandaranaike"/>
<link wikidata="Q829325" start="39794" end="39819" title="List of elected and appointed female heads of state and government" label="female head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093055" start="39822" end="39839" title="G. G. Ponnambalam" label="G. G. Ponnambalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932654" start="39845" end="39862" title="Sri Lankan Tamil nationalism" label="Tamil nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269564" start="39916" end="39941" title="All Ceylon Tamil Congress" label="All Ceylon Tamil Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q442636" start="40050" end="40070" title="S. J. V. Chelvanayakam" label="S.J.V. Chelvanayakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522458" start="40105" end="40133" title="Illankai Tamil Arasu Kachchi" label="Illankai Tamil Arasu Kachchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814443" start="40422" end="40451" title="Tamil United Liberation Front" label="Tamil United Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303358" start="40607" end="40630" title="Tamil National Alliance" label="Tamil National Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682545" start="40632" end="40657" title="Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna" label="Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="40661" end="40677" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxist–Leninist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033511" start="40705" end="40721" title="Rohana Wijeweera" label="Rohana Wijeweera"/>
<link wikidata="Q600703" start="40902" end="40917" title="Communist Party of Sri Lanka" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496425" start="40940" end="40965" title="Sri Lanka Muslim Congress" label="Sri Lanka Muslim Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q57338" start="41029" end="41046" title="Mahinda Rajapaksa" label="Mahinda Rajapaksa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18363191" start="41056" end="41083" title="2015 Sri Lankan presidential election" label="2015 presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737124" start="41165" end="41185" title="Maithripala Sirisena" label="Maithripala Sirisena"/>
<link wikidata="Q60769314" start="41276" end="41303" title="2019 Sri Lankan presidential election" label="2019 presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538702" start="41373" end="41391" title="Gotabaya Rajapaksa" label="Gotabaya Rajapaksa"/>
<link wikidata="Q58808801" start="41520" end="41543" title="2020 Sri Lankan parliamentary election" label="parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456145" start="41595" end="41624" title="Sri Lanka People&amp;#x27;s Front" label="Sri Lanka People&amp;#x27;s Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q112030660" start="41880" end="41896" title="2022 Sri Lankan political crisis" label="political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914380" start="41939" end="41948" title="President of Sri Lanka" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538702" start="41949" end="41967" title="Gotabaya Rajapaksa" label="Gotabaya Rajapaksa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450753" start="41976" end="41999" title="Parliament of Sri Lanka" label="Parliament of Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q111458253" start="42027" end="42084" title="2022 Sri Lankan protests" label="anti-government protests and demonstrations by the public"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043780" start="42115" end="42135" title="economy of Sri Lanka" label="economy of Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q983402" start="42326" end="42346" title="Ranil Wickremesinghe" label="Ranil Wickremesinghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q110654562" start="42388" end="42412" title="2022 Sri Lankan presidential election" label="parliamentarian election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777855" start="42474" end="42498" title="Anura Kumara Dissanayake" label="Anura Kumara Dissanayake"/>
<link wikidata="Q113317674" start="42520" end="42529" title="2024 Sri Lankan presidential election" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q861559" start="42623" end="42632" title="Provinces of Sri Lanka" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230110" start="42649" end="42658" title="Districts of Sri Lanka" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="42909" end="42925" title="Devolution" label="decentralisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322121" start="43338" end="43357" title="North Eastern Province, Sri Lanka" label="North-East Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588675" start="43665" end="43685" title="Government Agent (Sri Lanka)" label="district secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990968" start="43733" end="43756" title="Divisional Secretariats of Sri Lanka" label="divisional secretariats"/>
<link wikidata="Q110679749" start="43792" end="43807" title="Grama Niladhari" label="Grama Niladhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q154547" start="43994" end="43999" title="duchy" label="duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="44655" end="44675" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024330" start="44759" end="44779" title="India–Sri Lanka relations" label="relations with India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="44814" end="44828" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="44872" end="44884" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q145700" start="44890" end="44895" title="South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation" label="SAARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="44901" end="44911" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="44917" end="44944" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="44950" end="44972" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077459" start="44982" end="44994" title="Colombo Plan" label="Colombo Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q392541" start="45365" end="45395" title="Treaty of San Francisco" label="San Francisco Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="45470" end="45475" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="45525" end="45537" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q123334738" start="45740" end="45756" title="Ceylon-China Trade Agreement of 1952" label="Rubber-Rice Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q208191" start="45803" end="45827" title="Asian–African Conference" label="Asian–African Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="46045" end="46057" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809" start="46112" end="46123" title="Che Guevara" label="Che Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q12978362" start="46155" end="46174" title="Sirima–Shastri Pact" label="Sirima-Shastri Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q19630601" start="46187" end="46205" title="Sirima–Gandhi Pact" label="Sirima-Gandhi Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065785" start="46291" end="46312" title="Ceylon Citizenship Act" label="long-standing dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661549" start="46332" end="46367" title="Indian Tamils of Sri Lanka" label="plantation workers of Indian origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720887" start="46378" end="46391" title="Katchatheevu" label="Kachchatheevu"/>
<link wikidata="Q186299" start="46411" end="46422" title="Palk Strait" label="Palk Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q108795496" start="46523" end="46539" title="5th Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement" label="fifth NAM summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q469661" start="46651" end="46668" title="Junius Richard Jayewardene" label="J. R. Jayawardene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022577" start="46683" end="46727" title="Indian intervention in the Sri Lankan Civil War" label="India intervened in the Sri Lankan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358912" start="46757" end="46783" title="Indian Peace Keeping Force" label="Indian Peace Keeping Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579178" start="46900" end="46922" title="Sri Lanka Armed Forces" label="Sri Lanka Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607844" start="46939" end="46953" title="Sri Lanka Army" label="Sri Lanka Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274075" start="46959" end="46973" title="Sri Lanka Navy" label="Sri Lanka Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q600027" start="46983" end="47002" title="Sri Lanka Air Force" label="Sri Lanka Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q276724" start="47034" end="47053" title="Ministry of Defence (Sri Lanka)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="47181" end="47202" title="Conscription" label="military conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574747" start="47235" end="47253" title="Special Task Force (Sri Lanka)" label="Special Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585913" start="47259" end="47279" title="Sri Lanka Civil Security Force" label="Civil Security Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274402" start="47289" end="47310" title="Sri Lanka Coast Guard" label="Sri Lanka Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="47449" end="47456" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682545" start="47474" end="47477" title="Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna" label="JVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q80312" start="47515" end="47519" title="Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam" label="LTTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="47647" end="47661" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="47662" end="47674" title="peacekeeping" label="peacekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q775968" start="47802" end="47806" title="United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q160805" start="47808" end="47815" title="United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q740123" start="47821" end="47826" title="United Nations Stabilisation Mission in Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q327901" start="47910" end="47928" title="Global Peace Index" label="Global Peace Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="48010" end="48013" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="48026" end="48049" title="purchasing power parity" label="purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="48110" end="48127" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578694" start="48180" end="48198" title="plantation economy" label="plantation economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28165" start="48239" end="48247" title="cinnamon" label="cinnamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="48249" end="48255" title="rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376911" start="48261" end="48271" title="Tea production in Sri Lanka" label="Ceylon tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16935429" start="48320" end="48347" title="Ministry of Ports and Aviation (Sri Lanka)" label="development of modern ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="48599" end="48612" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="48639" end="48650" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q471719" start="49949" end="49970" title="market capitalisation" label="market capitalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359996" start="49978" end="50000" title="Colombo Stock Exchange" label="Colombo Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317814" start="50021" end="50035" title="Government budget deficit" label="budget deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q162455" start="50267" end="50283" title="Gini coefficient" label="Gini coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067257" start="50311" end="50340" title="Global Competitiveness Report" label="Global Competitiveness Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q170418" start="50359" end="50379" title="World Economic Forum" label="World Economic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127400" start="50767" end="50785" title="World Giving Index" label="World Giving Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="50882" end="50900" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253020" start="50970" end="50995" title="S&amp;amp;P Dow Jones Indices" label="S&amp;amp;P Dow Jones Indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q732352" start="51022" end="51037" title="Frontier markets" label="frontier market"/>
<link wikidata="Q176793" start="51050" end="51065" title="List of countries by Human Development Index" label="Sri Lanka ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="51112" end="51135" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="51313" end="51340" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q114380" start="52376" end="52391" title="economic crisis" label="economic crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358522" start="52953" end="52969" title="List of A-Grade highways in Sri Lanka" label="A-Grade highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975540" start="52974" end="52978" title="Expressways of Sri Lanka" label="four"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="52979" end="53004" title="controlled-access highway" label="controlled-access highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585945" start="53324" end="53339" title="Sri Lanka Railways" label="railway network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975182" start="53367" end="53383" title="National Railway" label="National Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585945" start="53393" end="53411" title="Sri Lanka Railways" label="Sri Lanka Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="53446" end="53461" title="deep-water port" label="deep-water port"/>
<link wikidata="Q763007" start="53466" end="53473" title="Port of Colombo" label="Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q319366" start="53475" end="53480" title="Galle" label="Galle"/>
<link wikidata="Q323873" start="53486" end="53497" title="Trincomalee" label="Trincomalee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6729657" start="53545" end="53555" title="Ruhunu Magampura International Port" label="Hambantota"/>
<link wikidata="Q235451" start="53734" end="53747" title="Vandana Shiva" label="Vandana Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083280" start="54978" end="55002" title="University of Peradeniya" label="University of Peradeniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q853293" start="55438" end="55456" title="SriLankan Airlines" label="SriLankan Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q203516" start="55837" end="55847" title="birth rate" label="birth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="55889" end="55899" title="Mortality rate" label="death rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q932244" start="56022" end="56031" title="Sinhalese people" label="Sinhalese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815623" start="56120" end="56137" title="Sri Lankan Tamils" label="Sri Lankan Tamils"/>
<link wikidata="Q998494" start="56215" end="56220" title="Sri Lankan Moors" label="Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q206642" start="56283" end="56291" title="Burgher people" label="Burghers"/>
<link wikidata="Q58187" start="56324" end="56330" title="Sri Lankan Malays" label="Malays"/>
<link wikidata="Q369883" start="56393" end="56405" title="Vedda people" label="Vedda people"/>
<link wikidata="Q13267" start="56522" end="56529" title="Sinhala language" label="Sinhala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="56534" end="56539" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="56552" end="56569" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610306" start="56597" end="56604" title="Sri Lankan English" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q206642" start="56716" end="56723" title="Burgher people" label="Burgher"/>
<link wikidata="Q14507109" start="56757" end="56774" title="Portuguese Creole" label="Portuguese Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="56864" end="56870" title="Creole language" label="Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089151" start="56871" end="56876" title="Sri Lanka Malay" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="56927" end="56935" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="56981" end="56998" title="Official religion" label="Official religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="57313" end="57322" title="Theravada" label="Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q587284" start="57476" end="57490" title="Mahinda (buddhist monk)" label="Mahinda Maurya"/>
<link wikidata="Q321437" start="57509" end="57519" title="Bodhi Tree" label="Bodhi Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="57532" end="57542" title="the Buddha" label="the Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q215685" start="57617" end="57627" title="Pāli Canon" label="Pāli Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535934" start="57987" end="58006" title="Hinduism in Sri Lanka" label="Hindus in Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025383" start="58315" end="58332" title="Devanampiya Tissa" label="Devanampiya Tissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q186299" start="58446" end="58457" title="Palk Strait" label="Palk Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="58487" end="58495" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q234953" start="58526" end="58534" title="Shaivism" label="Shaivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q80706" start="58655" end="58680" title="Hindu temple architecture" label="Hindu temple architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="58685" end="58695" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="58753" end="58761" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749107" start="58855" end="58860" title="Islam in Sri Lanka" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="59092" end="59097" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q82245" start="59113" end="59132" title="Shafiʽi school" label="Shafi&amp;#x27;i school"/>
<link wikidata="Q549296" start="59224" end="59236" title="Christianity in Sri Lanka" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819740" start="59496" end="59511" title="Catholic Church in Sri Lanka" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q163900" start="59629" end="59647" title="Francis Xavier" label="St. Francis Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089768" start="59738" end="59763" title="Church of Ceylon" label="Anglican Church of Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="59774" end="59798" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="59837" end="59848" title="Zoroastrian" label="Zoroastrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q200263" start="59872" end="59878" title="Parsis" label="Parsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="60068" end="60076" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401018" start="60094" end="60098" title="Poya" label="Poya"/>
<link wikidata="Q185688" start="60132" end="60146" title="Lunar calendar" label="Lunar calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="60152" end="60158" title="Hindus" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="60163" end="60170" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="60214" end="60225" title="Gallup poll" label="Gallup poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="60414" end="60429" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="61118" end="61143" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q155857" start="61196" end="61203" title="rubella" label="rubella"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="61208" end="61215" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="61271" end="61284" title="literacy rate" label="literacy rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q511009" start="61543" end="61563" title="Compulsory education" label="compulsory schooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500224" start="61598" end="61612" title="free education" label="free education"/>
<link wikidata="Q469045" start="61673" end="61692" title="C. W. W. Kannangara" label="C. W. W. Kannangara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6727588" start="61865" end="61881" title="Madhya Vidyalaya" label="Madhya Vidyalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q10992387" start="62300" end="62316" title="National school (Sri Lanka)" label="national schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q198668" start="62348" end="62369" title="Ministry of Education (Sri Lanka)" label="ministry of education"/>
<link wikidata="Q4363314" start="62510" end="62518" title="pirivena" label="pirivena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="63006" end="63029" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274071" start="63073" end="63107" title="Sri Lanka Broadcasting Corporation" label="Sri Lanka Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532066" start="63118" end="63130" title="Radio Ceylon" label="Radio Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208799" start="63200" end="63213" title="Edward Harper (engineer)" label="Edward Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017297" start="63462" end="63492" title="Independent Television Network" label="Independent Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="63785" end="63805" title="freedom of the press" label="freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067271" start="63878" end="63909" title="Press Freedom Index" label="poorest in democratic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q687745" start="64077" end="64099" title="Lasantha Wickrematunge" label="Lasantha Wickrematunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="64344" end="64365" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500691" start="64367" end="64387" title="Freedom from Torture" label="Freedom from Torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="64389" end="64407" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="64424" end="64442" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="British government"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="64451" end="64484" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056320" start="64543" end="64564" title="Government of Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lankan Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314125" start="64630" end="64685" title="Report of the Secretary-General&amp;#x27;s Panel of Experts on Accountability in Sri Lanka" label="report by an advisory panel to the UN secretary-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731251" start="64741" end="64751" title="Alleged war crimes during the Sri Lankan Civil War" label="war crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q60746287" start="64924" end="64964" title="Article 365 of the Sri Lankan Penal Code" label="Article 365 of the Sri Lankan Penal Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458196" start="64978" end="64993" title="LGBT rights in Sri Lanka" label="homosexual acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q205650" start="65045" end="65068" title="United Nations Human Rights Council" label="UN Human Rights Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377347" start="65084" end="65113" title="Enforced disappearances in Sri Lanka" label="over 12,000 named individuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q656812" start="65424" end="65452" title="Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights" label="UN Human Rights Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q242078" start="65453" end="65470" title="Navanethem Pillay" label="Navanethem Pillay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801901" start="65762" end="65775" title="land grabbing" label="land grabbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500691" start="65982" end="66002" title="Freedom from Torture" label="Freedom from Torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="66379" end="66397" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749556" start="66561" end="66581" title="culture of Sri Lanka" label="culture of Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66964" end="66985" title="Ancient constructions of Sri Lanka#Irrigation Works" label="hydraulic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787209" start="66990" end="67002" title="Architecture of ancient Sri Lanka" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520287" start="67296" end="67301" title="puttu" label="pittu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358516" start="67303" end="67311" title="kiribath" label="kiribath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204450" start="67323" end="67327" title="roti" label="roti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456855" start="67329" end="67343" title="Idiyappam" label="string hoppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972979" start="67345" end="67355" title="watalappam" label="watalappam"/>
<link wikidata="Q841779" start="67398" end="67410" title="coconut milk" label="coconut milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112191" start="67479" end="67484" title="kottu" label="kottu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548021" start="67490" end="67495" title="appam" label="appam"/>
<link wikidata="Q45757" start="67497" end="67506" title="Jackfruit" label="Jackfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q165449" start="67569" end="67596" title="Plantain (cooking)" label="plantain leaf or lotus leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587986" start="67825" end="67833" title="lamprais" label="lamprais"/>
<link wikidata="Q85748847" start="67885" end="67893" title="breudher" label="breudher"/>
<link wikidata="Q116788587" start="67923" end="67933" title="Bolo fiado" label="Bolo fiado"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534698" start="68002" end="68010" title="Sinhalese New Year" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670097" start="68015" end="68020" title="Tamil New Year" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183439" start="68041" end="68055" title="Esala Perahera" label="Esala Perahera"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="68299" end="68308" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="68367" end="68373" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q29271" start="68431" end="68442" title="Thai Pongal" label="Thai Pongal"/>
<link wikidata="Q848070" start="68447" end="68462" title="Maha Shivaratri" label="Maha Shivaratri"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="68486" end="68490" title="Hajj" label="Hajj"/>
<link wikidata="Q41662" start="68495" end="68502" title="Ramadan" label="Ramadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6345263" start="68568" end="68586" title="Kadawunu Poronduwa" label="Kadawunu Poronduwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q55154538" start="68639" end="68652" title="S. M. Nayagam" label="S. M. Nayagam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293372" start="68735" end="68748" title="Ranmuthu Duwa" label="Ranmuthu Duwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q838368" start="68826" end="68841" title="black-and-white" label="black-and-white"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="69054" end="69063" title="Bollywood" label="Bollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236797" start="69197" end="69216" title="Lester James Peiris" label="Lester James Peiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310600" start="69299" end="69305" title="Rekava" label="Rekava"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520384" start="69355" end="69366" title="Gamperaliya (film)" label="Gamperaliya"/>
<link wikidata="Q370051" start="69421" end="69430" title="Nidhanaya" label="Nidhanaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007426" start="69480" end="69494" title="Golu Hadawatha" label="Golu Hadawatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333142" start="69558" end="69570" title="Rienzi Crusz" label="Rienzi Crusz"/>
<link wikidata="Q313593" start="69697" end="69713" title="Michael Ondaatje" label="Michael Ondaatje"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732809" start="70180" end="70195" title="Mahagama Sekara" label="Mahagama Sekara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305779" start="70200" end="70217" title="Ananda Samarakoon" label="Ananda Samarakoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534869" start="70240" end="70255" title="W. D. Amaradeva" label="W. D. Amaradeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926271" start="70257" end="70273" title="Victor Ratnayake" label="Victor Ratnayake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6963139" start="70275" end="70287" title="Nanda Malini" label="Nanda Malini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126818" start="70292" end="70312" title="Clarence Wijewardene" label="Clarence Wijewardene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879826" start="70380" end="70391" title="Baila music" label="Baila music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585926" start="70409" end="70416" title="Sri Lanka Kaffirs" label="Kaffirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536153" start="70523" end="70536" title="Kandyan dance" label="Kandyan dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q853272" start="70562" end="70574" title="Sabaragamuwa" label="Sabaragamuwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q104614" start="71194" end="71202" title="cinnabar" label="cinnabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17199145" start="71383" end="71396" title="Parsi theatre" label="Parsi theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="71410" end="71416" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338330" start="71657" end="71681" title="Ediriweera Sarachchandra" label="Ediriweera Sarachchandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q718909" start="71939" end="71944" title="Aryan race" label="Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q727413" start="71996" end="72003" title="Rigveda" label="Rigveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q215685" start="72009" end="72019" title="Pāli Canon" label="Pāli Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q752404" start="72137" end="72160" title="Fourth Buddhist council" label="Fourth Buddhist council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968268" start="72190" end="72197" title="Kegalle" label="Kegalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782817" start="72248" end="72257" title="Mahāvaṃsa" label="Mahāvaṃsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q76695" start="72381" end="72395" title="Wilhelm Geiger" label="Wilhelm Geiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986204" start="72433" end="72443" title="Atthakatha" label="Atthakatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q379591" start="73302" end="73323" title="Martin Wickramasinghe" label="Martin Wickramasinghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728349" start="73345" end="73356" title="Madol Doova" label="Madol Doova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050260" start="73446" end="73460" title="national sport" label="national sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="73464" end="73474" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="73524" end="73531" title="Cricket" label="Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="73533" end="73544" title="Rugby union" label="Rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="73585" end="73605" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q231200" start="73607" end="73614" title="netball" label="netball"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="73619" end="73625" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="73694" end="73706" title="scuba diving" label="scuba diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089310" start="73812" end="73821" title="Cheena di" label="Cheena di"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534885" start="73826" end="73835" title="Angampora" label="Angampora"/>
<link wikidata="Q203092" start="73841" end="73872" title="Sri Lanka national cricket team" label="Sri Lanka national cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975393" start="73939" end="73947" title="underdog (competition)" label="underdog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139943" start="73970" end="73992" title="1996 Cricket World Cup" label="1996 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q142555" start="74004" end="74013" title="Australia national cricket team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363392" start="74063" end="74086" title="2014 ICC World Twenty20" label="2014 ICC World Twenty20"/>
<link wikidata="Q192202" start="74189" end="74206" title="Cricket World Cup" label="Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127675" start="74210" end="74214" title="2007 Cricket World Cup" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156492" start="74219" end="74223" title="2011 Cricket World Cup Final" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q979298" start="74236" end="74254" title="ICC World Twenty20" label="ICC World Twenty20"/>
<link wikidata="Q732507" start="74258" end="74262" title="2009 ICC World Twenty20" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q994323" start="74267" end="74271" title="2012 ICC World Twenty20" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q675614" start="74291" end="74302" title="Off spin" label="off-spinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q379709" start="74303" end="74323" title="Muttiah Muralitharan" label="Muttiah Muralitharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132113" start="74355" end="74365" title="Test cricket" label="test match"/>
<link wikidata="Q597080" start="74366" end="74372" title="bowler (cricket)" label="bowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304651" start="74387" end="74419" title="Wisden Cricketers&amp;#x27; Almanack" label="Wisden Cricketers&amp;#x27; Almanack"/>
<link wikidata="Q737645" start="74470" end="74480" title="Kumar Sangakkara" label="Sangakkara"/>
<link wikidata="Q378810" start="74488" end="74498" title="Sanath Jayasuriya" label="Jayasuriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739165" start="74506" end="74517" title="Mahela Jayawardene" label="Jayawardene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724503" start="74529" end="74536" title="Tillakaratne Dilshan" label="Dilshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866609" start="74848" end="74856" title="Asia Cup" label="Asia Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139943" start="75023" end="75027" title="1996 Cricket World Cup" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q911295" start="75032" end="75036" title="2011 Cricket World Cup" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q994323" start="75052" end="75075" title="2012 ICC World Twenty20" label="2012 ICC World Twenty20"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="75113" end="75126" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q256183" start="75143" end="75155" title="Duncan White" label="Duncan White"/>
<link wikidata="Q8403" start="75163" end="75183" title="1948 Summer Olympics" label="1948 London Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q231419" start="75199" end="75217" title="400 metres hurdles" label="400 metres hurdles"/>
<link wikidata="Q242027" start="75237" end="75258" title="Susanthika Jayasinghe" label="Susanthika Jayasinghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="75266" end="75286" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="2000 Sydney Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q211155" start="75304" end="75314" title="200 metres" label="200 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q29913517" start="75325" end="75339" title="Muhammad Lafir" label="Muhammad Lafir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969234" start="75348" end="75376" title="IBSF World Billiards Championship" label="World Billiards Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341285" start="75416" end="75425" title="Cue sports" label="Cue sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405086" start="75502" end="75506" title="2016 Carrom World Championship" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315299" start="75608" end="75651" title="Sri Lankan National Badminton Championships" label="Sri Lankan National Badminton Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q478339" start="75694" end="75726" title="Sri Lanka national football team" label="Sri Lanka national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q249720" start="75752" end="75777" title="1995 South Asian Gold Cup" label="1995 South Asian Gold Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112464" start="75798" end="75818" title="Outline of Sri Lanka" label="Outline of Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q510686" start="75821" end="75848" title="List of cities in Sri Lanka" label="List of cities in Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450753" start="76264" end="76287" title="Parliament of Sri Lanka" label="Parliament of Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914380" start="76349" end="76371" title="President of Sri Lanka" label="President of Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758894" start="76399" end="76426" title="Prime Minister of Sri Lanka" label="Prime Minister of Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243281" start="76429" end="76457" title="Prime Minister&amp;#x27;s Office (Sri Lanka)" label="Prime Minister&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783006" start="76499" end="76532" title="Cabinet of Sri Lanka" label="Cabinet of Ministers of Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702908" start="76560" end="76586" title="Supreme Court of Sri Lanka" label="Supreme Court of Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="76633" end="76651" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="76659" end="76686" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="76893" end="76901" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="76922" end="76945" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q17957" start="77000" end="77013" title="Lonely Planet" label="Lonely Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="77062" end="77083" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161065" start="77223" end="77244" title="James Emerson Tennent" label="James Emerson Tennent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12013" start="77286" end="77297" title="Google Maps" label="Google Maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q188915" start="77359" end="77389" title="National Library of Israel" label="The National Library of Israel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="26751" wikidata="Q525" url="?curid=26751" title="Sun">
<text>The Sun is the star at the center of the Solar System. It is a massive, nearly perfect sphere of hot plasma, heated to incandescence by nuclear fusion reactions in its core, radiating the energy from its surface mainly as visible light and infrared radiation with 10% at ultraviolet energies. It is by far the most important source of energy for life on Earth. The Sun has been an object of veneration in many cultures. It has been a central subject for astronomical research since antiquity.

The Sun orbits the Galactic Center at a distance of 24,000 to 28,000 light-years. From Earth, it is () or about 8 light-minutes away. Its diameter is about (), 109 times that of Earth. Its mass is about 330,000 times that of Earth, making up about 99.86% of the total mass of the Solar System. Roughly three-quarters of the Sun&#x27;s mass consists of hydrogen (~73%); the rest is mostly helium (~25%), with much smaller quantities of heavier elements, including oxygen, carbon, neon, and iron.

The Sun is a G-type main-sequence star (G2V), informally called a yellow dwarf, though its light is actually white. It formed approximately 4.6 billion years ago from the gravitational collapse of matter within a region of a large molecular cloud. Most of this matter gathered in the center, whereas the rest flattened into an orbiting disk that became the Solar System. The central mass became so hot and dense that it eventually initiated nuclear fusion in its core. Every second, the Sun&#x27;s core fuses about 600 billion kilograms (kg) of hydrogen into helium and converts 4 billion kg of matter into energy.

About 4 to 7 billion years from now, when hydrogen fusion in the Sun&#x27;s core diminishes to the point where the Sun is no longer in hydrostatic equilibrium, its core will undergo a marked increase in density and temperature which will cause its outer layers to expand, eventually transforming the Sun into a red giant. This process will make the Sun large enough to render Earth uninhabitable approximately 3 billion years from the present. After the red giant phase, models suggest the Sun will shed its outer layers and become a dense type of cooling star (a white dwarf), and no longer produce energy by fusion, but will still glow and give off heat from its previous fusion for perhaps trillions of years. After that, it is theorized to become a super dense black dwarf, giving off negligible energy.

== Etymology ==
The English word &quot;sun&quot; developed from Old English . Cognates appear in other Germanic languages, including West Frisian , Dutch , Low German , Standard German , Bavarian , Old Norse , and Gothic . All these words stem from Proto-Germanic . This is ultimately related to the word for &quot;sun&quot; in other branches of the Indo-European language family, though in most cases a nominative stem with an &quot;l&quot; is found, rather than the genitive stem in &quot;n&quot;, as for example in Latin , ancient Greek (), Welsh and Czech , as well as (with *l &gt; &quot;r&quot;) Sanskrit () and Persian (). Indeed, the &quot;l&quot;-stem survived in Proto-Germanic as well, as , which gave rise to Gothic (alongside ) and Old Norse prosaic (alongside poetic ), and through it the words for &quot;sun&quot; in the modern Scandinavian languages: Swedish and Danish , Icelandic , etc.

The principal adjectives for the Sun in English are &quot;sunny&quot; for sunlight and, in technical contexts, &quot;solar&quot; (), from Latin . From the Greek comes the rare adjective &quot;heliac&quot; (). In English, the Greek and Latin words occur in poetry as personifications of the Sun, Helios () and Sol (), while in science fiction &quot;Sol&quot; may be used to distinguish the Sun from other stars. The term &quot;sol&quot; with a lowercase &quot;s&quot; is used by planetary astronomers for the duration of a solar day on another planet such as Mars.

The astronomical symbol for the Sun is a circle with a center dot, . It is used for such units as &quot;M&quot;☉ (Solar mass), &quot;R&quot;☉ (Solar radius) and &quot;L&quot;☉ (Solar luminosity).
The scientific study of the Sun is called &quot;heliology&quot;.

== General characteristics ==
The Sun is a G-type main-sequence star that makes up about 99.86% of the mass of the Solar System. It has an absolute magnitude of +4.83, estimated to be brighter than about 85% of the stars in the Milky Way, most of which are red dwarfs. It is more massive than 95% of the stars within .
The Sun is a Population I, or heavy-element-rich, star. Its formation approximately 4.6 billion years ago may have been triggered by shockwaves from one or more nearby supernovae. This is suggested by a high abundance of heavy elements in the Solar System, such as gold and uranium, relative to the abundances of these elements in so-called Population II, heavy-element-poor, stars. The heavy elements could most plausibly have been produced by endothermic nuclear reactions during a supernova, or by transmutation through neutron absorption within a massive second-generation star.

The Sun is by far the brightest object in the Earth&#x27;s sky, with an apparent magnitude of −26.74. This is about 13 billion times brighter than the next brightest star, Sirius, which has an apparent magnitude of −1.46.

 is defined as the mean distance between the centers of the Sun and the Earth. The instantaneous distance varies by about as Earth moves from perihelion around 3 January to aphelion around 4 July. At its average distance, light travels from the Sun&#x27;s horizon to Earth&#x27;s horizon in about 8 minutes and 20 seconds, while light from the closest points of the Sun and Earth takes about two seconds less. The energy of this sunlight supports almost all life on Earth by photosynthesis, and drives Earth&#x27;s climate and weather.

The Sun does not have a definite boundary, but its density decreases exponentially with increasing height above the photosphere. For the purpose of measurement, the Sun&#x27;s radius is considered to be the distance from its center to the edge of the photosphere, the apparent visible surface of the Sun. 
The roundness of the Sun is relative difference between its radius at its equator, formula_1, and at its pole, formula_2, called the oblateness, 
formula_3
The value is difficult to measure. Atmospheric distortion means the measurement must be done on satellites; the value is very small meaning very precise technique is needed.

The oblateness was once proposed to be sufficient to explain the perihelion precession of Mercury but Einstein proposed that general relativity could explain the precession using a spherical Sun. When high precision measurements of the oblateness became available via the Solar Dynamics Observatory and the
Picard satellite the measured value was even smaller than expected, 8.2 x 10−6, or 8 parts per million.
This makes the Sun the natural object closest to a perfect sphere. The oblateness value remains constant independent of solar irradiation changes. The tidal effect of the planets is weak and does not significantly affect the shape of the Sun.

===Rotation===

The Sun rotates faster at its equator than at its poles. This differential rotation is caused by convective motion due to heat transport and the Coriolis force due to the Sun&#x27;s rotation. In a frame of reference defined by the stars, the rotational period is approximately 25.6 days at the equator and 33.5 days at the poles. Viewed from Earth as it orbits the Sun, the &quot;apparent rotational period&quot; of the Sun at its equator is about 28 days. Viewed from a vantage point above its north pole, the Sun rotates counterclockwise around its axis of spin.

A survey of solar analogs suggest the early Sun was rotating up to ten times faster than it does today. This would have made the surface much more active, with greater X-ray and UV emission. Sun spots would have covered 5–30% of the surface. The rotation rate was gradually slowed by magnetic braking, as the Sun&#x27;s magnetic field interacted with the outflowing solar wind. A vestige of this rapid primordial rotation still survives at the Sun&#x27;s core, which has been found to be rotating at a rate of once per week; four times the mean surface rotation rate.

== Composition ==

The Sun consists mainly of the elements hydrogen and helium. At this time in the Sun&#x27;s life, they account for 74.9% and 23.8%, respectively, of the mass of the Sun in the photosphere. All heavier elements, called &quot;metals&quot; in astronomy, account for less than 2% of the mass, with oxygen (roughly 1% of the Sun&#x27;s mass), carbon (0.3%), neon (0.2%), and iron (0.2%) being the most abundant.

The Sun&#x27;s original chemical composition was inherited from the interstellar medium out of which it formed. Originally it would have been about 71.1% hydrogen, 27.4% helium, and 1.5% heavier elements. The hydrogen and most of the helium in the Sun would have been produced by Big Bang nucleosynthesis in the first 20 minutes of the universe, and the heavier elements were produced by previous generations of stars before the Sun was formed, and spread into the interstellar medium during the final stages of stellar life and by events such as supernovae.

Since the Sun formed, the main fusion process has involved fusing hydrogen into helium. Over the past 4.6 billion years, the amount of helium and its location within the Sun has gradually changed. The proportion of helium within the core has increased from about 24% to about 60% due to fusion, and some of the helium and heavy elements have settled from the photosphere toward the center of the Sun because of gravity. The proportions of heavier elements are unchanged. Heat is transferred outward from the Sun&#x27;s core by radiation rather than by convection (see Radiative zone below), so the fusion products are not lifted outward by heat; they remain in the core, and gradually an inner core of helium has begun to form that cannot be fused because presently the Sun&#x27;s core is not hot or dense enough to fuse helium. In the current photosphere, the helium fraction is reduced, and the metallicity is only 84% of what it was in the protostellar phase (before nuclear fusion in the core started). In the future, helium will continue to accumulate in the core, and in about 5 billion years this gradual build-up will eventually cause the Sun to exit the main sequence and become a red giant.

The chemical composition of the photosphere is normally considered representative of the composition of the primordial Solar System. Typically, the solar heavy-element abundances described above are measured both by using spectroscopy of the Sun&#x27;s photosphere and by measuring abundances in meteorites that have never been heated to melting temperatures. These meteorites are thought to retain the composition of the protostellar Sun and are thus not affected by the settling of heavy elements. The two methods generally agree well.

== Structure and fusion ==


=== Core ===

The core of the Sun extends from the center to about 20–25% of the solar radius. It has a density of up to (about 150 times the density of water) and a temperature of close to 15.7 million kelvin (K). By contrast, the Sun&#x27;s surface temperature is about . Recent analysis of SOHO mission data favors the idea that the core is rotating faster than the radiative zone outside it. Through most of the Sun&#x27;s life, energy has been produced by nuclear fusion in the core region through the proton–proton chain; this process converts hydrogen into helium. Currently, 0.8% of the energy generated in the Sun comes from another sequence of fusion reactions called the CNO cycle; the proportion coming from the CNO cycle is expected to increase as the Sun becomes older and more luminous.

The core is the only region of the Sun that produces an appreciable amount of thermal energy through fusion; 99% of the Sun&#x27;s power is generated in the innermost 24% of its radius, and almost no fusion occurs beyond 30% of the radius. The rest of the Sun is heated by this energy as it is transferred outward through many successive layers, finally to the solar photosphere where it escapes into space through radiation (photons) or advection (massive particles).

The proton–proton chain occurs around times each second in the core, converting about 3.7 protons into alpha particles (helium nuclei) every second (out of a total of ~8.9 free protons in the Sun), or about . However, each proton (on average) takes around 9 billion years to fuse with another using the PP chain. Fusing four free protons (hydrogen nuclei) into a single alpha particle (helium nucleus) releases around 0.7% of the fused mass as energy, so the Sun releases energy at the mass–energy conversion rate of 4.26 billion kg/s (which requires 600 billion kg of hydrogen), for 384.6 yottawatts (), or 9.192 megatons of TNT per second. The large power output of the Sun is mainly due to the huge size and density of its core (compared to Earth and objects on Earth), with only a fairly small amount of power being generated per cubic metre. Theoretical models of the Sun&#x27;s interior indicate a maximum power density, or energy production, of approximately 276.5 watts per cubic metre at the center of the core, which, according to Karl Kruszelnicki, is about the same power density inside a compost pile.

The fusion rate in the core is in a self-correcting equilibrium: a slightly higher rate of fusion would cause the core to heat up more and expand slightly against the weight of the outer layers, reducing the density and hence the fusion rate and correcting the perturbation; and a slightly lower rate would cause the core to cool and shrink slightly, increasing the density and increasing the fusion rate and again reverting it to its present rate.

=== Radiative zone ===
The radiative zone is the thickest layer of the Sun, at 0.45 solar radii. From the core out to about 0.7 solar radii, thermal radiation is the primary means of energy transfer. The temperature drops from approximately 7 million to 2 million kelvins with increasing distance from the core. This temperature gradient is less than the value of the adiabatic lapse rate and hence cannot drive convection, which explains why the transfer of energy through this zone is by radiation instead of thermal convection. Ions of hydrogen and helium emit photons, which travel only a brief distance before being reabsorbed by other ions. The density drops a hundredfold (from 20,000 kg/m3 to 200 kg/m3) between 0.25 solar radii and 0.7 radii, the top of the radiative zone.

=== Tachocline ===
The radiative zone and the convective zone are separated by a transition layer, the tachocline. This is a region where the sharp regime change between the uniform rotation of the radiative zone and the differential rotation of the convection zone results in a large shear between the two—a condition where successive horizontal layers slide past one another. Presently, it is hypothesized that a magnetic dynamo, or solar dynamo, within this layer generates the Sun&#x27;s magnetic field.

=== Convective zone ===

The Sun&#x27;s convection zone extends from 0.7 solar radii (500,000 km) to near the surface. In this layer, the solar plasma is not dense or hot enough to transfer the heat energy of the interior outward via radiation. Instead, the density of the plasma is low enough to allow convective currents to develop and move the Sun&#x27;s energy outward towards its surface. Material heated at the tachocline picks up heat and expands, thereby reducing its density and allowing it to rise. As a result, an orderly motion of the mass develops into thermal cells that carry most of the heat outward to the Sun&#x27;s photosphere above. Once the material diffusively and radiatively cools just beneath the photospheric surface, its density increases, and it sinks to the base of the convection zone, where it again picks up heat from the top of the radiative zone and the convective cycle continues. At the photosphere, the temperature has dropped 350-fold to and the density to only 0.2 g/m3 (about 1/10,000 the density of air at sea level, and 1 millionth that of the inner layer of the convective zone).

The thermal columns of the convection zone form an imprint on the surface of the Sun giving it a granular appearance called the solar granulation at the smallest scale and supergranulation at larger scales. Turbulent convection in this outer part of the solar interior sustains &quot;small-scale&quot; dynamo action over the near-surface volume of the Sun. The Sun&#x27;s thermal columns are Bénard cells and take the shape of roughly hexagonal prisms.

=== Photosphere ===

The visible surface of the Sun, the photosphere, is the layer below which the Sun becomes opaque to visible light. Photons produced in this layer escape the Sun through the transparent solar atmosphere above it and become solar radiation, sunlight. The change in opacity is due to the decreasing amount of H− ions, which absorb visible light easily. Conversely, the visible light perceived is produced as electrons react with hydrogen atoms to produce H− ions.

The photosphere is tens to hundreds of kilometers thick, and is slightly less opaque than air on Earth. Because the upper part of the photosphere is cooler than the lower part, an image of the Sun appears brighter in the center than on the edge or &quot;limb&quot; of the solar disk, in a phenomenon known as &quot;limb darkening&quot;. The spectrum of sunlight has approximately the spectrum of a black-body radiating at , interspersed with atomic absorption lines from the tenuous layers above the photosphere. The photosphere has a particle density of ~1023 m−3 (about 0.37% of the particle number per volume of Earth&#x27;s atmosphere at sea level). The photosphere is not fully ionized—the extent of ionization is about 3%, leaving almost all of the hydrogen in atomic form.

=== Atmosphere ===
The Sun&#x27;s atmosphere is composed of five layers: the photosphere, the chromosphere, the transition region, the corona, and the heliosphere.

The coolest layer of the Sun is a temperature minimum region extending to about above the photosphere, and has a temperature of about . This part of the Sun is cool enough to allow for the existence of simple molecules such as carbon monoxide and water. The chromosphere, transition region, and corona are much hotter than the surface of the Sun. The reason is not well understood, but evidence suggests that Alfvén waves may have enough energy to heat the corona.

Above the temperature minimum layer is a layer about thick, dominated by a spectrum of emission and absorption lines. It is called the &quot;chromosphere&quot; from the Greek root &quot;chroma&quot;, meaning color, because the chromosphere is visible as a colored flash at the beginning and end of total solar eclipses. The temperature of the chromosphere increases gradually with altitude, ranging up to around near the top. In the upper part of the chromosphere helium becomes partially ionized.

Above the chromosphere, in a thin (about ) transition region, the temperature rises rapidly from around in the upper chromosphere to coronal temperatures closer to . The temperature increase is facilitated by the full ionization of helium in the transition region, which significantly reduces radiative cooling of the plasma. The transition region does not occur at a well-defined altitude, but forms a kind of nimbus around chromospheric features such as spicules and filaments, and is in constant, chaotic motion. The transition region is not easily visible from Earth&#x27;s surface, but is readily observable from space by instruments sensitive to extreme ultraviolet.

The corona is the next layer of the Sun. The low corona, near the surface of the Sun, has a particle density around 1015 m−3 to 1016 m−3. The average temperature of the corona and solar wind is about 1,000,000–2,000,000 K; however, in the hottest regions it is 8,000,000–20,000,000 K. Although no complete theory yet exists to account for the temperature of the corona, at least some of its heat is known to be from magnetic reconnection.
The corona is the extended atmosphere of the Sun, which has a volume much larger than the volume enclosed by the Sun&#x27;s photosphere. A flow of plasma outward from the Sun into interplanetary space is the solar wind.

The heliosphere, the tenuous outermost atmosphere of the Sun, is filled with solar wind plasma and is defined to begin at the distance where the flow of the solar wind becomes &quot;superalfvénic&quot;—that is, where the flow becomes faster than the speed of Alfvén waves, at approximately 20 solar radii (). Turbulence and dynamic forces in the heliosphere cannot affect the shape of the solar corona within, because the information can only travel at the speed of Alfvén waves. The solar wind travels outward continuously through the heliosphere, forming the solar magnetic field into a spiral shape, until it impacts the heliopause more than from the Sun. In December 2004, the &quot;Voyager 1&quot; probe passed through a shock front that is thought to be part of the heliopause. In late 2012, &quot;Voyager 1&quot; recorded a marked increase in cosmic ray collisions and a sharp drop in lower energy particles from the solar wind, which suggested that the probe had passed through the heliopause and entered the interstellar medium, and indeed did so on August 25, 2012, at approximately 122 astronomical units (18 Tm) from the Sun. The heliosphere has a heliotail which stretches out behind it due to the Sun&#x27;s peculiar motion through the galaxy.

On April 28, 2021, NASA&#x27;s Parker Solar Probe encountered the specific magnetic and particle conditions at 18.8 solar radii that indicated that it penetrated the Alfvén surface, the boundary separating the corona from the solar wind, defined as where the coronal plasma&#x27;s Alfvén speed and the large-scale solar wind speed are equal. During the flyby, Parker Solar Probe passed into and out of the corona several times. This proved the predictions that the Alfvén critical surface is not shaped like a smooth ball, but has spikes and valleys that wrinkle its surface.

== Solar radiation ==
The Sun emits light across the visible spectrum, so its color is white, with a CIE color-space index near (0.3, 0.3), when viewed from space or when the Sun is high in the sky. The Solar radiance per wavelength peaks in the green portion of the spectrum when viewed from space. When the Sun is very low in the sky, atmospheric scattering renders the Sun yellow, red, orange, or magenta, and in rare occasions even green or blue. Some cultures mentally picture the Sun as yellow and some even red; the cultural reasons for this are debated. The Sun is classed as a &quot;G2&quot; star, meaning it is a G-type star, with &quot;2&quot; indicating its surface temperature is in the second range of the G class.

The solar constant is the amount of power that the Sun deposits per unit area that is directly exposed to sunlight. The solar constant is equal to approximately (watts per square meter) at a distance of one astronomical unit (AU) from the Sun (that is, at or near Earth&#x27;s orbit). Sunlight on the surface of Earth is attenuated by Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, so that less power arrives at the surface (closer to ) in clear conditions when the Sun is near the zenith. Sunlight at the top of Earth&#x27;s atmosphere is composed (by total energy) of about 50% infrared light, 40% visible light, and 10% ultraviolet light. The atmosphere filters out over 70% of solar ultraviolet, especially at the shorter wavelengths. Solar ultraviolet radiation ionizes Earth&#x27;s dayside upper atmosphere, creating the electrically conducting ionosphere.

Ultraviolet light from the Sun has antiseptic properties and can be used to sanitize tools and water. This radiation causes sunburn, and has other biological effects such as the production of vitamin D and sun tanning. It is the main cause of skin cancer. Ultraviolet light is strongly attenuated by Earth&#x27;s ozone layer, so that the amount of UV varies greatly with latitude and has been partially responsible for many biological adaptations, including variations in human skin color.

High-energy gamma ray photons initially released with fusion reactions in the core are almost immediately absorbed by the solar plasma of the radiative zone, usually after traveling only a few millimeters. Re-emission happens in a random direction and usually at slightly lower energy. With this sequence of emissions and absorptions, it takes a long time for radiation to reach the Sun&#x27;s surface. Estimates of the photon travel time range between 10,000 and 170,000 years. In contrast, it takes only 2.3 seconds for neutrinos, which account for about 2% of the total energy production of the Sun, to reach the surface. Because energy transport in the Sun is a process that involves photons in thermodynamic equilibrium with matter, the time scale of energy transport in the Sun is longer, on the order of 30,000,000 years. This is the time it would take the Sun to return to a stable state if the rate of energy generation in its core were suddenly changed.

Electron neutrinos are released by fusion reactions in the core, but, unlike photons, they rarely interact with matter, so almost all are able to escape the Sun immediately. However, measurements of the number of these neutrinos produced in the Sun are lower than theories predict by a factor of 3. In 2001, the discovery of neutrino oscillation resolved the discrepancy: the Sun emits the number of electron neutrinos predicted by the theory, but neutrino detectors were missing of them because the neutrinos had changed flavor by the time they were detected.

== Magnetic activity ==

The Sun has a stellar magnetic field that varies across its surface. Its polar field is , whereas the field is typically in features on the Sun called sunspots and in solar prominences. The magnetic field varies in time and location. The quasi-periodic 11-year solar cycle is the most prominent variation in which the number and size of sunspots waxes and wanes.&lt;ref name=&quot;doi10.1146/annurev-astro-081913-040012&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

The solar magnetic field extends well beyond the Sun itself. The electrically conducting solar wind plasma carries the Sun&#x27;s magnetic field into space, forming what is called the interplanetary magnetic field. In an approximation known as ideal magnetohydrodynamics, plasma particles only move along magnetic field lines. As a result, the outward-flowing solar wind stretches the interplanetary magnetic field outward, forcing it into a roughly radial structure. For a simple dipolar solar magnetic field, with opposite hemispherical polarities on either side of the solar magnetic equator, a thin current sheet is formed in the solar wind. At great distances, the rotation of the Sun twists the dipolar magnetic field and corresponding current sheet into an Archimedean spiral structure called the &quot;Parker spiral&quot;.

=== Sunspot ===

Sunspots are visible as dark patches on the Sun&#x27;s photosphere and correspond to concentrations of magnetic field where convective transport of heat is inhibited from the solar interior to the surface. As a result, sunspots are slightly cooler than the surrounding photosphere, so they appear dark. At a typical solar minimum, few sunspots are visible, and occasionally none can be seen at all. Those that do appear are at high solar latitudes. As the solar cycle progresses toward its maximum, sunspots tend to form closer to the solar equator, a phenomenon known as &quot;Spörer&#x27;s law&quot;. The largest sunspots can be tens of thousands of kilometers across.

An 11-year sunspot cycle is half of a 22-year Babcock–Leighton dynamo cycle, which corresponds to an oscillatory exchange of energy between toroidal and poloidal solar magnetic fields. At solar-cycle maximum, the external poloidal dipolar magnetic field is near its dynamo-cycle minimum strength; but an internal toroidal quadrupolar field, generated through differential rotation within the tachocline, is near its maximum strength. At this point in the dynamo cycle, buoyant upwelling within the convective zone forces emergence of the toroidal magnetic field through the photosphere, giving rise to pairs of sunspots, roughly aligned east–west and having footprints with opposite magnetic polarities. The magnetic polarity of sunspot pairs alternates every solar cycle, a phenomenon described by Hale&#x27;s law.

During the solar cycle&#x27;s declining phase, energy shifts from the internal toroidal magnetic field to the external poloidal field, and sunspots diminish in number and size. At solar-cycle minimum, the toroidal field is, correspondingly, at minimum strength, sunspots are relatively rare, and the poloidal field is at its maximum strength. With the rise of the next 11-year sunspot cycle, differential rotation shifts magnetic energy back from the poloidal to the toroidal field, but with a polarity that is opposite to the previous cycle. The process carries on continuously, and in an idealized, simplified scenario, each 11-year sunspot cycle corresponds to a change, then, in the overall polarity of the Sun&#x27;s large-scale magnetic field.

=== Solar activity ===

The Sun&#x27;s magnetic field leads to many effects that are collectively called solar activity. Solar flares and coronal mass ejections tend to occur at sunspot groups. Slowly changing high-speed streams of solar wind are emitted from coronal holes at the photospheric surface. Both coronal mass ejections and high-speed streams of solar wind carry plasma and the interplanetary magnetic field outward into the Solar System. The effects of solar activity on Earth include auroras at moderate to high latitudes and the disruption of radio communications and electric power. Solar activity is thought to have played a large role in the formation and evolution of the Solar System.

Change in solar irradiance over the 11 year solar cycle has been correlated with change in sunspot number. The solar cycle influences space weather conditions, including those surrounding Earth. For example, in the 17th century, the solar cycle appeared to have stopped entirely for several decades; few sunspots were observed during a period known as the Maunder minimum. This coincided in time with the era of the Little Ice Age, when Europe experienced unusually cold temperatures. Earlier extended minima have been discovered through analysis of tree rings and appear to have coincided with lower-than-average global temperatures.

=== Coronal heating ===

The temperature of the photosphere is approximately 6,000 K, whereas the temperature of the corona reaches . The high temperature of the corona shows that it is heated by something other than direct heat conduction from the photosphere.

It is thought that the energy necessary to heat the corona is provided by turbulent motion in the convection zone below the photosphere, and two main mechanisms have been proposed to explain coronal heating. The first is wave heating, in which sound, gravitational or magnetohydrodynamic waves are produced by turbulence in the convection zone. These waves travel upward and dissipate in the corona, depositing their energy in the ambient matter in the form of heat. The other is magnetic heating, in which magnetic energy is continuously built up by photospheric motion and released through magnetic reconnection in the form of large solar flares and myriad similar but smaller events—nanoflares.

Currently, it is unclear whether waves are an efficient heating mechanism. All waves except Alfvén waves have been found to dissipate or refract before reaching the corona. In addition, Alfvén waves do not easily dissipate in the corona. Current research focus has therefore shifted towards flare heating mechanisms.

== Life phases ==
The Sun today is roughly halfway through the main-sequence portion of its life. It has not changed dramatically in over four billion years and will remain fairly stable for about five billion more. However, after hydrogen fusion in its core has stopped, the Sun will undergo dramatic changes, both internally and externally.

=== Formation ===

The Sun formed about 4.6 billion years ago from the collapse of part of a giant molecular cloud that consisted mostly of hydrogen and helium and that probably gave birth to many other stars. This age is estimated using computer models of stellar evolution and through nucleocosmochronology. The result is consistent with the radiometric date of the oldest Solar System material, at 4.567 billion years ago. Studies of ancient meteorites reveal traces of stable daughter nuclei of short-lived isotopes, such as iron-60, that form only in exploding, short-lived stars. This indicates that one or more supernovae must have occurred near the location where the Sun formed. A shock wave from a nearby supernova would have triggered the formation of the Sun by compressing the matter within the molecular cloud and causing certain regions to collapse under their own gravity. As one fragment of the cloud collapsed it also began to rotate due to conservation of angular momentum and heat up with the increasing pressure. Much of the mass became concentrated in the center, whereas the rest flattened out into a disk that would become the planets and other Solar System bodies. Gravity and pressure within the core of the cloud generated a lot of heat as it accumulated more matter from the surrounding disk, eventually triggering nuclear fusion.

The stars HD 162826 and HD 186302 share similarities with the Sun and are thus hypothesized to be its stellar siblings, formed in the same molecular cloud.

=== Main sequence ===
The Sun is about halfway through its main-sequence stage, during which nuclear fusion reactions in its core fuse hydrogen into helium. Each second, more than four billion kilograms of matter are converted into energy within the Sun&#x27;s core, producing neutrinos and solar radiation. At this rate, the Sun has so far converted around 100 times the mass of Earth into energy, about 0.03% of the total mass of the Sun. The Sun will spend a total of approximately 10 to 11 billion years as a main-sequence star before the red giant phase of the Sun. At the 8 billion year mark, the Sun will be at its hottest point according to the ESA&#x27;s &quot;Gaia&quot; space observatory mission in 2022.

The Sun is gradually becoming hotter in its core, hotter at the surface, larger in radius, and more luminous during its time on the main sequence: since the beginning of its main sequence life, it has expanded in radius by 15% and the surface has increased in temperature from to , resulting in a 48% increase in luminosity from 0.677 solar luminosities to its present-day 1.0 solar luminosity. This occurs because the helium atoms in the core have a higher mean molecular weight than the hydrogen atoms that were fused, resulting in less thermal pressure. The core is therefore shrinking, allowing the outer layers of the Sun to move closer to the center, releasing gravitational potential energy. According to the virial theorem, half of this released gravitational energy goes into heating, which leads to a gradual increase in the rate at which fusion occurs and thus an increase in the luminosity. This process speeds up as the core gradually becomes denser. At present, it is increasing in brightness by about 1% every 100 million years. It will take at least 1 billion years from now to deplete liquid water from the Earth from such increase. After that, the Earth will cease to be able to support complex, multicellular life and the last remaining multicellular organisms on the planet will suffer a final, complete mass extinction.

=== After core hydrogen exhaustion ===
The Sun does not have enough mass to explode as a supernova. Instead, when it runs out of hydrogen in the core in approximately 5 billion years, core hydrogen fusion will stop, and there will be nothing to prevent the core from contracting. The release of gravitational potential energy will cause the luminosity of the Sun to increase, ending the main sequence phase and leading the Sun to expand over the next billion years: first into a subgiant, and then into a red giant. The heating due to gravitational contraction will also lead to expansion of the Sun and hydrogen fusion in a shell just outside the core, where unfused hydrogen remains, contributing to the increased luminosity, which will eventually reach more than 1,000 times its present luminosity. When the Sun enters its red-giant branch (RGB) phase, it will engulf (and very likely destroy) Mercury and Venus. According to a 2008 article, Earth&#x27;s orbit will have initially expanded to at most due to the Sun&#x27;s loss of mass. However, Earth&#x27;s orbit will then start shrinking due to tidal forces (and, eventually, drag from the lower chromosphere) so that it is engulfed by the Sun during the tip of the red-giant branch phase 7.59 billion years from now, 3.8 and 1 million years after Mercury and Venus have respectively suffered the same fate.

By the time the Sun reaches the tip of the red-giant branch, it will be about 256 times larger than it is today, with a radius of . The Sun will spend around a billion years in the RGB and lose around a third of its mass.

After the red-giant branch, the Sun has approximately 120 million years of active life left, but much happens. First, the core (full of degenerate helium) ignites violently in the helium flash; it is estimated that 6% of the core—itself 40% of the Sun&#x27;s mass—will be converted into carbon within a matter of minutes through the triple-alpha process. The Sun then shrinks to around 10 times its current size and 50 times the luminosity, with a temperature a little lower than today. It will then have reached the red clump or horizontal branch, but a star of the Sun&#x27;s metallicity does not evolve blueward along the horizontal branch. Instead, it just becomes moderately larger and more luminous over about 100 million years as it continues to react helium in the core.

When the helium is exhausted, the Sun will repeat the expansion it followed when the hydrogen in the core was exhausted. This time, however, it all happens faster, and the Sun becomes larger and more luminous. This is the asymptotic-giant-branch phase, and the Sun is alternately reacting hydrogen in a shell or helium in a deeper shell. After about 20 million years on the early asymptotic giant branch, the Sun becomes increasingly unstable, with rapid mass loss and thermal pulses that increase the size and luminosity for a few hundred years every 100,000 years or so. The thermal pulses become larger each time, with the later pulses pushing the luminosity to as much as 5,000 times the current level. Despite this, the Sun&#x27;s maximum AGB radius will not be as large as its tip-RGB maximum: 179 , or about .

Models vary depending on the rate and timing of mass loss. Models that have higher mass loss on the red-giant branch produce smaller, less luminous stars at the tip of the asymptotic giant branch, perhaps only 2,000 times the luminosity and less than 200 times the radius. For the Sun, four thermal pulses are predicted before it completely loses its outer envelope and starts to make a planetary nebula.

The post-asymptotic-giant-branch evolution is even faster. The luminosity stays approximately constant as the temperature increases, with the ejected half of the Sun&#x27;s mass becoming ionized into a planetary nebula as the exposed core reaches , as if it is in a sort of blue loop. The final naked core, a white dwarf, will have a temperature of over and contain an estimated 54.05% of the Sun&#x27;s present-day mass. Simulations indicate that the Sun may be among the least massive stars capable of forming a planetary nebula. The planetary nebula will disperse in about 10,000 years, but the white dwarf will survive for trillions of years before fading to a hypothetical super-dense black dwarf. As such, it would give off no more energy.

== Location ==
=== Solar System ===
The Sun has eight known planets orbiting it. This includes four terrestrial planets (Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars), two gas giants (Jupiter and Saturn), and two ice giants (Uranus and Neptune). The Solar System also has nine bodies generally considered as dwarf planets and some more candidates, an asteroid belt, numerous comets, and a large number of icy bodies which lie beyond the orbit of Neptune. Six of the planets and many smaller bodies also have their own natural satellites: in particular, the satellite systems of Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus are in some ways like miniature versions of the Sun&#x27;s system.

The Sun is moved by the gravitational pull of the planets. The center of the Sun moves around the Solar System barycenter, within a range from 0.1 to 2.2 solar radii. The Sun&#x27;s motion around the barycenter approximately repeats every 179 years, rotated by about 30° due primarily to the synodic period of Jupiter and Saturn.

The Sun&#x27;s gravitational field is estimated to dominate the gravitational forces of surrounding stars out to about two light-years (). Lower estimates for the radius of the Oort cloud, by contrast, do not place it farther than . Most of the mass is orbiting in the region between 3,000 and . The furthest known objects, such as Comet West, have aphelia around from the Sun. The Sun&#x27;s Hill sphere with respect to the galactic nucleus, the effective range of its gravitational influence, was calculated by G. A. Chebotarev to be 230,000 AU.

=== Celestial neighborhood ===
== Motion ==


The Sun, taking along the whole Solar System, orbits the galaxy&#x27;s center of mass at an average speed of 230 km/s (828,000 km/h) or 143 mi/s (514,000 mph), taking about 220–250 million Earth years to complete a revolution (a Galactic year), having done so about 20 times since the Sun&#x27;s formation. The direction of the Sun&#x27;s motion, the Solar apex, is roughly in the direction of the star Vega.

The Milky Way is moving with respect to the cosmic microwave background radiation (CMB) in the direction of the constellation Hydra with a speed of 550 km/s. Since the Sun is moving with respect to the galactic center in the direction of Cygnus (galactic longitude 90°; latitude 0°) at more than 200km/sec, the resultant velocity with respect to the CMB is about 370 km/s in the direction of Crater or Leo (galactic latitude 264°, latitude 48°).

== Observational history ==

=== Early understanding ===
In many prehistoric and ancient cultures, the Sun was thought to be a solar deity or other supernatural entity. In the early first millennium BC, Babylonian astronomers observed that the Sun&#x27;s motion along the ecliptic is not uniform, though they did not know why; it is today known that this is due to the movement of Earth in an elliptic orbit, moving faster when it is nearer to the Sun at perihelion and moving slower when it is farther away at aphelion.

One of the first people to offer a scientific or philosophical explanation for the Sun was the Greek philosopher Anaxagoras. He reasoned that it was a giant flaming ball of metal even larger than the land of the Peloponnesus and that the Moon reflected the light of the Sun. Eratosthenes estimated the distance between Earth and the Sun in the third century BC as &quot;of stadia myriads 400 and 80000&quot;, the translation of which is ambiguous, implying either 4,080,000 stadia (755,000 km) or 804,000,000 stadia (148 to 153 million kilometers or 0.99 to 1.02 AU); the latter value is correct to within a few percent. In the first century AD, Ptolemy estimated the distance as 1,210 times the radius of Earth, approximately .

The theory that the Sun is the center around which the planets orbit was first proposed by the ancient Greek Aristarchus of Samos in the third century BC, and later adopted by Seleucus of Seleucia (see Heliocentrism). This view was developed in a more detailed mathematical model of a heliocentric system in the 16th century by Nicolaus Copernicus.

=== Development of scientific understanding ===

Observations of sunspots were recorded during the Han dynasty (206 BC–AD 220) by Chinese astronomers, who maintained records of these observations for centuries. Averroes also provided a description of sunspots in the 12th century. The invention of the telescope in the early 17th century permitted detailed observations of sunspots by Thomas Harriot, Galileo Galilei and other astronomers. Galileo posited that sunspots were on the surface of the Sun rather than small objects passing between Earth and the Sun.

Arabic astronomical contributions include Al-Battani&#x27;s discovery that the direction of the Sun&#x27;s apogee (the place in the Sun&#x27;s orbit against the fixed stars where it seems to be moving slowest) is changing. In modern heliocentric terms, this is caused by a gradual motion of the aphelion of the &quot;Earth&#x27;s&quot; orbit. Ibn Yunus observed more than 10,000 entries for the Sun&#x27;s position for many years using a large astrolabe.

The first reasonably accurate distance to the Sun was determined in 1684 by Giovanni Domenico Cassini. Knowing that direct measurements of the solar parallax were difficult, he chose to measure the Martian parallax. Having sent Jean Richer to Cayenne, part of French Guiana, for simultaneous measurements, Cassini in Paris determined the parallax of Mars when Mars was at its closest to Earth in 1672. Using the circumference distance between the two observations, Cassini calculated the Earth-Mars distance, then used Kepler&#x27;s laws to determine the Earth-Sun distance. His value, about 10% smaller than modern values, was much larger than all previous estimates.

From an observation of a transit of Venus in 1032, the Persian astronomer and polymath Ibn Sina concluded that Venus was closer to Earth than the Sun. In 1677, Edmond Halley observed a transit of Mercury across the Sun, leading him to realize that observations of the solar parallax of a planet (more ideally using the transit of Venus) could be used to trigonometrically determine the distances between Earth, Venus, and the Sun. Careful observations of the 1769 transit of Venus allowed astronomers to calculate the average Earth–Sun distance as , only 0.8% greater than the modern value.
In 1666, Isaac Newton observed the Sun&#x27;s light using a prism, and showed that it is made up of light of many colors. In 1800, William Herschel discovered infrared radiation beyond the red part of the solar spectrum. The 19th century saw advancement in spectroscopic studies of the Sun; Joseph von Fraunhofer recorded more than 600 absorption lines in the spectrum, the strongest of which are still often referred to as Fraunhofer lines. The 20th century brought about several specialized systems for observing the Sun, especially at different narrowband wavelengths, such as those using Calcium H (396.9 nm), K (393.37 nm) and Hydrogen-alpha (656.46 nm) filtering.

During early studies of the optical spectrum of the photosphere, some absorption lines were found that did not correspond to any chemical elements then known on Earth. In 1868, Norman Lockyer hypothesized that these absorption lines were caused by a new element that he dubbed &quot;helium&quot;, after the Greek Sun god Helios. Twenty-five years later, helium was isolated on Earth.

In the early years of the modern scientific era, the source of the Sun&#x27;s energy was a significant puzzle. Lord Kelvin suggested that the Sun is a gradually cooling liquid body that is radiating an internal store of heat. Kelvin and Hermann von Helmholtz then proposed a gravitational contraction mechanism to explain the energy output, but the resulting age estimate was only 20 million years, well short of the time span of at least 300 million years suggested by some geological discoveries of that time. In 1890, Lockyer proposed a meteoritic hypothesis for the formation and evolution of the Sun.

Not until 1904 was a documented solution offered. Ernest Rutherford suggested that the Sun&#x27;s output could be maintained by an internal source of heat, and suggested radioactive decay as the source. However, it would be Albert Einstein who would provide the essential clue to the source of the Sun&#x27;s energy output with his mass–energy equivalence relation . In 1920, Sir Arthur Eddington proposed that the pressures and temperatures at the core of the Sun could produce a nuclear fusion reaction that merged hydrogen (protons) into helium nuclei, resulting in a production of energy from the net change in mass. The preponderance of hydrogen in the Sun was confirmed in 1925 by Cecilia Payne using the ionization theory developed by Meghnad Saha. The theoretical concept of fusion was developed in the 1930s by the astrophysicists Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar and Hans Bethe. Hans Bethe calculated the details of the two main energy-producing nuclear reactions that power the Sun. In 1957, Margaret Burbidge, Geoffrey Burbidge, William Fowler and Fred Hoyle showed that most of the elements in the universe have been synthesized by nuclear reactions inside stars, some like the Sun.

=== Solar space missions ===
The first satellites designed for long term observation of the Sun from interplanetary space were NASA&#x27;s Pioneers 6, 7, 8 and 9, which were launched between 1959 and 1968. These probes orbited the Sun at a distance similar to that of Earth, and made the first detailed measurements of the solar wind and the solar magnetic field. Pioneer 9 operated for a particularly long time, transmitting data until May 1983.

In the 1970s, two Helios spacecraft and the Skylab Apollo Telescope Mount provided scientists with significant new data on solar wind and the solar corona. The Helios 1 and 2 probes were U.S.–German collaborations that studied the solar wind from an orbit carrying the spacecraft inside Mercury&#x27;s orbit at perihelion. The Skylab space station, launched by NASA in 1973, included a solar observatory module called the Apollo Telescope Mount that was operated by astronauts resident on the station. Skylab made the first time-resolved observations of the solar transition region and of ultraviolet emissions from the solar corona. Discoveries included the first observations of coronal mass ejections, then called &quot;coronal transients&quot;, and of coronal holes, now known to be intimately associated with the solar wind.

In 1980, the Solar Maximum Mission probes were launched by NASA. This spacecraft was designed to observe gamma rays, X-rays and UV radiation from solar flares during a time of high solar activity and solar luminosity. Just a few months after launch, however, an electronics failure caused the probe to go into standby mode, and it spent the next three years in this inactive state. In 1984, Space Shuttle &quot;Challenger&quot; mission STS-41C retrieved the satellite and repaired its electronics before re-releasing it into orbit. The Solar Maximum Mission subsequently acquired thousands of images of the solar corona before re-entering Earth&#x27;s atmosphere in June 1989.

Launched in 1991, Japan&#x27;s Yohkoh (&quot;Sunbeam&quot;) satellite observed solar flares at X-ray wavelengths. Mission data allowed scientists to identify several different types of flares and demonstrated that the corona away from regions of peak activity was much more dynamic and active than had previously been supposed. Yohkoh observed an entire solar cycle but went into standby mode when an annular eclipse in 2001 caused it to lose its lock on the Sun. It was destroyed by atmospheric re-entry in 2005.

The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory, jointly built by the European Space Agency and NASA, was launched on 2 December 1995. Originally intended to serve a two-year mission, SOHO remains in operation as of 2024. Situated at the Lagrangian point between Earth and the Sun (at which the gravitational pull from both is equal), SOHO has provided a constant view of the Sun at many wavelengths since its launch. Besides its direct solar observation, SOHO has enabled the discovery of a large number of comets, mostly tiny sungrazing comets that incinerate as they pass the Sun.
All these satellites have observed the Sun from the plane of the ecliptic, and so have only observed its equatorial regions in detail. The &quot;Ulysses&quot; probe was launched in 1990 to study the Sun&#x27;s polar regions. It first traveled to Jupiter, to &quot;slingshot&quot; into an orbit that would take it far above the plane of the ecliptic. Once &quot;Ulysses&quot; was in its scheduled orbit, it began observing the solar wind and magnetic field strength at high solar latitudes, finding that the solar wind from high latitudes was moving at about 750 km/s, which was slower than expected, and that there were large magnetic waves emerging from high latitudes that scattered galactic cosmic rays.

Elemental abundances in the photosphere are well known from spectroscopic studies, but the composition of the interior of the Sun is more poorly understood. A solar wind sample return mission, &quot;Genesis&quot;, was designed to allow astronomers to directly measure the composition of solar material.

== Observation by eyes ==
===Exposure to the eye===
The brightness of the Sun can cause pain from looking at it with the naked eye; however, doing so for brief periods is not hazardous for normal non-dilated eyes. Looking directly at the Sun (sungazing) causes phosphene visual artifacts and temporary partial blindness. It also delivers about 4 milliwatts of sunlight to the retina, slightly heating it and potentially causing damage in eyes that cannot respond properly to the brightness. Viewing of the direct Sun with the naked eye can cause UV-induced, sunburn-like lesions on the retina beginning after about 100 seconds, particularly under conditions where the UV light from the Sun is intense and well focused.

Viewing the Sun through light-concentrating optics such as binoculars may result in permanent damage to the retina without an appropriate filter that blocks UV and substantially dims the sunlight. When using an attenuating filter to view the Sun, the viewer is cautioned to use a filter specifically designed for that use. Some improvised filters that pass UV or IR rays, can actually harm the eye at high brightness levels. Brief glances at the midday Sun through an unfiltered telescope can cause permanent damage.

During sunrise and sunset, sunlight is attenuated because of Rayleigh scattering and Mie scattering from a particularly long passage through Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, and the Sun is sometimes faint enough to be viewed comfortably with the naked eye or safely with optics (provided there is no risk of bright sunlight suddenly appearing through a break between clouds). Hazy conditions, atmospheric dust, and high humidity contribute to this atmospheric attenuation.

===Phenomena===
An optical phenomenon, known as a green flash, can sometimes be seen shortly after sunset or before sunrise. The flash is caused by light from the Sun just below the horizon being bent (usually through a temperature inversion) towards the observer. Light of shorter wavelengths (violet, blue, green) is bent more than that of longer wavelengths (yellow, orange, red) but the violet and blue light is scattered more, leaving light that is perceived as green.

== Religious aspects ==
Solar deities play a major role in many world religions and mythologies. Worship of the Sun was central to civilizations such as the ancient Egyptians, the Inca of South America and the Aztecs of what is now Mexico. In religions such as Hinduism, the Sun is still considered a god, known as Surya. Many ancient monuments were constructed with solar phenomena in mind; for example, stone megaliths accurately mark the summer or winter solstice (for example in Nabta Playa, Egypt; Mnajdra, Malta; and Stonehenge, England); Newgrange, a prehistoric human-built mount in Ireland, was designed to detect the winter solstice; the pyramid of El Castillo at Chichén Itzá in Mexico is designed to cast shadows in the shape of serpents climbing the pyramid at the vernal and autumnal equinoxes.

The ancient Sumerians believed that the Sun was Utu, the god of justice and twin brother of Inanna, the Queen of Heaven. Later, Utu was identified with the East Semitic god Shamash. Utu was regarded as a helper-deity, who aided those in distress.
From at least the Fourth Dynasty of Ancient Egypt, the Sun was worshipped as the god Ra, portrayed as a falcon-headed divinity surmounted by the solar disk. In the New Empire period, the Sun became identified with the dung beetle. In the form of the sun disc Aten, the Sun had a brief resurgence during the Amarna Period when it again became the preeminent, if not only, divinity for the Pharaoh Akhenaton. The Egyptians portrayed the god Ra as being carried across the sky in a solar barque, accompanied by lesser gods, and to the Greeks, he was Helios, carried by a chariot drawn by fiery horses. From the reign of Elagabalus in the late Roman Empire the Sun&#x27;s birthday was a holiday celebrated as Sol Invictus (literally &quot;Unconquered Sun&quot;) soon after the winter solstice. The Sun appears from Earth to revolve once a year along the ecliptic through the zodiac, and so Greek astronomers categorized it as one of the seven planets (Greek &quot;planetes&quot;, &quot;wanderer&quot;); the naming of the days of the weeks after the seven planets dates to the Roman era.

In Proto-Indo-European religion, the Sun was personified as the goddess &quot;*Seh2ul&quot;. Derivatives of this goddess in Indo-European languages include the Old Norse &quot;Sól&quot;, Sanskrit &quot;Surya&quot;, Gaulish &quot;Sulis&quot;, Lithuanian &quot;Saulė&quot;, and Slavic &quot;Solntse&quot;. In ancient Greek religion, the sun deity was the male god Helios, who in later times was syncretized with Apollo.

In ancient Roman culture, Sunday was the day of the sun god. In paganism, the Sun was a source of life. It was the center of a popular cult among Romans, who would stand at dawn to catch the first rays of sunshine as they prayed. The celebration of the winter solstice (which influenced Christmas) was part of the Roman cult of the unconquered Sun (Sol Invictus). It was adopted as the Sabbath day by Christians. The symbol of light was a pagan device adopted by Christians, and perhaps the most important one that did not come from Jewish traditions. Christian churches were built so that the congregation faced toward the sunrise. In the Bible, the Book of Malachi mentions the &quot;Sun of Righteousness&quot;, which some Christians have interpreted as a reference to the Messiah (Christ). 

Tonatiuh, the Aztec god of the sun, was closely associated with human sacrifice. The sun goddess Amaterasu is the most important deity in the Shinto religion, and she is believed to be the direct ancestor of all Japanese emperors.

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Sun in fiction


== Notes ==

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==
* Astronomy Cast: The Sun
* Satellite observations of solar luminosity 
* Animation – The Future of the Sun
* &quot;Thermonuclear Art – The Sun In Ultra-HD&quot; | Goddard Space Flight Center
* &quot;A Decade of Sun&quot; | Goddard Space Flight Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="4" end="7" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="15" end="19" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="41" end="53" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="87" end="93" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="101" end="107" title="Plasma (physics)" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q192593" start="119" end="132" title="incandescence" label="incandescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="136" end="150" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783831" start="204" end="211" title="surface" label="surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="222" end="235" title="visible light" label="visible light"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="240" end="258" title="infrared radiation" label="infrared radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="271" end="282" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="346" end="350" title="life" label="life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="354" end="359" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443929" start="381" end="401" title="The Sun in culture" label="object of veneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="482" end="491" title="Ancient history" label="antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q649112" start="513" end="528" title="Galactic Center" label="Galactic Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="563" end="573" title="light-year" label="light-year"/>
<link wikidata="Q909315" start="608" end="620" title="light-minute" label="light-minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q48440" start="628" end="640" title="Solar radius" label="Its diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q180892" start="679" end="687" title="solar mass" label="Its mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="829" end="833" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="846" end="854" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="882" end="888" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="957" end="963" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="965" end="971" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q654" start="973" end="977" title="neon" label="neon"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="983" end="987" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5864" start="1003" end="1028" title="G-type main-sequence star" label="G-type main-sequence star"/>
<link wikidata="Q329273" start="1161" end="1183" title="gravitational collapse" label="gravitational collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q272447" start="1221" end="1236" title="molecular cloud" label="molecular cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535" start="1336" end="1359" title="formation and evolution of the Solar System" label="became the Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q619448" start="1453" end="1457" title="solar core" label="core"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="1517" end="1526" title="kilograms" label="kilograms"/>
<link wikidata="Q35875" start="1585" end="1603" title="mass–energy equivalence" label="matter into energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057093" start="1648" end="1663" title="hydrogen fusion" label="hydrogen fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q208641" start="1741" end="1764" title="hydrostatic equilibrium" label="hydrostatic equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q50081" start="1917" end="1926" title="red giant" label="red giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="2170" end="2181" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976" start="2371" end="2382" title="black dwarf" label="black dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="2479" end="2490" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="2518" end="2536" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q27175" start="2548" end="2560" title="West Frisian language" label="West Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="2563" end="2568" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25433" start="2571" end="2581" title="Low German" label="Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q279350" start="2584" end="2599" title="Standard German" label="Standard German"/>
<link wikidata="Q29540" start="2602" end="2610" title="Bavarian language" label="Bavarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="2613" end="2622" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q35722" start="2629" end="2635" title="Gothic language" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="2664" end="2678" title="Proto-Germanic" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="2765" end="2787" title="Indo-European language" label="Indo-European language"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="2819" end="2829" title="nominative" label="nominative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="2883" end="2891" title="genitive" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2933" end="2938" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2941" end="2954" title="ancient Greek" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="2959" end="2964" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="2969" end="2974" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="3033" end="3040" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="3282" end="3289" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="3294" end="3300" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="3303" end="3312" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="3616" end="3622" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199937" start="3630" end="3633" title="Sol (Roman mythology)" label="Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q904031" start="3747" end="3750" title="Sol (day on Mars)" label="sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444002" start="3843" end="3852" title="solar day" label="solar day"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="3879" end="3883" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q645745" start="3890" end="3909" title="astronomical symbol" label="astronomical symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q180892" start="4000" end="4010" title="Solar mass" label="Solar mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q48440" start="4029" end="4041" title="Solar radius" label="Solar radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q843877" start="4063" end="4079" title="Solar luminosity" label="Solar luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5864" start="4191" end="4216" title="G-type main-sequence star" label="G-type main-sequence star"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="4287" end="4305" title="absolute magnitude" label="absolute magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="4376" end="4385" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893" start="4405" end="4414" title="red dwarf" label="red dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436016" start="4480" end="4492" title="Population I stars" label="Population I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="4635" end="4644" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q428867" start="4675" end="4684" title="Abundance of the chemical elements" label="abundance"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="4732" end="4736" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="4741" end="4748" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436016" start="4808" end="4821" title="Population II" label="Population II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12571883" start="4912" end="4923" title="endothermic" label="endothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q202651" start="4968" end="4981" title="Nuclear transmutation" label="transmutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064418" start="4990" end="5008" title="neutron absorption" label="neutron absorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091248" start="5073" end="5113" title="List of brightest natural objects in the sky" label="brightest object in the Earth&amp;#x27;s sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="5123" end="5141" title="apparent magnitude" label="apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409" start="5223" end="5229" title="Sirius" label="Sirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="5416" end="5426" title="perihelion" label="perihelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="5447" end="5455" title="aphelion" label="aphelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q193788" start="5703" end="5711" title="sunlight" label="sunlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="5749" end="5763" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="5776" end="5796" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s climate" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372" start="5927" end="5938" title="photosphere" label="photosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q212750" start="6250" end="6260" title="oblateness" label="oblateness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297564" start="6513" end="6545" title="perihelion precession of Mercury" label="perihelion precession of Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="6573" end="6591" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q382494" start="6720" end="6746" title="Solar Dynamics Observatory" label="Solar Dynamics Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q762088" start="6755" end="6761" title="Picard (satellite)" label="Picard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209314" start="7169" end="7174" title="poles of astronomical bodies" label="poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724743" start="7181" end="7202" title="Solar rotation" label="differential rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q160329" start="7216" end="7233" title="convection" label="convective motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q169973" start="7264" end="7278" title="Coriolis effect" label="Coriolis force"/>
<link wikidata="Q16726164" start="7642" end="7658" title="counterclockwise" label="counterclockwise"/>
<link wikidata="Q112881" start="7697" end="7709" title="solar analog" label="solar analog"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731515" start="7969" end="7985" title="Magnetic braking (astronomy)" label="magnetic braking"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="8051" end="8061" title="solar wind" label="solar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="8313" end="8321" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="8326" end="8332" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q217030" start="8497" end="8503" title="metallicity" label="metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="8567" end="8573" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="8611" end="8617" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q654" start="8626" end="8630" title="neon" label="neon"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="8643" end="8647" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="8749" end="8768" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q837317" start="8961" end="8985" title="Big Bang nucleosynthesis" label="Big Bang nucleosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057093" start="9057" end="9098" title="stellar nucleosynthesis" label="produced by previous generations of stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472" start="9177" end="9205" title="stellar evolution" label="final stages of stellar life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="9228" end="9237" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="9652" end="9659" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q179635" start="9712" end="9731" title="Heat transfer" label="Heat is transferred"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9809" end="9823" title="#Radiative zone" label="Radiative zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q217030" start="10138" end="10149" title="metallicity" label="metallicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q204903" start="10184" end="10196" title="Protostar" label="protostellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="10404" end="10417" title="main sequence" label="main sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q50081" start="10431" end="10440" title="red giant" label="red giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q752171" start="10665" end="10677" title="astronomical spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="10739" end="10749" title="meteorites" label="meteorites"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="11214" end="11220" title="kelvin" label="kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q320638" start="11304" end="11308" title="Solar and Heliospheric Observatory" label="SOHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q223073" start="11518" end="11537" title="proton–proton chain" label="proton–proton chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q222971" start="11693" end="11702" title="CNO cycle" label="CNO cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q209233" start="11892" end="11906" title="thermal energy" label="thermal energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q103517" start="12387" end="12401" title="alpha particle" label="alpha particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="12614" end="12620" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q131299" start="12874" end="12884" title="Yotta-" label="yottawatts"/>
<link wikidata="Q193227" start="12898" end="12913" title="TNT equivalent" label="megatons of TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q25517" start="13118" end="13129" title="cubic metre" label="cubic metre"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="13256" end="13260" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063254" start="13325" end="13342" title="Karl Kruszelnicki" label="Karl Kruszelnicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q212254" start="13385" end="13397" title="compost pile" label="compost pile"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583695" start="13539" end="13545" title="thermal expansion" label="expand"/>
<link wikidata="Q803623" start="13661" end="13673" title="Perturbation (astronomy)" label="perturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48440" start="13978" end="13989" title="Solar radius" label="solar radii"/>
<link wikidata="Q192593" start="13991" end="14008" title="thermal radiation" label="thermal radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q554388" start="14167" end="14187" title="temperature gradient" label="temperature gradient"/>
<link wikidata="Q66900467" start="14218" end="14238" title="adiabatic lapse rate" label="adiabatic lapse rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335" start="14340" end="14349" title="radiation" label="radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="14381" end="14385" title="Ions" label="Ions"/>
<link wikidata="Q31767" start="14737" end="14747" title="tachocline" label="tachocline"/>
<link wikidata="Q128034" start="14884" end="14899" title="convection zone" label="convection zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q657936" start="14919" end="14924" title="shear (fluid)" label="shear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377388" start="15069" end="15081" title="solar dynamo" label="solar dynamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="15126" end="15140" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q845657" start="16395" end="16412" title="solar granulation" label="solar granulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q29010" start="16439" end="16455" title="supergranulation" label="supergranulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019460" start="16659" end="16671" title="Bénard cells" label="Bénard cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q691914" start="16832" end="16838" title="opacity (optics)" label="opaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q29004" start="17048" end="17055" title="Hydrogen anion" label="H− ions"/>
<link wikidata="Q772102" start="17519" end="17533" title="limb darkening" label="limb darkening"/>
<link wikidata="Q161424" start="17602" end="17612" title="black-body" label="black-body"/>
<link wikidata="Q13553575" start="17653" end="17668" title="absorption line" label="absorption line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="17819" end="17842" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q190003" start="18079" end="18091" title="chromosphere" label="chromosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q128118" start="18097" end="18114" title="Solar transition region" label="transition region"/>
<link wikidata="Q113000019" start="18120" end="18126" title="Stellar corona" label="corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q131687" start="18136" end="18147" title="heliosphere" label="heliosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="18377" end="18392" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q645813" start="18559" end="18570" title="Alfvén wave" label="Alfvén wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q190382" start="19105" end="19112" title="ionization" label="ionized"/>
<link wikidata="Q186310" start="19526" end="19532" title="Halo (optical phenomenon)" label="nimbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q128106" start="19571" end="19579" title="Solar spicule" label="spicules"/>
<link wikidata="Q221699" start="19584" end="19593" title="Solar filament" label="filaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169" start="19733" end="19738" title="outer space" label="space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385457" start="19767" end="19786" title="extreme ultraviolet" label="extreme ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q287506" start="20205" end="20226" title="magnetic reconnection" label="magnetic reconnection"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169" start="20408" end="20428" title="Outer space" label="interplanetary space"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="20436" end="20446" title="solar wind" label="solar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q619081" start="21038" end="21044" title="Parker spiral" label="spiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q131687" start="21073" end="21083" title="Heliopause (astronomy)" label="heliopause"/>
<link wikidata="Q48469" start="21136" end="21145" title="Voyager 1" label="Voyager 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="21299" end="21309" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="21466" end="21485" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21609" end="21618" title="Heliosphere#Heliotail" label="heliotail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253791" start="21671" end="21686" title="peculiar motion" label="peculiar motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q899091" start="21739" end="21757" title="Parker Solar Probe" label="Parker Solar Probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q113518728" start="21874" end="21888" title="Alfvén surface" label="Alfvén surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="22338" end="22354" title="visible spectrum" label="visible spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23444" start="22372" end="22377" title="white" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q374617" start="22386" end="22389" title="CIE 1931 color space" label="CIE"/>
<link wikidata="Q249023" start="22622" end="22644" title="Diffuse sky radiation" label="atmospheric scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q647349" start="22721" end="22734" title="Green flash" label="green or blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="22908" end="22919" title="G-type star" label="G-type star"/>
<link wikidata="Q854050" start="22955" end="22974" title="effective temperature" label="surface temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q335272" start="23019" end="23033" title="solar constant" label="solar constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="23222" end="23239" title="astronomical unit" label="astronomical unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357982" start="23336" end="23346" title="attenuation (electromagnetic radiation)" label="attenuated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="23350" end="23373" title="Atmosphere of Earth" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q82806" start="23475" end="23481" title="zenith" label="zenith"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="23738" end="23759" title="ultraviolet radiation" label="ultraviolet radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q162219" start="23844" end="23854" title="ionosphere" label="ionosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="23857" end="23868" title="Ultraviolet" label="Ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q274493" start="23892" end="23902" title="antiseptic" label="antiseptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q649717" start="23981" end="23988" title="sunburn" label="sunburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q175621" start="24049" end="24058" title="vitamin D" label="vitamin D"/>
<link wikidata="Q321458" start="24063" end="24074" title="sun tanning" label="sun tanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q192102" start="24100" end="24111" title="skin cancer" label="skin cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q79995" start="24170" end="24181" title="ozone layer" label="ozone layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="24228" end="24236" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q853516" start="24329" end="24345" title="human skin color" label="human skin color"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="24360" end="24369" title="gamma ray" label="gamma ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="24370" end="24376" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="24870" end="24878" title="neutrino" label="neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="25047" end="25060" title="Thermodynamics" label="thermodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="25078" end="25084" title="matter" label="matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q619699" start="25313" end="25330" title="Electron neutrino" label="Electron neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q31937" start="25566" end="25593" title="Solar neutrino problem" label="lower than theories predict"/>
<link wikidata="Q509021" start="25638" end="25658" title="neutrino oscillation" label="neutrino oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q874733" start="25835" end="25841" title="flavor (particle physics)" label="flavor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6449" start="25914" end="25936" title="stellar magnetic field" label="stellar magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582994" start="26051" end="26058" title="sunspot" label="sunspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q221699" start="26067" end="26083" title="solar prominence" label="solar prominence"/>
<link wikidata="Q49385" start="26161" end="26172" title="solar cycle" label="solar cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q619254" start="26527" end="26556" title="interplanetary magnetic field" label="interplanetary magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549249" start="26593" end="26613" title="magnetohydrodynamics" label="magnetohydrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q619081" start="26946" end="26959" title="heliospheric current sheet" label="current sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q28967" start="27107" end="27125" title="Archimedean spiral" label="Archimedean spiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314257" start="27508" end="27521" title="solar minimum" label="solar minimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445154" start="27682" end="27689" title="Solar maximum" label="maximum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537964" start="27770" end="27787" title="Spörer&amp;#x27;s law" label="Spörer&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036889" start="27910" end="27917" title="Babcock Model" label="Babcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377388" start="27927" end="27933" title="solar dynamo" label="dynamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826210" start="28004" end="28025" title="toroidal and poloidal" label="toroidal and poloidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q108314835" start="28663" end="28678" title="Hale&amp;#x27;s law" label="Hale&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q49385" start="29537" end="29551" title="solar variation" label="solar activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q119830" start="29553" end="29565" title="Solar flares" label="Solar flares"/>
<link wikidata="Q129890" start="29570" end="29592" title="coronal mass ejections" label="coronal mass ejections"/>
<link wikidata="Q127948" start="29692" end="29705" title="coronal holes" label="coronal holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="29929" end="29936" title="aurora (astronomy)" label="auroras"/>
<link wikidata="Q27137" start="30014" end="30028" title="electric power" label="electric power"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535" start="30091" end="30134" title="formation and evolution of the Solar System" label="formation and evolution of the Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q584093" start="30271" end="30284" title="space weather" label="space weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q827568" start="30493" end="30508" title="Maunder minimum" label="Maunder minimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q190530" start="30553" end="30567" title="Little Ice Age" label="Little Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q80205" start="30687" end="30696" title="tree ring" label="tree ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7465774" start="30997" end="31012" title="heat conduction" label="heat conduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q287506" start="31628" end="31649" title="magnetic reconnection" label="magnetic reconnection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088170" start="31722" end="31732" title="nanoflares" label="nanoflares"/>
<link wikidata="Q272447" start="32496" end="32511" title="molecular cloud" label="molecular cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q925667" start="32635" end="32650" title="computer simulation" label="computer models"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472" start="32654" end="32671" title="stellar evolution" label="stellar evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290891" start="32684" end="32705" title="nucleocosmochronology" label="nucleocosmochronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="32741" end="32757" title="radiometric dating" label="radiometric date"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="32842" end="32851" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201493" start="32926" end="32933" title="iron-60" label="iron-60"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="33015" end="33024" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q190688" start="33087" end="33097" title="shock wave" label="shock wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q161254" start="33356" end="33388" title="conservation of angular momentum" label="conservation of angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057093" start="33740" end="33754" title="stellar nucleosynthesis" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q10848465" start="33767" end="33776" title="HD 162826" label="HD 162826"/>
<link wikidata="Q59121867" start="33781" end="33790" title="HD 186302" label="HD 186302"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556707" start="34205" end="34220" title="solar radiation" label="solar radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q50081" start="34457" end="34466" title="red giant" label="red giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q767805" start="34584" end="34588" title="Gaia (spacecraft)" label="Gaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q843877" start="34966" end="34984" title="solar luminosity" label="solar luminosities"/>
<link wikidata="Q145623" start="35094" end="35110" title="molecular weight" label="molecular weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643508" start="35120" end="35133" title="hydrogen atom" label="hydrogen atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297853" start="35298" end="35328" title="gravitational potential energy" label="gravitational potential energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q620602" start="35347" end="35361" title="virial theorem" label="virial theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q55814" start="35955" end="35970" title="mass extinction" label="mass extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="36062" end="36071" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227" start="36452" end="36460" title="subgiant" label="subgiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q50081" start="36478" end="36487" title="red giant" label="red giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929897" start="36799" end="36815" title="red-giant branch" label="red-giant branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="36870" end="36877" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="36882" end="36887" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q223325" start="37074" end="37086" title="tidal forces" label="tidal forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q374911" start="37184" end="37211" title="tip of the red-giant branch" label="tip of the red-giant branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q51368" start="37697" end="37707" title="degenerate matter" label="degenerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q865098" start="37741" end="37753" title="helium flash" label="helium flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q336225" start="37894" end="37914" title="triple-alpha process" label="triple-alpha process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358411" start="38078" end="38087" title="red clump" label="red clump"/>
<link wikidata="Q50076" start="38091" end="38108" title="horizontal branch" label="horizontal branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q50089" start="38563" end="38586" title="asymptotic giant branch" label="asymptotic-giant-branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q50089" start="38810" end="38823" title="thermal pulse" label="thermal pulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q13632" start="39546" end="39562" title="planetary nebula" label="planetary nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q13632" start="39767" end="39783" title="planetary nebula" label="planetary nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q60772858" start="39839" end="39848" title="blue loop" label="blue loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="39874" end="39885" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976" start="40255" end="40266" title="black dwarf" label="black dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q128207" start="40412" end="40431" title="terrestrial planets" label="terrestrial planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="40433" end="40440" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="40442" end="40447" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="40449" end="40454" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="40460" end="40464" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q121750" start="40471" end="40481" title="gas giants" label="gas giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="40483" end="40490" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="40495" end="40501" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319599" start="40512" end="40522" title="ice giants" label="ice giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q324" start="40524" end="40530" title="Uranus" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q332" start="40535" end="40542" title="Neptune" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199" start="40607" end="40619" title="dwarf planet" label="dwarf planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q244288" start="40635" end="40645" title="list of possible dwarf planets" label="candidates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="40650" end="40663" title="asteroid belt" label="asteroid belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="40674" end="40680" title="comets" label="comets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="40817" end="40834" title="natural satellite" label="natural satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q809690" start="41084" end="41094" title="barycenter" label="barycenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q37640" start="41265" end="41279" title="synodic period" label="synodic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q928582" start="41355" end="41409" title="Sphere of influence (astrodynamics)" label="dominate the gravitational forces of surrounding stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q40864" start="41481" end="41491" title="Oort cloud" label="Oort cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q677840" start="41636" end="41646" title="Comet West" label="Comet West"/>
<link wikidata="Q498792" start="41697" end="41708" title="Hill sphere" label="Hill sphere"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41817" end="41833" title="Gleb Alexandrovich Chebotarev" label="G. A. Chebotarev"/>
<link wikidata="Q649112" start="41952" end="41984" title="Galactic Center" label="the galaxy&amp;#x27;s center of mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q577" start="42088" end="42098" title="Earth year" label="Earth year"/>
<link wikidata="Q268391" start="42128" end="42141" title="Galactic year" label="Galactic year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122219" start="42250" end="42260" title="Solar apex" label="Solar apex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427" start="42302" end="42306" title="Vega" label="Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="42353" end="42390" title="cosmic microwave background radiation" label="cosmic microwave background radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10578" start="42435" end="42440" title="Hydra (constellation)" label="Hydra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9282" start="42701" end="42707" title="Crater (constellation)" label="Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q8853" start="42711" end="42714" title="Leo (constellation)" label="Leo"/>
<link wikidata="Q511056" start="42883" end="42894" title="solar deity" label="solar deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="42904" end="42916" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q787929" start="42959" end="42981" title="Babylonian astronomy" label="Babylonian astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q79852" start="43028" end="43036" title="ecliptic" label="ecliptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268240" start="43149" end="43163" title="elliptic orbit" label="elliptic orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="43373" end="43378" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q83041" start="43391" end="43401" title="Anaxagoras" label="Anaxagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="43490" end="43502" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43182" start="43553" end="43565" title="Eratosthenes" label="Eratosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8689" start="43658" end="43664" title="myriad" label="myriad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645966" start="43752" end="43758" title="Stadion (unit)" label="stadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="43924" end="43931" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155470" start="43970" end="43989" title="Earth radius" label="the radius of Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q140188" start="44117" end="44137" title="Aristarchus of Samos" label="Aristarchus of Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q139798" start="44184" end="44204" title="Seleucus of Seleucia" label="Seleucus of Seleucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="44210" end="44223" title="Heliocentrism" label="Heliocentrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="44336" end="44355" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="44457" end="44468" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268276" start="44488" end="44507" title="Chinese astronomy" label="Chinese astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q39837" start="44569" end="44577" title="Averroes" label="Averroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q315402" start="44743" end="44757" title="Thomas Harriot" label="Thomas Harriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="44759" end="44774" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255366" start="44921" end="44954" title="Astronomy in the medieval Islamic world" label="Arabic astronomical contributions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11079" start="44963" end="44973" title="Al-Battani" label="Al-Battani"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="45028" end="45034" title="apogee" label="apogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q459921" start="45264" end="45273" title="Ibn Yunus" label="Ibn Yunus"/>
<link wikidata="Q164992" start="45365" end="45374" title="astrolabe" label="astrolabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q14279" start="45453" end="45478" title="Giovanni Domenico Cassini" label="Giovanni Domenico Cassini"/>
<link wikidata="Q720451" start="45605" end="45616" title="Jean Richer" label="Jean Richer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44401" start="45620" end="45627" title="Cayenne" label="Cayenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769" start="45637" end="45650" title="French Guiana" label="French Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="45727" end="45731" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q83219" start="45896" end="45914" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s laws" label="Kepler&amp;#x27;s laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q185203" start="46072" end="46088" title="transit of Venus" label="transit of Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="46134" end="46142" title="Avicenna" label="Ibn Sina"/>
<link wikidata="Q47434" start="46207" end="46220" title="Edmond Halley" label="Edmond Halley"/>
<link wikidata="Q116769675" start="46315" end="46329" title="solar parallax" label="solar parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084" start="46401" end="46418" title="Trigonometry" label="trigonometrically"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="46458" end="46463" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4553059" start="46506" end="46527" title="1769 transit of Venus observed from Tahiti" label="1769 transit of Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="46647" end="46659" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q165896" start="46698" end="46703" title="prism (optics)" label="prism"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277" start="46769" end="46785" title="William Herschel" label="William Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="46797" end="46805" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q43948" start="46929" end="46950" title="Joseph von Fraunhofer" label="Joseph von Fraunhofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13553575" start="46974" end="46990" title="absorption lines" label="absorption lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q311552" start="47062" end="47078" title="Fraunhofer lines" label="Fraunhofer lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q585943" start="47270" end="47284" title="H-alpha" label="Hydrogen-alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811658" start="47297" end="47306" title="Astronomical filter" label="filtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="47337" end="47353" title="optical spectrum" label="optical spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="47438" end="47454" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q127959" start="47486" end="47500" title="Norman Lockyer" label="Norman Lockyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="47630" end="47636" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q122701" start="47805" end="47816" title="Lord Kelvin" label="Lord Kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60024" start="47931" end="47952" title="Hermann von Helmholtz" label="Hermann von Helmholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q477816" start="47969" end="47994" title="Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism" label="gravitational contraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q9123" start="48351" end="48368" title="Ernest Rutherford" label="Ernest Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="48471" end="48488" title="radioactive decay" label="radioactive decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="48525" end="48540" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q35875" start="48633" end="48656" title="mass–energy equivalence" label="mass–energy equivalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q215022" start="48681" end="48697" title="Arthur Eddington" label="Arthur Eddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q234909" start="48988" end="49001" title="Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin" label="Cecilia Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q377898" start="49043" end="49055" title="Meghnad Saha" label="Meghnad Saha"/>
<link wikidata="Q148109" start="49141" end="49167" title="Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar" label="Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q155794" start="49172" end="49182" title="Hans Bethe" label="Hans Bethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q235712" start="49298" end="49315" title="Margaret Burbidge" label="Margaret Burbidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q363930" start="49317" end="49334" title="Geoffrey Burbidge" label="Geoffrey Burbidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q46120" start="49336" end="49350" title="William Alfred Fowler" label="William Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q183397" start="49355" end="49365" title="Fred Hoyle" label="Fred Hoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q471702" start="49425" end="49436" title="nucleosynthesis" label="synthesized"/>
<link wikidata="Q190108" start="49631" end="49639" title="Pioneer program" label="Pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q335408" start="49856" end="49865" title="Pioneer 9" label="Pioneer 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q664667" start="49958" end="49975" title="Helios (spacecraft)" label="Helios spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858454" start="49991" end="50013" title="Apollo Telescope Mount" label="Apollo Telescope Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q127948" start="50696" end="50708" title="coronal hole" label="coronal hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188874" start="50784" end="50805" title="Solar Maximum Mission" label="Solar Maximum Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="50888" end="50893" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="50899" end="50901" title="Ultraviolet" label="UV"/>
<link wikidata="Q54382" start="51162" end="51198" title="Space Shuttle Challenger" label="Space Shuttle &amp;quot;Challenger&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q752802" start="51207" end="51214" title="STS-41C" label="STS-41C"/>
<link wikidata="Q531716" start="51398" end="51409" title="Atmospheric reentry" label="re-entering"/>
<link wikidata="Q586893" start="51480" end="51486" title="Yohkoh" label="Yohkoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q320638" start="51968" end="52002" title="Solar and Heliospheric Observatory" label="Solar and Heliospheric Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="52025" end="52046" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q190463" start="52193" end="52209" title="Lagrangian point" label="Lagrangian point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="52463" end="52468" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575238" start="52483" end="52499" title="sungrazing comet" label="sungrazing comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q156081" start="52678" end="52703" title="Ulysses (spacecraft)" label="&amp;quot;Ulysses&amp;quot; probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q752171" start="53307" end="53320" title="astronomical spectroscopy" label="spectroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q74418" start="53446" end="53453" title="Genesis (spacecraft)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q506254" start="53672" end="53681" title="naked eye" label="naked eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128283" start="53751" end="53758" title="Mydriasis" label="dilated"/>
<link wikidata="Q608503" start="53794" end="53803" title="sungazing" label="sungazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072103" start="53812" end="53821" title="phosphene" label="phosphene"/>
<link wikidata="Q14620" start="54315" end="54321" title="optics" label="optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q102626" start="54330" end="54340" title="binoculars" label="binoculars"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="54634" end="54636" title="infrared" label="IR"/>
<link wikidata="Q193709" start="54850" end="54869" title="Rayleigh scattering" label="Rayleigh scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q901737" start="54874" end="54888" title="Mie theory" label="Mie scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q14506045" start="55274" end="55292" title="optical phenomenon" label="optical phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q647349" start="55305" end="55316" title="green flash" label="green flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q72277" start="55451" end="55455" title="refraction" label="bent"/>
<link wikidata="Q190096" start="55475" end="55496" title="temperature inversion" label="temperature inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q193709" start="55671" end="55680" title="Rayleigh scattering" label="scattered"/>
<link wikidata="Q511056" start="55827" end="55845" title="Sun worship" label="Worship of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="55887" end="55900" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="55910" end="55914" title="Inca" label="Inca"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="55940" end="55945" title="Aztec" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="55991" end="55999" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q204418" start="56045" end="56050" title="Surya" label="Surya"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="56141" end="56149" title="megalith" label="megalith"/>
<link wikidata="Q123524" start="56188" end="56196" title="solstice" label="solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535226" start="56213" end="56224" title="Nabta Playa" label="Nabta Playa"/>
<link wikidata="Q584366" start="56233" end="56240" title="Mnajdra" label="Mnajdra"/>
<link wikidata="Q39671" start="56253" end="56263" title="Stonehenge" label="Stonehenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q339503" start="56275" end="56284" title="Newgrange" label="Newgrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128327" start="56389" end="56400" title="El Castillo, Chichen Itza" label="El Castillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5859" start="56404" end="56416" title="Chichén Itzá" label="Chichén Itzá"/>
<link wikidata="Q12516" start="56493" end="56500" title="pyramid" label="pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315" start="56528" end="56535" title="equinox" label="equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="56552" end="56557" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q332188" start="56588" end="56591" title="Utu" label="Utu"/>
<link wikidata="Q272523" start="56632" end="56638" title="Inanna" label="Inanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q286491" start="56644" end="56659" title="Queen of Heaven (antiquity)" label="Queen of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q164273" start="56696" end="56708" title="East Semitic" label="East Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q332188" start="56713" end="56720" title="Shamash" label="Shamash"/>
<link wikidata="Q211001" start="56805" end="56819" title="Fourth Dynasty" label="Fourth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252904" start="56868" end="56874" title="Ra" label="god Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q180568" start="56951" end="56961" title="New Kingdom of Egypt" label="New Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q861966" start="57005" end="57016" title="dung beetle" label="dung beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q130227" start="57046" end="57050" title="Aten" label="Aten"/>
<link wikidata="Q455151" start="57094" end="57107" title="Amarna Period" label="Amarna Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q81794" start="57183" end="57192" title="Akhenaton" label="Akhenaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762" start="57404" end="57414" title="Elagabalus" label="Elagabalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="57422" end="57439" title="Decline of the Roman Empire" label="late Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q214494" start="57492" end="57504" title="Sol Invictus" label="Sol Invictus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79852" start="57637" end="57645" title="ecliptic" label="ecliptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40540" start="57658" end="57664" title="zodiac" label="zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135397" start="57726" end="57733" title="classical planets" label="planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962347" start="57804" end="57821" title="Names of the days of the week" label="days of the weeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="57859" end="57868" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401124" start="57874" end="57902" title="Proto-Indo-European religion" label="Proto-Indo-European religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q511056" start="57943" end="57962" title="Sun deity" label="&amp;quot;*Seh2ul&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="57995" end="58018" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="58031" end="58040" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q654596" start="58047" end="58050" title="Sól (sun)" label="Sól"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="58058" end="58066" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q204418" start="58073" end="58078" title="Surya" label="Surya"/>
<link wikidata="Q29977" start="58086" end="58093" title="Gaulish language" label="Gaulish"/>
<link wikidata="Q862660" start="58100" end="58105" title="Sulis" label="Sulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9083" start="58113" end="58123" title="Lithuanian language" label="Lithuanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048328" start="58130" end="58135" title="Saulė" label="Saulė"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="58147" end="58153" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q855270" start="58178" end="58200" title="ancient Greek religion" label="ancient Greek religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="58264" end="58275" title="syncretism" label="syncretized"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="58281" end="58287" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q132" start="58316" end="58322" title="Sunday" label="Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q207932" start="58543" end="58558" title="winter solstice" label="winter solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q214494" start="58639" end="58651" title="Sol Invictus" label="Sol Invictus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322950" start="58676" end="58683" title="Sabbath" label="Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="58930" end="58935" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q51675" start="58941" end="58956" title="Book of Malachi" label="Book of Malachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="59015" end="59025" title="Christianity" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q51626" start="59065" end="59072" title="Messiah" label="Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="59074" end="59080" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441598" start="59085" end="59093" title="Tonatiuh" label="Tonatiuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q119094" start="59149" end="59164" title="human sacrifice" label="human sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q455602" start="59182" end="59191" title="Amaterasu" label="Amaterasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="59227" end="59233" title="Shinto" label="Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q188210" start="59297" end="59314" title="List of Emperors of Japan" label="Japanese emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q117254337" start="59352" end="59366" title="Sun in fiction" label="Sun in fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q52152" start="59610" end="59637" title="Goddard Space Flight Center" label="Goddard Space Flight Center"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="26752" wikidata="Q11241" url="?curid=26752" title="Smiley">
<text>A smiley, sometimes called a smiley face, is a basic ideogram representing a smiling face. Since the 1950s, it has become part of popular culture worldwide, used either as a standalone ideogram or as a form of communication, such as emoticons. The smiley began as two dots and a line representing eyes and a mouth. More elaborate designs in the 1950s emerged, with noses, eyebrows, and outlines. New York radio station WMCA used a yellow and black design for its &quot;Good Guys&quot; campaign in the early 1960s. More yellow-and-black designs appeared in the 1960s and 1970s, including works by Harvey Ross Ball in 1963, and Franklin Loufrani in 1971. Today, The Smiley Company founded by Franklin Loufrani claims to hold the rights to the smiley face in over 100 countries. It has become one of the top 100 licensing companies globally.

There was a smile fad in 1971 in the United States. The Associated Press (AP) ran a wirephoto showing Joy P. Young and Harvey Ball holding the design of the smiley and reported on September 11, 1971 that &quot;two affiliated insurance companies&quot; claimed credit for the symbol and Harvey Ball designed it; Bernard and Murray Spain claimed credit for introducing it to the market. In October 1971 Loufrani trademarked his design in France while working as a journalist for the French newspaper &quot;France Soir&quot;.

Today, the smiley face has evolved from an ideogram into a template for communication and use in written language. The internet smiley began with Scott Fahlman in the 1980s when he first theorized ASCII characters could be used to create faces and demonstrate emotion in text. Since then, Fahlman&#x27;s designs have become digital pictograms known as emoticons. They are loosely based on the ideograms designed in the 1960s and 1970s, continuing with the yellow and black design.

==Terminology==

The earliest known use of &quot;smiley&quot; as an adjective for &quot;having a smile&quot; or &quot;smiling&quot; in print was in 1848. James Russell Lowell used the line &quot;All kin&#x27; o&#x27; smily roun&#x27; the lips&quot; in his poem &quot;The Courtin’&quot;. According to the Merriam-Webster online dictionary the earliest known use of &quot;smiley face&quot; for &quot;a line drawing of a smiling face&quot; was in 1957. In 1957 Jane McHenry wrote in a write-up in Family Weekly Magazine, &quot;Do-It-Yourself Carnival&quot; &quot;Tape a paper plate to the mop head for a face, arranging string strands on each side for the hair. Draw a big &quot;smiley face&quot; on the plate!&quot; A year later, there was an illustration of a noseless smiling face containing two dots, eyebrows, and a single curved line for a mouth in a write-up in Family Weekly Magazine, Galloping Ghosts! by Bill Ross with the text:&quot;Collect six empty pop bottles and six cone-shaped paper cups. With crayons draw smiley faces on three of the cups and scary ones on the others. Put a cup on top of each bottle and line them up as &#x27;ghosts.&#x27;...Keep score by counting five points for each scary-faced ghost knocked over and, since it is a night for spooks, only one point for each &quot;smiley&quot;!&quot;
Early designs were often called &quot;smiling face&quot; or &quot;happy face.&quot; In 1961 the WMCA&#x27;s Good Guys, incorporated a black smiley onto a yellow sweatshirt, and it was nicknamed the &quot;happy face.&quot; The Spain brothers and Harvey Ross Ball both had designs in the 70s that concentrated more on slogans than the actual name of the smiley.
When Ball&#x27;s design was completed, it was not given an official name. It was however labeled as &quot;The Smile Insurance Company&quot; which appeared on the back of the badges he created. The label was due to the fact the badges were designed for commercial use for an insurance company. The Spain brothers used the slogan Have a nice day, which is now frequently known for the slogan rather than the naming of the smiley.

The word smiley was used by Franklin Loufrani in France, when he registered his smiley design for trademark while working as a journalist for France Soir in 1971. The smiley accompanied positive news in the newspaper and eventually became the foundation for the licensing operation, The Smiley Company.
Competing terms were used such as &quot;smiling face&quot; and &quot;happy face&quot; before consensus was reached on the term &quot;smiley.&quot;The name smiley became commonly used in the 1970s and 1980s as the yellow and black ideogram began to appear more in popular culture. The ideogram has since been used as a foundation to create emoticon emojis. These are digital interpretations of the smiley ideogram and have since become the most commonly used set of emojis since they adopted by Unicode in 2006 onwards. Smiley has since become a broader term that often includes both the ideogram design, but also emojis that use the same yellow and black design.

==Ideogram history==
===Early history of smiling faces===
Ingmar Bergman&#x27;s 1948 film &quot;Port of Call&quot; includes a scene where the unhappy Berit (played by Nine-Christine Jönsson) draws a &quot;sad&quot; face – closely resembling the modern &quot;frowny&quot; but including a dot for the nose – in lipstick on her mirror before being interrupted. In September 1963, there was the premiere of The Funny Company, an American children&#x27;s TV programmer, had a noseless Smiling face used as a kids&#x27; club logo; the closing credits ended with the message, &quot;Keep Smiling!&quot;

In the latter half of the 20th century, the face now known as a smiley has evolved into a well-known symbol recognizable for its yellow and black features. The first known combination of yellow and black was used for a smiling face was in late 1962, when New York City radio station WMCA released a yellow sweatshirt as part of a marketing campaign. By 1963, over 11,000 sweatshirts had been given away. They had featured in Billboard magazine and numerous celebrities had also been pictured wearing them, including actress Patsy King and Mick Jagger. The radio station used the happy face as part of a competition for listeners. When the station called listeners, any listener who answered their phone &quot;WMCA Good Guys!&quot; was rewarded with a &quot;WMCA good guys&quot; sweatshirt that incorporated the yellow and black happy face into its design. The features of the WMCA smiley was a yellow face, with black dots as eyes and had a slightly crooked smile. The outline of the face was also not smooth to give it more of a hand drawn look. Originally, the yellow and black sweatshirt (sometimes referred to as gold), had WMCA Good Guys written on the front with no smiley face.
A number of United States–based designs of yellow and black happy faces emerged over the next decade. State Mutual Life Assurance Company in Worcester, Massachusetts wanted to raise the moral of its staff following a merger with another insurance company. Company Vice President John Adam, Jr. suggested a &quot;friendship campaign.&quot; He put Joy Young, Assistant Director of Sales and Marketing, in charge of the project. According to Worcester Historical Museum&#x27;s documents, Young requested that freelance artist Harvey Ball should design &quot;a little smile to be used on buttons, desk cards and posters.&quot; Ball completed the happy face in ten minutes and was paid $45 (). His rendition, with a bright yellow background, dark oval eyes, full smile, and creases at the sides of the mouth, was imprinted on more than fifty million buttons and became familiar worldwide. The design is so simple that it is certain that similar versions were produced before 1963, including those cited above. However, Ball&#x27;s rendition, as described here, has become the most iconic version. In 1967, Seattle graphic artist George Tanagi drew his own version at the request of advertising agent, David Stern. Tanagi&#x27;s design was used in a Seattle-based University Federal Savings &amp; Loan advertising campaign. Lee Adams&#x27;s lyrics inspired the &quot;Put on a Happy Face&quot; ad campaign from the musical &quot;Bye Bye Birdie&quot;. Stern, the man behind this campaign, also incorporated the Happy Face in his run for Seattle mayor in 1993. The Philadelphia-based brothers Bernard and Murray Spain also used the design on novelty items for their business, Traffic Stoppers. They focused on the slogan &quot;Have a happy day,&quot; which mutated into &quot;Have a nice day.&quot; As with Harvey Ball, they also produced happy face badges, producing over 50 million with New York button manufacturer NG Slater.

In 1972, Frenchman Franklin Loufrani legally trademarked the use of a smiley face. He used it to highlight the good news parts of the newspaper &quot;France Soir&quot;. He simply called the design &quot;Smiley&quot; and launched The Smiley Company. In 1996 Loufrani&#x27;s son Nicolas Loufrani took over the family business and built it into a multinational corporation. Nicolas Loufrani was outwardly skeptical of Harvey Ball&#x27;s claim to creating the first smiley face. While noting that the design that his father came up with and Ball&#x27;s design were nearly identical, Loufrani argued that the design is so simple that no one person can lay claim to having created it. As evidence for this, Loufrani&#x27;s website points to early cave paintings found in France (dating from 2500 BC) that he claims are the first depictions of a smiley face. Loufrani also points to a 1960 radio ad campaign that reportedly made use of a similar design.

The Smiley Company claims to own the rights to the Smiley trademark in one hundred countries. Its subsidiary, SmileyWorld Ltd, in London, headed by Nicolas Loufrani, creates or approves all the Smiley products sold in countries where it holds the trademark. The Smiley brand and logo have significant exposure through licensees in sectors such as clothing, home decoration, perfumery, plush, stationery, publishing, and through promotional campaigns. The Smiley Company is one of the 100 top licensing companies in the world, with a turnover of US$167 million in 2012. The first Smiley shop opened in London in the Boxpark shopping center in December 2011. In 2022, there were many birthday celebrations for the smiley. Many of these came in the form of collaborations between The Smiley Company and large retailers, such as Nordstrom.

The digital evolution of the Smiley began around the same time in the late 1990s, when the smiley first started to be incorporated into emoticon designs. Many people lay claims on when this began and who started it, but phone company Alcatel first included a digital smiley as a welcome screen in 1996. However, the first major development was the use of &quot;toolbars&quot; where users of various messaging applications (such as MSN messenger) could send emoticons or smileys for the first time on its messaging platform. The launch date is often hard to pinpoint, but it was likely on MSN Messenger 6 or 7 when it became an official toolbar, circa 2005. Prior to this, unofficial toolbars had been used by millions of users to use digital smileys to convey or communicate emotion. One of the major toolbars was SmileyWorld&#x27;s toolbar, a usable plugin developed by Nicolas Loufrani from his original Smiley Dictionary, with GIFs dating back even further on the site. By 2003, the SmileyWorld toolbar had 887 original smiley icons. In the 1990s and 2000s, emoticons, smileys and later emojis were often interchangeable, but were used to describe pictograms used for digital communication.

In recent times, the smiley has been used as a symbol for happiness or to spread joy in public places or at major events. The first recorded evidence of this was at the London 2012 opening ceremony, where The Smiley Company is also headquartered. Balls were released into the crowd as the show began to start. The balls were large but light enough that members of the crowd could use the balls like a beach ball, with each ball containing a large black smiley on one side.

In China, there has been a steady growth in the use of smiley&#x27;s in its culture both as a physical brand and also digitally. This rise in popularity has led to a number of smiley merchandise stores opening in the country. By the end of 2024, 15 stores had opened in the country in cities such as Guangzhou, Suzhou and Xiamen. It was expected that the number could top 50 stores by the end of 2027. Other countries in Asia were also experiencing a similar boom, including Thailand where 3 stores opened in 2024.

== Language and communication ==

The oldest known smiling face was found by a team of archaeologists led by Nicolò Marchetti of the University of Bologna. Marchetti and his team pieced together fragments of a Hittite pot from approximately 1700 BC found in Karkamış, Turkey. Once the pot had been pieced together, the team noticed that the item had a large smiling face engraved on it, becoming the first item with such a design to be found. While this wasn&#x27;t written in modern day form, cave drawings are considered a form of communication.

The earliest known smiling face to be included in a written document was drawn by a Slovak notary to indicate his satisfaction with the state of his town&#x27;s municipal financial records in 1635. The gold smiling face was drawn on the bottom of the legal document, appearing next to lawyer&#x27;s Jan Ladislaides signature. The Danish poet and author Johannes V. Jensen was famous for experimenting with the form of his writing, amongst other things. In a letter sent to publisher Ernst Bojesen in December 1900, he includes both a happy and sad face. It was in the 1900s that the design evolved from a basic eye and mouth design into a more recognizable design.

A disputed early use of a smiling ASCII emoticon in a printed text may have been in Robert Herrick&#x27;s poem &quot;To Fortune&quot; (1648), which contains the line &quot;Upon my ruins (smiling yet :)&quot;. Journalist Levi Stahl has suggested that this may have been an intentional &quot;orthographic joke&quot;, while this occurrence is likely merely the colon placed inside parentheses rather than outside of them as is standard typographic practice today: &quot;(smiling yet):&quot;. There are citations of similar punctuation in a non-humorous context, even within Herrick&#x27;s own work. It is likely that the parenthesis was added later by modern editors.

On the Internet, the emojis has become a visual means of conveyance that uses images. The first known mention on the Internet was on 19 September 1982, when Scott Fahlman from Carnegie Mellon University wrote:

Yellow graphical smileys have been used for many different purposes, including use in early 1980s video games. Yahoo! Messenger (from 1998) used smiley symbols in the user list next to each user, and also as an icon for the application. In November 2001, and later, smiley emojis inside the actual chat text was adopted by several chat systems, including Yahoo Messenger.

The smiley is the printable version of characters 1 and 2 of (black-and-white versions of) codepage 437 (1981) of the first IBM PC and all subsequent PC compatible computers. For modern computers, all versions of Microsoft Windows after Windows 95 can use the smiley as part of Windows Glyph List 4, although some computer fonts miss some characters.

The smiley face was included in Unicode&#x27;s Miscellaneous Symbols from version 1.1 (1993).

Later additions to Unicode included a large number of variants expressing a range of human emotions, in particular with the addition of the &quot;Emoticons&quot; and &quot;Supplemental Symbols and Pictographs blocks in Unicode versions 6.0 (2010) and 8.0 (2015), respectively.
These were introduced for compatibility with the ad-hoc implementation of emoticons by Japanese telephone carriers in unused ranges of the Shift JIS standard.
This resulted in a de facto standard in the range with lead bytes 0xF5 to 0xF9.
KDDI has gone much further than this, and has introduced hundreds more in the space with lead bytes 0xF3 and 0xF4.

== Symbolism in popular culture and applications ==
The smiley has now become synonymous with culture across the world. It is used for communication, imagery, branding, and topical purposes to display a range of emotions. In print, numerous brands used a yellow happy face to demonstrate happiness, beginning in the 1960s.

===United States advertising campaigns===
Before many countries had licensing and/or trademark restrictions on the smiley, different designs were used in advertising campaigns in the early to mid 1900s. Much of this activity was centered on the Northeastern United States. One of the first known commercial uses of a smiling face was in 1919, when the Buffalo Steam Roller Company in Buffalo, New York, applied stickers on receipts with the word &quot;thanks&quot; and a smiling face above it. The face contained a lot of detail, having eyebrows, nose, teeth, chin, and facial creases reminiscent of &quot;man-in-the-Moon&quot; style characteristics. Another early commercial use of a smiling face was in 1922 when the Gregory Rubber Company of Akron, Ohio, ran an ad for &quot;smiley face&quot; balloons in &quot;The Billboard&quot;. This happy face had hair, a nose, teeth, pie eyes, and triangles over the eyes. In 1953 and 1958, similar happy faces were used in promotional campaigns for the films &quot;Lili&quot; (1953) and &quot;Gigi&quot; (1958).

Happy faces in northeastern United States, and later in the entire country, became a &quot;common theme&quot; within advertising circles from the 1960s onwards. This rose to prominence during the 1960s and was remixed and interpreted in different ways up until the 1980s. There were sporadic designs of smiling faces or happy face before this, but it wasn&#x27;t until the WMCA in the early 1960s used yellow and black that the theme became more commonplace. Today trademark restrictions (e.g. The Smiley Company) make this kind of de-centralized design less likely or frequent.

===In print===
Franklin Loufrani used the word smiley when he designed a smiling face for the newspaper he was working for at the time. The Loufrani design came in 1971, when Loufrani designed a smiley face for the newspaper, &quot;France-Soir&quot;. The newspaper used Loufrani&#x27;s smiley to highlight stories that they defined as &quot;feel-good news.&quot; This particular smiley went onto form The Smiley Company. &quot;Mad&quot; magazine notably used the smiley a year later in 1972 across their entire front page for the April edition of the magazine. This was one of the first instances that the smiling face had been adapted, with one of the twenty visible smileys pulling a face.

In the United States, there were many instances of smiling faces in the 1900s. However, the first industry to mass adopt the smiley was in comics and cartoons.

The logo for and cover of the omnibus edition of the &quot;Watchmen&quot; comic book series is a smiley badge, worn by the character the Comedian, with blood splattered on it from the murder which initiates the events of the story.

In the DC Comics, shady businessman &quot;Boss Smiley&quot; (a political boss with a smiley face for a head) makes several appearances.

===Music and film===
As music genres began to create their own cultures from the 1970s onwards, many cultures began to incorporate a smiling face into their culture. In the late 1970s, the American band Dead Kennedys launched their first recording, &quot;California über alles&quot;. The single cover was a collage aimed to look like that of a Nazi rally prior to World War II. It featured three of the vertical banners commonly used at such rallies, but with the usual swastikas replaced by large smileys. In the UK, the happy face has been associated with psychedelic culture since Ubi Dwyer and the Windsor Free Festival in the 1970s and the electronic dance music culture, particularly with acid house, that emerged during the Second Summer of Love in the late 1980s. The association was cemented when the band Bomb the Bass used an extracted smiley from the comic book series &quot;Watchmen&quot; on the center of its &quot;Beat Dis&quot; hit single.

In addition to the movie adaptation of &quot;Watchmen&quot;, the film &quot;Suicide Squad&quot; has the character Deadshot staring into the window of a clothing store. Behind a line of mannequins is a yellow smiley face pin, which had been closely associated to another DC comic character, Comedian. The 2001 film &quot;Evolution&quot; has a three-eyed smiley for its logo. It was later carried onto the movie&#x27;s spin-off cartoon, &quot;&quot;.

In the film &quot;Forrest Gump&quot; it is implied the titular character inspired the smiley face design after wiping his face on a T-shirt while running coast to coast.

In the late-1980s, the smiley again became a prominent image within the music industry. It was adopted during the growth of acid house across Europe and the UK in the late 1980s. According to many, this began when DJ, Danny Rampling, used the smiley to celebrate Paul Oakenfold&#x27;s birthday. This sparked a movement where the smiley moved into various dance genres, becoming a symbol of 1980s dance music.

In 2022, David Guetta collaborated with Felix Da Housecat and Kittin to release the song, &quot;Silver Screen&quot;, a reimagined version of the 2001 dance track. Guetta&#x27;s version celebrated positivity and happiness. The music video features a cameo from street artist, André Saraiva and portrays different groups portraying the message &quot;Take The Time To Smile.&quot; The video partners that message with numerous smileys, on the side of buildings, on placards and on posters.

===Physical products===
Vittel announced in 2017 that they would be using the smiley on a special edition design of its water bottles. AdAge referred to its use as a &quot;feel-good effect&quot; and water bottles using the smiley icon had an 11.8% increase in sales, compared to the standard bottles, with 128 million bottles sold across Europe which featured the smiley-design.
In the UK, &quot;Jammie Dodgers&quot;, a legendary biscuit line, incorporate the smiley engraved into circular cookies.

===Art and fashion===
As part of his early works, graffiti artist Banksy frequently used the smiley in his art. The first of his major works that included a smiley was his Flying Copper portrait, which was completed in 2004. It was during a period when Banksy experimented with working on canvas and paper portraits. He also used the smiley in 2005 to replace the face of the grim reaper. The image became known as &quot;grin reaper.&quot; In 2007, The Smiley Company partnered with Moschino for the campaign, &quot;Smiley for Moschino.&quot;

During the COVID-19 pandemic, fashion label Pull &amp; Bear announced they would be releasing t-shirts with a smiley design incorporated on the front. Other fashion labels that have used the smiley on their garments include H&amp;M and Zara. The smiley has also featured on high-end fashion lines, including Fendi and Moncler. High end French jeweller Valerie Messika produced white gold and yellow pendants, which contained a smiley face.

For the 50th birthday of the Smiley, Galeries Lafayette in Paris, Beijing and Shanghai and 10 Nordstrom department stores sold limited edition smiley products to commemorate the anniversary. During the same year, Lee Jeans announced the launch of a new clothing collection, Lee x Smiley.

===Gaming===
In 1980, Namco released the now famous &quot;Pac-Man&quot;, a yellow faced cartoon character. In 2008, the video game &quot;&quot; used the yellow smiley as part of its branding for the game. The smiley appeared throughout the game and also on the cover. The smiley normally appeared on the side of a grenade, which is something that became synonymous with the &quot;Battlefield&quot; series.

The 1987 Atari ST game &quot;MIDI Maze&quot;, released on other platforms as &quot;Faceball 2000&quot;, features round, yellow Smileys as enemies. When a player is eliminated, these enemies taunt the player with the phrase &quot;Have a nice day.&quot;

===Events, business, and social sciences===
During the London 2012 opening ceremony, early on in the show a number of giant yellow beach balls were released into the audience. Each had a large smiley face. Walmart uses a smiley face as its mascot. User experience researchers showed that the usage of smileys to represent measurement scales may ease the challenges related to translation and implementation for brief cross-cultural surveys.

The Brooklyn Bridge had a smiley projected onto the base one evening in 2020. The smiley was part of a wider campaign by The Smiley Company to increase happiness for New Yorkers. The 82 feet wide projected smiley featured light pink lipstick on the mouth of the smiley. 

In 2022, Assouline published &quot;50 Years of Good News,&quot; a breakdown of the cultural development of the smiley and its use.

In 2022, the International Day of Happiness was celebrated by projecting a smiley onto a number of landmarks around the globe. In Seoul, South Korea, a smiley celebrating happiness was projected onto The Seoul Tower.

==Ownership and alternative smileys==

In 1997, Franklin Loufrani attempted to trademark rights to the ideogram he created in the United States. Walmart contested his application, as it began using its &quot;Rolling Back Prices&quot; campaign a year prior. The fallout led to a 2002 court case, and a seven-year ongoing case. The fallout resulted in Wal-Mart phasing out the use of the smiley in 2006. Despite that, Walmart sued an online parodist for alleged &quot;trademark infringement&quot; after he used the symbol. The District Court found in favor of the parodist when in March 2008, the judge concluded that Walmart&#x27;s smiley face logo was not shown to be &quot;inherently distinctive&quot; and that it &quot;has failed to establish that the smiley face has acquired secondary meaning or that it is otherwise a protectable trademark&quot; under U.S. law. In June 2010, Walmart and The Smiley Company founded by Loufrani settled their 10-year-old dispute in front of the Chicago federal court. The terms remain confidential. In 2016, Walmart brought back the smiley face on its website, social media profiles, and in selected stores.

The band Nirvana created its own smiley design in 1991. It was claimed that Kurt Cobain was the designer of the Nirvana smiley. Following his death, this claim was one of the reasons why it became so iconic. As recently as 2020, media reports suggested a Los Angeles–based freelance designer was in fact behind the designs.

Fashion house Marc Jacobs designed a smiley in 2018, which had a yellow outline, with the letters M and J replacing the eyes. The mouth design was similar to the original Nirvana design. In January 2019, legal representatives of Nirvana announced they were suing Marc Jacobs for a breach of copyright. Following the announcement by a judge in Los Angeles that the suit could move forward, Marc Jacobs announced a countersuit against Nirvana. In 2020, a Los Angeles–based designer suggested that he was the creator of the Nirvana smiley and therefore became an interjector in the case between Nirvana and Marc Jacobs.

== See also ==
* Acid2
* Body language
* Emoji
* Emoticon
* Facial Action Coding System
* Galle (Martian crater)
* Henohenomoheji
* Kolobok
* Mr. Yuk
* Pac-Man (character)
* Pareidolia
* Red John
* SDSS J1038+4849
* Social intelligence

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11241" start="2" end="8" title="Smiley" label="smiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11241" start="29" end="40" title="Smiley" label="smiley face"/>
<link wikidata="Q138619" start="53" end="61" title="ideogram" label="ideogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q487" start="77" end="89" title="Smile" label="smiling face"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="130" end="145" title="popular culture" label="popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q31963" start="233" end="241" title="emoticon" label="emoticon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564725" start="419" end="423" title="WMCA (AM)" label="WMCA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="469" end="478" title="WMCA (AM)#Good Guys era" label="Good Guys"/>
<link wikidata="Q771669" start="596" end="612" title="Harvey Ross Ball" label="Harvey Ross Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589091" start="626" end="643" title="The Smiley Company" label="Franklin Loufrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589091" start="660" end="678" title="The Smiley Company" label="The Smiley Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="877" end="890" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="896" end="912" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q117833347" start="924" end="933" title="wirephoto" label="wirephoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1275" end="1281" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1320" end="1326" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="1327" end="1336" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440784" start="1343" end="1354" title="France Soir" label="France Soir"/>
<link wikidata="Q138619" start="1406" end="1414" title="ideogram" label="ideogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q92769" start="1509" end="1522" title="Scott Fahlman" label="Scott Fahlman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="1560" end="1576" title="ASCII" label="ASCII characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q52827" start="1695" end="1704" title="pictogram" label="pictogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q31963" start="1715" end="1723" title="emoticon" label="emoticon"/>
<link wikidata="Q487" start="1942" end="1947" title="smile" label="smile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="1980" end="1985" title="Publishing" label="print"/>
<link wikidata="Q449670" start="1999" end="2019" title="James Russell Lowell" label="James Russell Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="2101" end="2105" title="Poetry" label="poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q585329" start="2149" end="2164" title="Merriam-Webster" label="Merriam-Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865872" start="2339" end="2361" title="USA Weekend" label="Family Weekly Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865872" start="2711" end="2733" title="USA Weekend" label="Family Weekly Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564725" start="3262" end="3266" title="WMCA (AM)" label="WMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932431" start="3392" end="3397" title="Spain (surname)" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q771669" start="3411" end="3427" title="Harvey Ross Ball" label="Harvey Ross Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683490" start="3854" end="3869" title="Have a nice day" label="Have a nice day"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589091" start="3983" end="4000" title="The Smiley Company" label="Franklin Loufrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440784" start="4097" end="4108" title="France Soir" label="France Soir"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589091" start="4238" end="4256" title="The Smiley Company" label="The Smiley Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q138619" start="4488" end="4496" title="ideogram" label="ideogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="4521" end="4536" title="popular culture" label="popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049294" start="4597" end="4611" title="emoji" label="emoticon emoji"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="4752" end="4759" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049294" start="4871" end="4876" title="emoji" label="emoji"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546" start="4980" end="4994" title="Ingmar Bergman" label="Ingmar Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108471" start="5012" end="5036" title="Port of Call (1948 film)" label="&amp;quot;Port of Call&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q745304" start="5089" end="5111" title="Nine-Christine Jönsson" label="Nine-Christine Jönsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735478" start="5325" end="5342" title="The Funny Company" label="The Funny Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="5943" end="5961" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958848" start="6042" end="6052" title="Patsy King" label="Patsy King"/>
<link wikidata="Q128121" start="6057" end="6068" title="Mick Jagger" label="Mick Jagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="6715" end="6728" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q49179" start="6844" end="6868" title="Worcester, Massachusetts" label="Worcester, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="6940" end="6957" title="insurance company" label="insurance company"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034187" start="7142" end="7169" title="Worcester Historical Museum" label="Worcester Historical Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q771669" start="7226" end="7237" title="Harvey Ball" label="Harvey Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132937" start="7548" end="7555" title="Pin-back button" label="buttons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018482" start="8125" end="8139" title="Bye Bye Birdie" label="Bye Bye Birdie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683490" start="8470" end="8485" title="Have a nice day" label="Have a nice day"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="8669" end="8680" title="trademarked" label="trademarked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440784" start="8774" end="8785" title="France Soir" label="France Soir"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589091" start="8853" end="8871" title="The Smiley Company" label="The Smiley Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="8968" end="8993" title="multinational corporation" label="multinational corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q771669" start="9039" end="9050" title="Harvey Ball" label="Harvey Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q30512320" start="10187" end="10194" title="Boxpark" label="Boxpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589091" start="10349" end="10367" title="The Smiley Company" label="The Smiley Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q174310" start="10397" end="10406" title="Nordstrom" label="Nordstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q31963" start="10545" end="10553" title="emoticon" label="emoticon"/>
<link wikidata="Q885235" start="10643" end="10650" title="Alcatel" label="Alcatel"/>
<link wikidata="Q71493" start="10840" end="10853" title="MSN messenger" label="MSN messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192" start="11339" end="11342" title="GIF" label="GIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q31963" start="11470" end="11478" title="emoticon" label="emoticon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049294" start="11499" end="11504" title="emoji" label="emoji"/>
<link wikidata="Q168545" start="11773" end="11801" title="2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony" label="London 2012 opening ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589091" start="11809" end="11827" title="The Smiley Company" label="The Smiley Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q650736" start="12005" end="12015" title="beach ball" label="beach ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="12081" end="12086" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="12378" end="12387" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q42622" start="12389" end="12395" title="Suzhou" label="Suzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q68744" start="12400" end="12406" title="Xiamen" label="Xiamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="12553" end="12561" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="12681" end="12695" title="Archaeology" label="archaeologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q131262" start="12727" end="12748" title="University of Bologna" label="University of Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="12804" end="12811" title="Hittites" label="Hittite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018531" start="12852" end="12860" title="Karkamış" label="Karkamış"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="12862" end="12868" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q171336" start="13227" end="13233" title="Slovaks" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q159552" start="13496" end="13514" title="Johannes V. Jensen" label="Johannes V. Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q553554" start="13893" end="13907" title="Robert Herrick (poet)" label="Robert Herrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="14482" end="14490" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q92769" start="14632" end="14645" title="Scott Fahlman" label="Scott Fahlman"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="14651" end="14677" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="14784" end="14794" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q71694" start="14797" end="14813" title="Yahoo! Messenger" label="Yahoo! Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105757" start="15150" end="15162" title="codepage 437" label="codepage 437"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="15183" end="15189" title="IBM PC" label="IBM PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="15272" end="15289" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q83370" start="15296" end="15306" title="Windows 95" label="Windows 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q153184" start="15337" end="15357" title="Windows Glyph List 4" label="Windows Glyph List 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147633" start="15373" end="15386" title="computer font" label="computer font"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="15443" end="15450" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q180699" start="15458" end="15479" title="Miscellaneous Symbols" label="Miscellaneous Symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494062" start="15652" end="15661" title="Emoticons (Unicode block)" label="Emoticons"/>
<link wikidata="Q20972860" start="15678" end="15714" title="Supplemental Symbols and Pictographs" label="Supplemental Symbols and Pictographs"/>
<link wikidata="Q31963" start="15857" end="15865" title="emoticon" label="emoticon"/>
<link wikidata="Q286345" start="15922" end="15931" title="Shift JIS" label="Shift JIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q971946" start="16022" end="16026" title="KDDI" label="KDDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024" start="16273" end="16286" title="communication" label="communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="16350" end="16357" title="emotion" label="emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="16707" end="16733" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="16846" end="16863" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q163132" start="17207" end="17218" title="Akron, Ohio" label="Akron, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824959" start="17464" end="17480" title="Lili (1953 film)" label="&amp;quot;Lili&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q577757" start="17492" end="17508" title="Gigi (1958 film)" label="&amp;quot;Gigi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589091" start="18012" end="18030" title="The Smiley Company" label="The Smiley Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440784" start="18330" end="18341" title="France-Soir" label="France-Soir"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589091" start="18499" end="18517" title="The Smiley Company" label="The Smiley Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q312086" start="18519" end="18534" title="Mad (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Mad&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="18798" end="18811" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004" start="18930" end="18936" title="comics" label="comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q128444" start="19011" end="19019" title="Watchmen" label="Watchmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="19192" end="19201" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242478" start="19227" end="19238" title="Boss Smiley" label="Boss Smiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="19511" end="19519" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q208211" start="19525" end="19538" title="Dead Kennedys" label="Dead Kennedys"/>
<link wikidata="Q570023" start="19577" end="19598" title="California über alles" label="California über alles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="19666" end="19670" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="19686" end="19698" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="19792" end="19800" title="swastika" label="swastika"/>
<link wikidata="Q666011" start="19880" end="19899" title="psychedelic culture" label="psychedelic culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876512" start="19906" end="19915" title="Ubi Dwyer" label="Ubi Dwyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024605" start="19924" end="19945" title="Windsor Free Festival" label="Windsor Free Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="19967" end="19989" title="electronic dance music" label="electronic dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q341364" start="20017" end="20027" title="acid house" label="acid house"/>
<link wikidata="Q572996" start="20053" end="20074" title="Second Summer of Love" label="Second Summer of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q891757" start="20137" end="20150" title="Bomb the Bass" label="Bomb the Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q128444" start="20209" end="20217" title="Watchmen" label="Watchmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876926" start="20251" end="20259" title="Beat Dis" label="Beat Dis"/>
<link wikidata="Q128444" start="20324" end="20332" title="Watchmen" label="Watchmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18604504" start="20355" end="20368" title="Suicide Squad (2016 film)" label="Suicide Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q511769" start="20393" end="20401" title="Deadshot" label="Deadshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591461" start="20569" end="20577" title="Comedian (character)" label="Comedian"/>
<link wikidata="Q500460" start="20599" end="20608" title="Evolution (2001 film)" label="Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q134773" start="20747" end="20759" title="Forrest Gump" label="Forrest Gump"/>
<link wikidata="Q746359" start="20972" end="20986" title="music industry" label="music industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q341364" start="21024" end="21034" title="acid house" label="acid house"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="21042" end="21048" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220756" start="21118" end="21132" title="Danny Rampling" label="Danny Rampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q321339" start="21163" end="21177" title="Paul Oakenfold" label="Paul Oakenfold"/>
<link wikidata="Q8298" start="21319" end="21331" title="David Guetta" label="David Guetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q518662" start="21350" end="21367" title="Felix Da Housecat" label="Felix Da Housecat"/>
<link wikidata="Q235770" start="21372" end="21378" title="Miss Kittin" label="Kittin"/>
<link wikidata="Q316930" start="21460" end="21465" title="dance (music genre)" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q362467" start="21585" end="21598" title="André Saraiva" label="André Saraiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308887" start="21822" end="21828" title="Vittel (water)" label="Vittel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817227" start="21918" end="21930" title="water bottle" label="water bottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q380047" start="21933" end="21938" title="AdAge" label="AdAge"/>
<link wikidata="Q133600" start="22364" end="22370" title="Banksy" label="Banksy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131803011" start="22674" end="22685" title="grim reaper" label="grim reaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589091" start="22747" end="22765" title="The Smiley Company" label="The Smiley Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q659863" start="22781" end="22789" title="Moschino" label="Moschino"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="22853" end="22870" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q691029" start="22886" end="22901" title="Pull &amp;amp; Bear" label="Pull &amp;amp; Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q188326" start="23066" end="23073" title="H&amp;amp;M" label="H&amp;amp;M"/>
<link wikidata="Q147662" start="23078" end="23082" title="Zara (retailer)" label="Zara"/>
<link wikidata="Q926575" start="23150" end="23155" title="Fendi" label="Fendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548951" start="23160" end="23167" title="Moncler" label="Moncler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094686" start="23320" end="23338" title="Galeries Lafayette" label="Galeries Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="23342" end="23347" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="23349" end="23356" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="23361" end="23369" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q174310" start="23377" end="23386" title="Nordstrom" label="Nordstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632681" start="23496" end="23505" title="Lee (jeans)" label="Lee Jeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q309996" start="23594" end="23599" title="Namco" label="Namco"/>
<link wikidata="Q173626" start="23630" end="23637" title="Pac-Man" label="Pac-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="23988" end="23996" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q335946" start="24008" end="24017" title="MIDI Maze" label="MIDI Maze"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683490" start="24208" end="24223" title="Have a nice day" label="Have a nice day"/>
<link wikidata="Q168545" start="24287" end="24315" title="2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony" label="London 2012 opening ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="24438" end="24445" title="Walmart" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047808" start="24480" end="24495" title="User experience" label="User experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155171" start="24566" end="24572" title="Scale (social sciences)" label="scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553" start="24608" end="24619" title="translation" label="translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q125006" start="24678" end="24693" title="Brooklyn Bridge" label="Brooklyn Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589091" start="24795" end="24813" title="The Smiley Company" label="The Smiley Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="24840" end="24850" title="New York City" label="New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810309" start="24955" end="24964" title="Assouline" label="Assouline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305947" start="25091" end="25121" title="International Day of Happiness" label="International Day of Happiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="25208" end="25213" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="25215" end="25226" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q69134" start="25278" end="25293" title="N Seoul Tower" label="The Seoul Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="25426" end="25439" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="25441" end="25448" title="Walmart" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832136" start="25970" end="25992" title="Trademark distinctiveness" label="inherently distinctive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893196" start="26153" end="26161" title="United States trademark law" label="U.S. law"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589091" start="26189" end="26207" title="The Smiley Company" label="The Smiley Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="26451" end="26458" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="26518" end="26529" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="26697" end="26708" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q313108" start="26781" end="26792" title="Marc Jacobs" label="Marc Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="27048" end="27067" title="copyright" label="breach of copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190815" start="27180" end="27191" title="countersuit" label="countersuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="27220" end="27231" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q853740" start="27402" end="27407" title="Acid2" label="Acid2"/>
<link wikidata="Q477298" start="27410" end="27423" title="Body language" label="Body language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049294" start="27426" end="27431" title="Emoji" label="Emoji"/>
<link wikidata="Q31963" start="27434" end="27442" title="Emoticon" label="Emoticon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391629" start="27445" end="27472" title="Facial Action Coding System" label="Facial Action Coding System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109371" start="27475" end="27497" title="Galle (Martian crater)" label="Galle (Martian crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q955105" start="27500" end="27514" title="Henohenomoheji" label="Henohenomoheji"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092708" start="27517" end="27524" title="Kolobok" label="Kolobok"/>
<link wikidata="Q547672" start="27527" end="27534" title="Mr. Yuk" label="Mr. Yuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913000" start="27537" end="27556" title="Pac-Man (character)" label="Pac-Man (character)"/>
<link wikidata="Q506422" start="27559" end="27569" title="Pareidolia" label="Pareidolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109776" start="27572" end="27580" title="Red John" label="Red John"/>
<link wikidata="Q131578750" start="27583" end="27598" title="SDSS J1038+4849" label="SDSS J1038+4849"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273844" start="27601" end="27620" title="Social intelligence" label="Social intelligence"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="26753" wikidata="Q188675" url="?curid=26753" title="Signature">
<text>A signature (; from , &quot;to sign&quot;) is a depiction of someone&#x27;s name, nickname, or even a simple &quot;X&quot; or other mark that a person writes on documents as a proof of identity and intent. Signatures are often, but not always, handwritten or stylized. The writer of a signature is a signatory or signer. Similar to a handwritten signature, a signature work describes the work as readily identifying its creator. A signature may be confused with an autograph, which is chiefly an artistic signature. This can lead to confusion when people have both an autograph and signature and as such some people in the public eye keep their signatures private whilst fully publishing their autograph.

==Function and types==
===Identification===


The traditional function of a signature is to permanently affix to a document a person&#x27;s uniquely personal, undeniable self-identification as physical evidence of that person&#x27;s personal witness and certification of the content of all, or a specified part, of the document. For example, the role of a signature in many consumer contracts is not solely to provide evidence of the identity of the contracting party, but also to provide evidence of deliberation and informed consent.

In the United States, signatures encompass marks and actions of all sorts that are indicative of identity and intent. The legal rule is that unless a statute specifically prescribes a particular method of making a signature it may be made in any number of ways. These include by a mechanical or rubber stamp facsimile. A signature may be made by the purported signatory; alternatively someone else duly authorized by the signatory, acting in the signer&#x27;s presence and at the signatory&#x27;s direction, may make the signature.

Many individuals have much more fanciful signatures than their normal cursive writing, including elaborate ascenders, descenders and exotic es, much as one would find in calligraphic writing. As an example, the final &quot;k&quot; in John Hancock&#x27;s famous signature on the US Declaration of Independence loops back to underline his name. This kind of flourish is also known as a &quot;&quot;, a French term meaning flourish, initial or signature. The paraph is used in graphology analyses.

Several cultures whose languages use writing systems other than alphabets do not share the Western notion of signatures per se: the &quot;signing&quot; of one&#x27;s name results in a written product no different from the result of &quot;writing&quot; one&#x27;s name in the standard way. For these languages, to write or to sign involves the same written characters. 
===Mark in lieu of signature ===

In some jurisdictions, an illiterate signatory can make a &quot;mark&quot; (often an &quot;X&quot; but occasionally a personalized symbol) on legal documents, so long as the document is countersigned by a literate witness. In some countries, illiterate people place a thumbprint on legal documents in lieu of a written signature.

===Mechanically produced signatures===
Special signature machines, called autopens, are capable of automatically reproducing an individual&#x27;s signature. These are typically used by people required to sign a lot of printed matter, such as celebrities, heads of state or CEOs. More recently, Members of Congress in the United States have begun having their signature made into a TrueType font file. This allows staff members in the Congressman&#x27;s office to easily reproduce it on correspondence, legislation, and official documents. In the East Asian languages of Chinese, Japanese, and Korean, people traditionally use stamp-like objects known as &quot;name-seals&quot; with the name carved in &quot;tensho&quot; script (&quot;seal script&quot;) in lieu of a handwritten signature.

===Wet signatures===
A wet signature is a person&#x27;s name written in their own hand with ink. Some government agencies require that professional persons or official reviewers sign originals and all copies of originals to authenticate that they personally viewed the content. In many countries, signatures must be made, witnessed and recorded in the presence of a notary public to carry legal force in specific contexts. In the United States this is prevalent with architectural and construction plans. Its intent is to prevent mistakes or fraud but the practice is not known to be effective.

===Detection of forged signatures===
Handwriting experts say &quot;it is extremely difficult for anyone to be able to figure out if a signature or other very limited writing sample has been forged.&quot;
High volume review of signatures, to decide if a signature is true or forged, occurs when election offices decide whether to accept absentee ballots arriving from voters,
and possibly when banks decide whether to pay checks.
The highest error rates in signature verification are found with lay people, higher than for computers, which in turn make more errors than experts.

There have been concerns that signature reviews improperly reject ballots from young and minority voters at higher rates than others, with no or limited ability of voters to appeal the rejection.
 When errors are made with bank checks, the payer can ask the bank for corrections.

In 2018, a fifth of adults in the United Kingdom said they sign so rarely they have no consistent signature, including 21% of people 18-24 and 16% of people over age 55. 55% of UK adults said they rarely sign anything.

Researchers have published error rates for computerized signature verification. They compare different systems on a common database of true and false signatures. The best system falsely rejects 10% of true signatures, while it accepts 10% of forgeries. Another system has error rates on both of 14%, and the third-best has error rates of 17%. It is possible to be less stringent and reject fewer true signatures, at the cost of also rejecting fewer forgeries. Computer algorithms:look for a certain number of points of similarity between the compared signatures ... a wide range of algorithms and standards, each particular to that machine&#x27;s manufacturer, are used to verify signatures. In addition, counties have discretion in managing the settings and implementing manufacturers&#x27; guidelines ... there are no statewide standards for automatic signature verification ... most counties do not have a publicly available, written explanation of the signature verification criteria and processes they use.

In an experiment, experts rejected 5% of true signatures and 71% of forgeries. They were doubtful about another 57% of true signatures and 27% of forgeries. If computer verification is adjusted to reflect what experts are sure about, it will wrongly reject 5% of true signatures and wrongly accept 29% of forgeries. If computers were adjusted more strictly, rejecting all signatures which experts have doubts about, the computers would set aside 62% of true signatures, and still wrongly accept 2% of forgeries. Lay people made more mistakes and were doubtful less often, though the study does not report whether their mistakes were to accept more forgeries or reject more true signatures.

Voters with short names are at a disadvantage, since experts make more mistakes on signatures with fewer &quot;turning points and intersections.&quot; Participants in this study had 10 true signatures to compare to, which is more than most postal ballot verifications have. A more recent study for the US Department of Justice confirms the probabilistic nature of signature verification, though it does not provide numbers.

===Online usage===
In e-mail and newsgroup usage, another type of signature exists which is independent of one&#x27;s language. Users can set one or more lines of custom text known as a signature block to be automatically appended to their messages. This text usually includes a name, contact information, and sometimes quotations and ASCII art. A shortened form of a signature block, only including one&#x27;s name, often with some distinguishing prefix, can be used to simply indicate the end of a post or response. Some web sites also allow graphics to be used. Note, however, that this type of signature is not related to electronic signatures or digital signatures, which are more technical in nature and not directly understandable by humans.

===Reusing signature pages===
For guidance applicable in England and Wales on the use of pre-signed signature pages being subsequently attached to documents to effect a &quot;virtual&quot; signing, see Law of Property (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1989#Validity of execution under Mercury.
==Art==
The signature on a painting or other work of art has always been an important item in the assessment of art. Fake signatures are sometimes added to enhance the value of a painting, or are added to a fake painting to support its authenticity. A notorious case was the signature of Johannes Vermeer on the fake &quot;Supper at Emmaus&quot; made by the art-forger Han van Meegeren. However, the fact that painters&#x27; signatures often vary over time (particularly in the modern and contemporary periods) might complicate the issue. The signatures of some painters take on an artistic form that may be of less value in determining forgeries.
If a painting is abstract or ambiguous, the signature can be the only clue to determine which side is the top.

==Copyright==
Under British law, the appearance of signatures (not the names themselves) may be protected under copyright law.

Under United States copyright law, &quot;titles, names [I c...]; mere variations of typographic ornamentation, lettering, or coloring&quot; are not eligible for copyright; however, the appearance of signatures (not the names themselves) may be protected under copyright law.

==Uniform Commercial Code==

Uniform Commercial Code §1-201(37) of the United States generally defines signed as &quot;using any symbol executed or adopted with present intention to adopt or accept a writing.&quot; The Uniform Commercial Code §3-401(b) for negotiable instruments states &quot;A signature may be made (i) manually or by means of a device or machine, and (ii) by the use of any name, including a trade or assumed name, or by a word, mark, or symbol executed or adopted by a person with present intention to authenticate a writing.&quot;

==See also==

*Autograph club
*&quot;Autograph Collector Magazine&quot;
*Biometric signature as form of the electronic signature
*Builder&#x27;s signature
*Initials
*Images of signatures
*&quot;manu propria&quot; (&quot;m.p.&quot;)
*Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence, includes depicted signatures 
*Monogram
*Pawtograph, an animal&#x27;s paw print
* Round-robin (document), a signed document where the signatures are arranged in a circle
*Royal sign-manual
*Shakespeare&#x27;s handwriting
*Signum manus
*Tughra
*Huaya

==References==
==External links==

*Why Do We Sign For Things? A Rabbi, A Lawyer And A MasterCard Exec Explain NPR / Planet Money
* History of signatures at &quot;Slate&quot;
*What is Signature? Signature of 100 famous people (video on YouTube)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188675" start="2" end="11" title="Signature" label="signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393642" start="244" end="255" title="Handwriting" label="handwritten"/>
<link wikidata="Q188675" start="300" end="309" title="Signature" label="signatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q188675" start="313" end="319" title="Signature" label="signer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188675" start="359" end="373" title="Signature" label="signature work"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872572" start="465" end="474" title="autograph" label="autograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q93288" start="1089" end="1098" title="contracts" label="contracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q194070" start="1551" end="1560" title="facsimile" label="facsimile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079418" start="1846" end="1853" title="cursive" label="cursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q518371" start="1883" end="1892" title="Ascender (typography)" label="ascenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045635" start="1894" end="1903" title="descender" label="descender"/>
<link wikidata="Q12681" start="1946" end="1958" title="calligraphic" label="calligraphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q272774" start="2010" end="2022" title="John Hancock" label="John Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2176" end="2182" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q185133" start="2250" end="2260" title="graphology" label="graphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472389" start="3080" end="3087" title="autopen" label="autopen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14761450" start="3300" end="3319" title="Member of Congress" label="Members of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q751800" start="3387" end="3395" title="TrueType" label="TrueType"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="3576" end="3583" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="3585" end="3593" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="3599" end="3605" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850202" start="3671" end="3675" title="seal (East Asia)" label="seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208842" start="3740" end="3751" title="seal script" label="seal script"/>
<link wikidata="Q15479268" start="4162" end="4175" title="notary public" label="notary public"/>
<link wikidata="Q596496" start="4728" end="4743" title="absentee ballot" label="absentee ballot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4813" end="4819" title="Cheque#Cheque fraud" label="checks"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="7623" end="7629" title="e-mail" label="e-mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q657881" start="7634" end="7643" title="newsgroup" label="newsgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362562" start="7787" end="7802" title="signature block" label="signature block"/>
<link wikidata="Q193097" start="7936" end="7945" title="ASCII art" label="ASCII art"/>
<link wikidata="Q27114292" start="8101" end="8105" title="posting style" label="post"/>
<link wikidata="Q869548" start="8227" end="8247" title="electronic signature" label="electronic signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q220849" start="8252" end="8269" title="digital signature" label="digital signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156248" start="8408" end="8425" title="England and Wales" label="England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8553" end="8640" title="Law of Property (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1989#Validity of execution under Mercury" label="Law of Property (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1989#Validity of execution under Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q41264" start="8930" end="8946" title="Johannes Vermeer" label="Johannes Vermeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q436161" start="9011" end="9027" title="Han van Meegeren" label="Han van Meegeren"/>
<link wikidata="Q128115" start="9307" end="9315" title="abstract painting" label="abstract"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741453" start="9319" end="9328" title="ambiguous figure" label="ambiguous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169279" start="9514" end="9527" title="Copyright law of the United Kingdom" label="copyright law"/>
<link wikidata="Q842270" start="9536" end="9563" title="Copyright law of the United States" label="United States copyright law"/>
<link wikidata="Q906196" start="9835" end="9858" title="Uniform Commercial Code" label="Uniform Commercial Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359388" start="10063" end="10085" title="negotiable instruments" label="negotiable instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="10217" end="10222" title="Trademark" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q130217525" start="10374" end="10388" title="Autograph club" label="Autograph club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826303" start="10396" end="10424" title="Autograph Collector Magazine" label="Autograph Collector Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q177765" start="10432" end="10451" title="Biometric signature" label="Biometric signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q869548" start="10467" end="10487" title="electronic signature" label="electronic signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q108198530" start="10489" end="10513" title="Builder&amp;#x27;s signature" label="Builder&amp;#x27;s signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q378408" start="10515" end="10523" title="Initials" label="Initials"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10525" end="10545" title=":Category:Images of signatures" label="Images of signatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q289135" start="10553" end="10565" title="manu propria" label="manu propria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895034" start="10592" end="10653" title="Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence" label="Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q168346" start="10686" end="10694" title="Monogram" label="Monogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q17037683" start="10696" end="10706" title="Pawtograph" label="Pawtograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862465" start="10737" end="10759" title="Round-robin (document)" label="Round-robin (document)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375085" start="10826" end="10843" title="Royal sign-manual" label="Royal sign-manual"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018304" start="10845" end="10875" title="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s handwriting" label="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s handwriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077921" start="10877" end="10889" title="Signum manus" label="Signum manus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189985" start="10891" end="10897" title="Tughra" label="Tughra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915623" start="10899" end="10904" title="Huaya" label="Huaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="11142" end="11149" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="26754" wikidata="Q257102" url="?curid=26754" title="Seal">
<text>Seal may refer to any of the following:
==Common uses==
* Pinniped, a diverse group of semi-aquatic marine mammals, many of which are commonly called seals, particularly:
** Earless seal, also called &quot;true seal&quot;
** Fur seal
** Eared seal
* Seal (emblem), a device to impress an emblem, used as a means of authentication, on paper, wax, clay or another medium (the impression is also called a seal) 
* Seal (mechanical), a device which helps prevent leakage, contain pressure, or exclude contamination where two systems join
* Security seals such as labels, tapes, bands, or ties affixed onto a container in order to prevent and detect tampering

==Arts, entertainment and media==
* &quot;Seal&quot; (1991 album), by Seal
* &quot;Seal&quot; (1994 album), sometimes referred to as &quot;Seal II&quot;, by Seal
* &quot;Seal IV&quot;, a 2003 album by Seal
* &quot;Seal Online&quot;, a 2003 massively multiplayer online role-playing game

==Law==
* Seal (contract law), a legal formality for contracts and other instruments
* Seal (East Asia), a stamp used in East Asia as a form of a signature
* Record sealing

==Military==
* &quot;Fairey Seal&quot;, a 1930s British carrier-borne torpedo bomber aircraft
* HMS &quot;Seal&quot;, two Royal Navy ships and one submarine
* USS &quot;Seal&quot;, two American submarines
* Supermarine Seal II, the 1921 British flying boat

===Special forces===
*United States Navy SEALs, the principal special operations force of the U.S. Navy
*Thai Navy Seals, Thai Navy special operations force modelled on the U.S. Navy SEALs
*Naval Special Operations Command, also known as the Philippine Navy SEALs
*ROKN UDT/SEALs, a component of the Republic of Korea Navy Special Warfare Flotilla

==People==
* Seal (musician) (born 1963), English singer and songwriter
* Seal (surname):
** Aditya Seal (born 1988), Indian actor
** Barbara Seal, Canadian former judge from Montreal, Quebec
** Barry Seal (1939–1986), American drug smuggler and DEA informant
** Brajendra Nath Seal (1864–1938), Indian humanist philosopher and educator
** David Seal (born 1972), Australian soccer player
** Elizabeth Seal (born 1933), Italian actress
** Frances Thurber Seal, American Christian Science practitioner and teacher
** Jaynie Seal (born 1973), Australian television presenter
** Jimmy Seal (born 1950), English footballer
** Kevin Seal, American television presenter and actor
** Manuel Seal (born 1960), American songwriter-producer
** Michael Seal (born 1970), British orchestral conductor and classical violinist
** Mike Seal (fighter) (born 1977), Mexican mixed martial artist
** Mutty Lall Seal (1792–1854), Indian Bengali businessman and philanthropist
** Paul Seal (born 1952), American football tight end 
** Sudhangshu Seal (born 1945), Indian politician

==Places==
* Seal, Kent, a village and civil parish in England
* Seal, Ohio, an unincorporated community
* Seal Beach, California, a city located in Orange County, USA
* Seal Cay, а island within the Bahamas
* Seal Harbour, Nova Scotia, a community in Guysborough County, Canada
* Seal Lake, a lake in Greenland

==Other uses==
* &quot;Seal&quot;, a generic term for the surface treatment of sealed roads (and by extension, a term used for the roads themselves)
* Seal brown
* Seal of the prophets, a title given to the Islamic prophet, Muhammad
* Seal script, ancient Chinese calligraphy
* Security seal, a device used to show whether a locking device has been opened
* BYD Seal, an electric sedan
* Select Entry Accelerated Learning, a program used in Victoria, Australia, in some secondary schools

==See also==
* SEAL (disambiguation)
* Seale (disambiguation)
* Sealing (disambiguation)
* Seals (disambiguation)
* Seel (disambiguation)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q257102" start="0" end="4" title="Seal" label="Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263" start="58" end="66" title="Pinniped" label="Pinniped"/>
<link wikidata="Q25587" start="174" end="186" title="Earless seal" label="Earless seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043473" start="225" end="233" title="Fur seal" label="Fur seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q26700" start="237" end="247" title="Eared seal" label="Eared seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q162919" start="250" end="263" title="Seal (emblem)" label="Seal (emblem)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004810" start="411" end="428" title="Seal (mechanical)" label="Seal (mechanical)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413428" start="536" end="549" title="Security seal" label="Security seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q39090893" start="559" end="572" title="Security tape" label="labels, tapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202091" start="574" end="579" title="Tamper-evident band" label="bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q27963603" start="584" end="588" title="Pull-tight seal" label="ties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681758" start="626" end="654" title="Tamper-evident technology" label="prevent and detect tampering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548925" start="692" end="721" title="Seal (1991 album)" label="&amp;quot;Seal&amp;quot; (1991 album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q928785" start="733" end="762" title="Seal (1994 album)" label="&amp;quot;Seal&amp;quot; (1994 album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442828" start="826" end="833" title="Seal IV" label="Seal IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4189309" start="870" end="881" title="Seal Online" label="Seal Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797791" start="954" end="973" title="Seal (contract law)" label="Seal (contract law)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850202" start="1031" end="1047" title="Seal (East Asia)" label="Seal (East Asia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145405" start="1102" end="1116" title="Record sealing" label="Record sealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883220" start="1139" end="1150" title="Fairey Seal" label="Fairey Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3782134" start="1214" end="1234" title="HMS Seal" label="HMS &amp;quot;Seal&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q748620" start="1277" end="1297" title="USS Seal" label="USS &amp;quot;Seal&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643899" start="1325" end="1344" title="Supermarine Seal II" label="Supermarine Seal II"/>
<link wikidata="Q178033" start="1398" end="1422" title="United States Navy SEALs" label="United States Navy SEALs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970667" start="1481" end="1496" title="Thai Navy Seals" label="Thai Navy Seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981928" start="1566" end="1598" title="Naval Special Operations Command" label="Naval Special Operations Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q485031" start="1676" end="1723" title="Republic of Korea Navy Special Warfare Flotilla" label="Republic of Korea Navy Special Warfare Flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q218091" start="1738" end="1753" title="Seal (musician)" label="Seal (musician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933751" start="1799" end="1813" title="Seal (surname)" label="Seal (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16887606" start="1818" end="1829" title="Aditya Seal" label="Aditya Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q26703676" start="1859" end="1871" title="Barbara Seal" label="Barbara Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q326239" start="1920" end="1930" title="Barry Seal" label="Barry Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955996" start="1988" end="2007" title="Brajendra Nath Seal" label="Brajendra Nath Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239613" start="2065" end="2075" title="David Seal" label="David Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363483" start="2117" end="2131" title="Elizabeth Seal" label="Elizabeth Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440819" start="2164" end="2184" title="Frances Thurber Seal" label="Frances Thurber Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16214613" start="2241" end="2252" title="Jaynie Seal" label="Jaynie Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6201247" start="2301" end="2311" title="Jimmy Seal" label="Jimmy Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397458" start="2347" end="2357" title="Kevin Seal" label="Kevin Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752875" start="2402" end="2413" title="Manuel Seal" label="Manuel Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848753" start="2459" end="2471" title="Michael Seal" label="Michael Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15987712" start="2541" end="2560" title="Mike Seal (fighter)" label="Mike Seal (fighter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944137" start="2606" end="2621" title="Mutty Lall Seal" label="Mutty Lall Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153510" start="2684" end="2693" title="Paul Seal" label="Paul Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16107123" start="2739" end="2754" title="Sudhangshu Seal" label="Sudhangshu Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586715" start="2800" end="2810" title="Seal, Kent" label="Seal, Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q22134252" start="2852" end="2862" title="Seal, Ohio" label="Seal, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q593039" start="2894" end="2916" title="Seal Beach, California" label="Seal Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4419081" start="2957" end="2965" title="Seal Cay" label="Seal Cay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440520" start="2997" end="3022" title="Seal Harbour, Nova Scotia" label="Seal Harbour, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21882796" start="3068" end="3077" title="Seal Lake" label="Seal Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q16893284" start="3179" end="3190" title="sealed road" label="sealed road"/>
<link wikidata="Q612837" start="3251" end="3261" title="Seal brown" label="Seal brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603515" start="3264" end="3284" title="Seal of the prophets" label="Seal of the prophets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208842" start="3335" end="3346" title="Seal script" label="Seal script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413428" start="3378" end="3391" title="Security seal" label="Security seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q114414285" start="3458" end="3466" title="BYD Seal" label="BYD Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447652" start="3488" end="3521" title="Select Entry Accelerated Learning" label="Select Entry Accelerated Learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389544" start="3604" end="3625" title="SEAL (disambiguation)" label="SEAL (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262021" start="3628" end="3650" title="Seale (disambiguation)" label="Seale (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907938" start="3653" end="3677" title="Sealing (disambiguation)" label="Sealing (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440655" start="3680" end="3702" title="Seals (disambiguation)" label="Seals (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q343343" start="3705" end="3726" title="Seel (disambiguation)" label="Seel (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="26756" wikidata="Q45961" url="?curid=26756" title="Sino-Tibetan languages">
<text>Sino-Tibetan (also referred to as Trans-Himalayan) is a family of more than 400 languages, second only to Indo-European in number of native speakers. Around 1.4 billion people speak a Sino-Tibetan language. The vast majority of these are the 1.3 billion native speakers of Sinitic languages. Other Sino-Tibetan languages with large numbers of speakers include Burmese (33 million) and the Tibetic languages (6 million). Four United Nations member states (China, Singapore, Myanmar, and Bhutan) have a Sino-Tibetan language as a main native language. Other languages of the family are spoken in the Himalayas, the Southeast Asian Massif, and the eastern edge of the Tibetan Plateau. Most of these have small speech communities in remote mountain areas, and as such are poorly documented.

Several low-level subgroups have been securely reconstructed, but reconstruction of a proto-language for the family as a whole is still at an early stage, so the higher-level structure of Sino-Tibetan remains unclear. Although the family is traditionally presented as divided into Sinitic (i.e. Chinese languages) and Tibeto-Burman branches, a common origin of the non-Sinitic languages has never been demonstrated. The Kra–Dai and Hmong–Mien languages are generally included within Sino-Tibetan by Chinese linguists but have been excluded by the international community since the 1940s. Several links to other language families have been proposed, but none have broad acceptance.

==History==
A genetic relationship between Chinese, Tibetan, Burmese, and other languages was first proposed in the early 19th century and is now broadly accepted. The initial focus on languages of civilizations with long literary traditions has been broadened to include less widely spoken languages, some of which have only recently, or never, been written. However, the reconstruction of the family is much less developed than for families such as Indo-European or Austroasiatic. Difficulties have included the great diversity of the languages, the lack of inflection in many of them, and the effects of language contact. In addition, many of the smaller languages are spoken in mountainous areas that are difficult to reach and are often also sensitive border zones. There is no consensus regarding the date and location of their origin.

===Early work===
During the 18th century, several scholars noticed parallels between Tibetan and Burmese, both languages with extensive literary traditions. Early in the following century, Brian Houghton Hodgson and others noted that many non-literary languages of the highlands of northeast India and Southeast Asia were also related to these. The name &quot;Tibeto-Burman&quot; was first applied to this group in 1856 by James Richardson Logan, who added Karen in 1858. The third volume of the &quot;Linguistic Survey of India&quot;, edited by Sten Konow, was devoted to the Tibeto-Burman languages of British India.

Studies of the &quot;Indo-Chinese&quot; languages of Southeast Asia from the mid-19th century by Logan and others revealed that they comprised four families: Tibeto-Burman, Tai, Mon–Khmer and Malayo-Polynesian. Julius Klaproth had noted in 1823 that Burmese, Tibetan, and Chinese all shared common basic vocabulary but that Thai, Mon, and Vietnamese were quite different. Ernst Kuhn envisaged a group with two branches, Chinese-Siamese and Tibeto-Burman. August Conrady called this group Indo-Chinese in his influential 1896 classification, though he had doubts about Karen. Conrady&#x27;s terminology was widely used, but there was uncertainty regarding his exclusion of Vietnamese. Franz Nikolaus Finck in 1909 placed Karen as a third branch of Chinese-Siamese.

Jean Przyluski introduced the French term &quot;sino-tibétain&quot; as the title of his chapter on the group in Meillet and Cohen&#x27;s &quot;Les langues du monde&quot; in 1924. He divided them into three groups: Tibeto-Burman, Chinese and Tai, and was uncertain about the affinity of Karen and Hmong–Mien. The English translation &quot;Sino-Tibetan&quot; first appeared in a short note by Przyluski and Luce in 1931.

===Shafer and Benedict===
In 1935, the anthropologist Alfred Kroeber started the Sino-Tibetan Philology Project, funded by the Works Project Administration and based at the University of California, Berkeley. The project was supervised by Robert Shafer until late 1938, and then by Paul K. Benedict. Under their direction, the staff of 30 non-linguists collated all the available documentation of Sino-Tibetan languages. The result was eight copies of a 15-volume typescript entitled &quot;Sino-Tibetan Linguistics&quot;. This work was never published but furnished the data for a series of papers by Shafer, as well as Shafer&#x27;s five-volume &quot;Introduction to Sino-Tibetan&quot; and Benedict&#x27;s &quot;Sino-Tibetan, a Conspectus&quot;.

Benedict completed the manuscript of his work in 1941, but it was not published until 1972. Instead of building the entire family tree, he set out to reconstruct a Proto-Tibeto-Burman language by comparing five major languages, with occasional comparisons with other languages. He reconstructed a two-way distinction on initial consonants based on voicing, with aspiration conditioned by pre-initial consonants that had been retained in Tibetic but lost in many other languages. Thus, Benedict reconstructed the following initials:

Although the initial consonants of cognates tend to have the same place and manner of articulation, voicing and aspiration are often unpredictable. This irregularity was attacked by Roy Andrew Miller, though Benedict&#x27;s supporters attribute it to the effects of prefixes that have been lost and are often unrecoverable. The issue remains unsolved today. It was cited together with the lack of reconstructable shared morphology, and evidence that much shared lexical material has been borrowed from Chinese into Tibeto-Burman, by Christopher Beckwith, one of the few scholars still arguing that Chinese is not related to Tibeto-Burman.

Benedict also reconstructed, at least for Tibeto-Burman, prefixes such as the causative &quot;s-&quot;, the intransitive &quot;m-&quot;, and &quot;r-&quot;, &quot;b-&quot; &quot;g-&quot; and &quot;d-&quot; of uncertain function, as well as suffixes &quot;-s&quot;, &quot;-t&quot; and &quot;-n&quot;.

===Study of literary languages===

Old Chinese is by far the oldest recorded Sino-Tibetan language, with inscriptions dating from around 1250 BC and a huge body of literature from the first millennium BC. However, the Chinese script is logographic and does not represent sounds systematically; it is therefore difficult to reconstruct the phonology of the language from the written records. Scholars have sought to reconstruct the phonology of Old Chinese by comparing the obscure descriptions of the sounds of Middle Chinese in medieval dictionaries with phonetic elements in Chinese characters and the rhyming patterns of early poetry. The first complete reconstruction, the &quot;Grammata Serica Recensa&quot; of Bernard Karlgren, was used by Benedict and Shafer.

Karlgren&#x27;s reconstruction was somewhat unwieldy, with many sounds having a highly non-uniform distribution. Later scholars have revised it by drawing on a range of other sources. Some proposals were based on cognates in other Sino-Tibetan languages, though workers have also found solely Chinese evidence for them. For example, recent reconstructions of Old Chinese have reduced Karlgren&#x27;s 15 vowels to a six-vowel system originally suggested by Nicholas Bodman. Similarly, Karlgren&#x27;s *l has been recast as *r, with a different initial interpreted as *l, matching Tibeto-Burman cognates, but also supported by Chinese transcriptions of foreign names. A growing number of scholars believe that Old Chinese did not use tones and that the tones of Middle Chinese developed from final consonants. One of these, *-s, is believed to be a suffix, with cognates in other Sino-Tibetan languages.
Tibetic has extensive written records from the adoption of writing by the Tibetan Empire in the mid-7th century. The earliest records of Burmese (such as the 12th-century Myazedi inscription) are more limited, but later an extensive literature developed. Both languages are recorded in alphabetic scripts ultimately derived from the Brahmi script of Ancient India. Most comparative work has used the conservative written forms of these languages, following the dictionaries of Jäschke (Tibetan) and Judson (Burmese), though both contain entries from a wide range of periods.

There are also extensive records in Tangut, the language of the Western Xia (1038–1227). Tangut is recorded in a Chinese-inspired logographic script, whose interpretation presents many difficulties, even though multilingual dictionaries have been found.

Gong Hwang-cherng has compared Old Chinese, Tibetic, Burmese, and Tangut to establish sound correspondences between those languages. He found that Tibetic and Burmese correspond to two Old Chinese vowels, *a and *ə. While this has been considered evidence for a separate Tibeto-Burman subgroup, Hill (2014) finds that Burmese has distinct correspondences for Old Chinese rhymes &quot;-ay&quot; : *-aj and &quot;-i&quot; : *-əj, and hence argues that the development *ə &gt; *a occurred independently in Tibetan and Burmese.

===Fieldwork===
The descriptions of non-literary languages used by Shafer and Benedict were often produced by missionaries and colonial administrators of varying linguistic skills. Most of the smaller Sino-Tibetan languages are spoken in inaccessible mountainous areas, many of which are politically or militarily sensitive and thus closed to investigators. Until the 1980s, the best-studied areas were Nepal and northern Thailand. In the 1980s and 1990s, new surveys were published from the Himalayas and southwestern China. Of particular interest was the increasing literature on the Qiangic languages of western Sichuan and adjacent areas.

==Distribution==

Most of the current spread of Sino-Tibetan languages is the result of historical expansions of the three groups with the most speakers – Chinese, Burmese and Tibetic – replacing an unknown number of earlier languages. These groups also have the longest literary traditions of the family. The remaining languages are spoken in mountainous areas, along the southern slopes of the Himalayas, the Southeast Asian Massif and the eastern edge of the Tibetan Plateau.

===Contemporary languages===
The branch with the largest number of speakers by far is the Sinitic languages, with 1.3 billion speakers, most of whom live in the eastern half of China. The first records of Chinese are oracle bone inscriptions from , when Old Chinese was spoken around the middle reaches of the Yellow River. Chinese has since expanded throughout China, forming a family whose diversity has been compared with the Romance languages. Diversity is greater in the rugged terrain of southeast China than in the North China Plain.

Burmese is the national language of Myanmar, and the first language of some 33 million people. Burmese speakers first entered the northern Irrawaddy basin from what is now western Yunnan in the early ninth century, in conjunction with an invasion by Nanzhao that shattered the Pyu city-states. Other Burmish languages are still spoken in Dehong Prefecture in the far west of Yunnan. By the 11th century, their Pagan Kingdom had expanded over the whole basin. The oldest texts, such as the Myazedi inscription, date from the early 12th century. The closely related Loloish languages are spoken by 9 million people in the mountains of western Sichuan, Yunnan, and nearby areas in northern Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, and Vietnam.

The Tibetic languages are spoken by some 6 million people on the Tibetan Plateau and neighbouring areas in the Himalayas and western Sichuan. They are descended from Old Tibetan, which was originally spoken in the Yarlung Valley before it was spread by the expansion of the Tibetan Empire in the seventh century. Although the empire collapsed in the ninth century, Classical Tibetan remained influential as the liturgical language of Tibetan Buddhism.

The remaining languages are spoken in upland areas. Southernmost are the Karen languages, spoken by 4 million people in the hill country along the Myanmar–Thailand border, with the greatest diversity in the Karen Hills, which are believed to be the homeland of the group. The highlands stretching from northeast India to northern Myanmar contain over 100 highly diverse Sino-Tibetan languages. Other Sino-Tibetan languages are found along the southern slopes of the Himalayas and the eastern edge of the Tibetan plateau.
The 22 official languages listed in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution of India include only two Sino-Tibetan languages, namely Meitei (officially called Manipuri) and Bodo.

===Homeland===
There has been a range of proposals for the Sino-Tibetan urheimat, reflecting the uncertainty about the classification of the family and its time depth. Three major hypotheses for the place and time of Sino-Tibetan unity have been presented:
* The most commonly cited hypothesis associates the family with the Neolithic Yangshao culture (7000–5000 years BP) of the Yellow River basin, with an expansion driven by millet agriculture. This scenario is associated with a proposed primary split between Sinitic in the east and the Tibeto-Burman languages, often assigned to the Majiayao culture (5300–4000 years BP) in the upper reaches of the Yellow River on the northeast edge of the Tibetan plateau. For example, James Matisoff proposes a split around 6000 years BP, with Chinese-speakers settling along the Yellow River and other groups migrating south down the Yangtze, Mekong, Salween and Brahmaputra rivers.
* George van Driem proposes a Sino-Tibetan homeland in the Sichuan Basin before 9000 years BP, with an associated taxonomy reflecting various outward migrations over time, first into northeast India, and later north (the predecessors of Chinese and Tibetic) and south (Karen and Lolo–Burmese).
* Roger Blench argues that agriculture cannot be reconstructed for Proto-Sino-Tibetan. Blench and Mark Post have proposed that the earliest speakers of Sino-Tibetan were not farmers but highly diverse foragers in the eastern foothills of the Himalayas in Northeast India, the area of greatest diversity, around 9000 years BP. They then envisage a series of migrations over the following millennia, with Sinitic representing one of the groups that migrated into China.
Zhang et al. (2019) performed a computational phylogenetic analysis of 109 Sino-Tibetan languages to suggest a Sino-Tibetan homeland in northern China near the Yellow River basin. The study further suggests that there was an initial major split between the Sinitic and Tibeto-Burman languages approximately 4,200 to 7,800 years ago (with an average of 5,900 years ago), associated with the Yangshao and/or Majiayao cultures. Sagart et al. (2019) performed another phylogenetic analysis based on different data and methods to arrive at the same conclusions to the homeland and divergence model but proposed an earlier root age of approximately 7,200 years ago, associating its origin with millet farmers of the late Cishan culture and early Yangshao culture. Both of these studies have been criticized by Orlandi (2021) for their reliance on lexical items, which are not seen as robust indicators of language ancestry.
==Classification==
Several low-level branches of the family, particularly Lolo-Burmese, have been securely reconstructed, but in the absence of a secure reconstruction of a Sino-Tibetan proto-language, the higher-level structure of the family remains unclear. Thus, a conservative classification of Sino-Tibetan/Tibeto-Burman would posit several dozen small coordinate families and isolates; attempts at subgrouping are either geographic conveniences or hypotheses for further research.

===Li (1937)===
In a survey in the 1937 &quot;Chinese Yearbook&quot;, Li Fang-Kuei described the family as consisting of four branches:
* Indo-Chinese (Sino-Tibetan)
** Chinese
** Tai (later expanded to Kam–Tai)
** Miao–Yao (Hmong–Mien)
** Tibeto-Burman
Tai and Miao–Yao were included because they shared isolating typology, tone systems and some vocabulary with Chinese. At the time, tone was considered so fundamental to language that tonal typology could be used as the basis for classification. In the Western scholarly community, these languages are no longer included in Sino-Tibetan, with the similarities attributed to diffusion across the Mainland Southeast Asia linguistic area, especially since . The exclusions of Vietnamese by Kuhn and of Tai and Miao–Yao by Benedict were vindicated in 1954 when André-Georges Haudricourt demonstrated that the tones of Vietnamese were reflexes of final consonants from Proto-Mon–Khmer.

Many Chinese linguists continue to follow Li&#x27;s classification. However, this arrangement remains problematic. For example, there is disagreement over whether to include the entire Kra–Dai family or just Kam–Tai (Zhuang–Dong excludes the Kra languages), because the Chinese cognates that form the basis of the putative relationship are not found in all branches of the family and have not been reconstructed for the family as a whole. In addition, Kam–Tai itself no longer appears to be a valid node within Kra–Dai.

===Benedict (1942)===
Benedict overtly excluded Vietnamese (placing it in Mon–Khmer) as well as Hmong–Mien and Kra–Dai (placing them in Austro-Tai). He otherwise retained the outlines of Conrady&#x27;s Indo-Chinese classification, though putting Karen in an intermediate position:
* Sino-Tibetan
** Chinese
** Tibeto-Karen
*** Karen
*** Tibeto-Burman
===Shafer (1955)===
Shafer criticized the division of the family into Tibeto-Burman and Sino-Daic branches, which he attributed to the different groups of languages studied by Konow and other scholars in British India on the one hand and by Henri Maspero and other French linguists on the other. He proposed a detailed classification, with six top-level divisions:
* Sino-Tibetan
** Sinitic
** Daic
** Bodic
** Burmic
** Baric
** Karenic
Shafer was sceptical of the inclusion of Daic, but after meeting Maspero in Paris decided to retain it pending a definitive resolution of the question.

===Matisoff (1978, 2015)===
James Matisoff abandoned Benedict&#x27;s Tibeto-Karen hypothesis:
* Sino-Tibetan
** Chinese
** Tibeto-Burman
Some more-recent Western scholars, such as Bradley (1997) and La Polla (2003), have retained Matisoff&#x27;s two primary branches, though differing in the details of Tibeto-Burman. However, Jacques (2006) notes, &quot;comparative work has never been able to put forth evidence for common innovations to all the Tibeto-Burman languages (the Sino-Tibetan languages to the exclusion of Chinese)&quot; and that &quot;it no longer seems justified to treat Chinese as the first branching of the Sino-Tibetan family,&quot; because the morphological divide between Chinese and Tibeto-Burman has been bridged by recent reconstructions of Old Chinese.

The internal structure of Sino-Tibetan has been tentatively revised as the following Stammbaum by Matisoff in the final print release of the &quot;Sino-Tibetan Etymological Dictionary and Thesaurus&quot; (STEDT) in 2015. Matisoff acknowledges that the position of Chinese within the family remains an open question.
*Sino-Tibetan
**Chinese
**Tibeto-Burman
***Northeast Indian areal group
****&quot;North Assam&quot;
*****Tani
*****Deng
****Kuki-Chin
****&quot;Naga&quot; areal group
*****Central Naga (Ao group)
*****Angami–Pochuri group
*****Zeme group
*****Tangkhulic
****Meitei
****Mikir / Karbi
****Mru
****Sal
*****Bodo–Garo
*****Northern Naga / Konyakian
*****Jingpho–Asakian
***Himalayish
****Tibeto-Kanauri
*****Western Himalayish
*****Bodic
*****Lepcha
*****Tamangish
*****Dhimal
****Newar
****Kiranti
****Kham-Magar-Chepang
***Tangut-Qiang
****Tangut
****Qiangic
****Rgyalrongic
***Nungic
***Tujia
***Lolo-Burmese–Naxi
****Lolo-Burmese
****Naxi
***Karenic
***Bai
===Starostin (1996)===
Sergei Starostin proposed that both the Kiranti languages and Chinese are divergent from a &quot;core&quot; Tibeto-Burman of at least Bodish, Lolo-Burmese, Tamangic, Jinghpaw, Kukish, and Karen (other families were not analysed) in a hypothesis called &quot;Sino-Kiranti&quot;. The proposal takes two forms: that Sinitic and Kiranti are themselves a valid node or that the two are not demonstrably close so that Sino-Tibetan has three primary branches:
* Sino-Tibetan (version 1)
** Sino-Kiranti
** Tibeto-Burman
* Sino-Tibetan (version 2)
** Chinese
** Kiranti
** Tibeto-Burman
===Van Driem (1997, 2001)===
George van Driem, like Shafer, rejects a primary split between Chinese and the rest, suggesting that Chinese owes its traditional privileged place in Sino-Tibetan to historical, typological, and cultural, rather than linguistic, criteria. He calls the entire family &quot;Tibeto-Burman&quot;, a name he says has historical primacy, but other linguists who reject a privileged position for Chinese nevertheless continue to call the resulting family &quot;Sino-Tibetan&quot;.

Like Matisoff, van Driem acknowledges that the relationships of the &quot;Kuki–Naga&quot; languages (Kuki, Mizo, Meitei, etc.), both amongst each other and to the other languages of the family, remain unclear. However, rather than placing them in a geographic grouping, as Matisoff does, van Driem leaves them unclassified. He has proposed several hypotheses, including the reclassification of Chinese to a Sino-Bodic subgroup:
*Tibeto-Burman
** Western (Baric, Brahmaputran, or Sal): Dhimal, Bodo–Garo, Konyak, Kachin–Luic
** Eastern
*** Northern (Sino-Bodic)
**** Northwestern (Bodic): Bodish, Kirantic, West Himalayish, Tamangic and several isolates
**** Northeastern (Sinitic)
*** Southern
**** Southwestern: Lolo-Burmese, Karenic
**** Southeastern: Qiangic, Jiarongic
**Some other small families and isolates as primary branches (Newar, Nungish, Magaric, &quot;etc.&quot;)
Van Driem points to two main pieces of evidence establishing a special relationship between Sinitic and Bodic and thus placing Chinese within the Tibeto-Burman family. First, there are some parallels between the morphology of Old Chinese and the modern Bodic languages. Second, there is a body of lexical cognates between the Chinese and Bodic languages, represented by the Kirantic language Limbu.

In response, Matisoff notes that the existence of shared lexical material only serves to establish an absolute relationship between two language families, not their relative relationship to one another. Although some cognate sets presented by van Driem are confined to Chinese and Bodic, many others are found in Sino-Tibetan languages generally and thus do not serve as evidence for a special relationship between Chinese and Bodic.

===Van Driem&#x27;s &quot;fallen leaves&quot; model (2001, 2014)===
Van Driem has also proposed a &quot;fallen leaves&quot; model that lists dozens of well-established low-level groups while remaining agnostic about intermediate groupings of these. In the most recent version (van Driem 2014), 42 groups are identified (with individual languages highlighted in &quot;italics&quot;):
*Bodish
*&quot;Tshangla&quot;
*West Himalayish
*Tamangic
*Newaric
*Kiranti
*&quot;Lepcha&quot;
*Magaric
*Chepangic
*Raji–Raute
*&quot;Dura&quot;
*&quot;&#x27;Ole&quot;
*&quot;Gongduk&quot;
*&quot;Lhokpu&quot;
*Siangic
*Kho-Bwa
*Hrusish
*Digarish
*Midžuish
*Tani
*Dhimalish
*Brahmaputran (Sal)
*&quot;Pyu&quot;
*Ao
*Angami–Pochuri
*Tangkhul
*Zeme
*&quot;Meithei&quot;
*Kukish
*&quot;Karbi&quot;
*Mru
*Sinitic
*Bai
*Tujia
*Lolo-Burmese
*Qiangic
*Ersuish
*Naic
*Rgyalrongic
*Kachinic
*Nungish
*Karenic
He also suggested (van Driem 2007) that the Sino-Tibetan language family be renamed &quot;Trans-Himalayan&quot;, which he considers to be more neutral.

Orlandi (2021) also considers the van Driem&#x27;s Trans-Himalayan fallen leaves model to be more plausible than the bifurcate classification of Sino-Tibetan being split into Sinitic and Tibeto-Burman.

===Blench and Post (2014)===
Roger Blench and Mark W. Post have criticized the applicability of conventional Sino-Tibetan classification schemes to minor languages lacking an extensive written history (unlike Chinese, Tibetic, and Burmese). They find that the evidence for the subclassification or even ST affiliation in all of several minor languages of northeastern India, in particular, is either poor or absent altogether.

In their view, many such languages would for now be best considered unclassified, or &quot;internal isolates&quot; within the family. They propose a provisional classification of the remaining languages:
*Sino-Tibetan
**Karbi (Mikir)
**Mruish
***
****Tani
****Nagish: Ao, Kuki-Chin, Tangkhul, Zeme, Angami–Pochuri and Meitei
****Western: Gongduk, &#x27;Ole, Mahakiranti, Lepcha, Kham–Magaric–Chepang, Tamangic, and Lhokpu
****Karenic
****Jingpho–Konyak–Bodo
****Eastern 
*****Tujia
*****Bai
*****Northern Qiangic
*****Southern Qiangic
******Chinese (Sinitic)
******Lolo-Burmese–Naic
******Bodish
*****Nungish
Following that, because they propose that the three best-known branches may be much closer related to each other than they are to &quot;minor&quot; Sino-Tibetan languages, Blench and Post argue that &quot;Sino-Tibetan&quot; or &quot;Tibeto-Burman&quot; are inappropriate names for a family whose earliest divergences led to different languages altogether. They support the proposed name &quot;Trans-Himalayan&quot;.

===Menghan Zhang, Shi Yan, et al. (2019)===
A team of researchers led by Pan Wuyun and Jin Li proposed the following phylogenetic tree in 2019, based on lexical items:
*Sino-Tibetan
**Sinitic
**Tibeto-Burman
****Karenic
****Kuki-Chin–Naga
****Sal
*****
******Digarish
******Tani
******
*******Himalayish
*******Nungish
*******Kinauri
********
*********Gurung-Tamang
*********Bodish
*********
**********Naic
**********Ersuish, Qiangic, Rgyalrongic
*********Lolo-Burmese
==Typology==
===Word order===
Except for the Chinese, Bai, Karenic, and Mruic languages, the usual word order in Sino-Tibetan languages is object–verb. However, Chinese and Bai differ from almost all other subject–verb–object languages in the world in placing relative clauses before the nouns they modify. Most scholars believe SOV to be the original order, with Chinese, Karen, and Bai having acquired SVO order due to the influence of neighbouring languages in the Mainland Southeast Asia linguistic area. This has been criticized as being insufficiently corroborated by Djamouri et al. 2007, who instead reconstruct a VO order for Proto-Sino-Tibetan.

===Phonology===
Contrastive tones are a feature found across the family although absent in some languages like Purik. Phonation contrasts are also present among many, notably in the Lolo-Burmese group. While Benedict contended that Proto-Tibeto-Burman would have a two-tone system, Matisoff refrained from reconstructing it since tones in individual languages may have developed independently through the process of tonogenesis.

===Morphology===
====The structure of words====
Sino-Tibetan is structurally one of the most diverse language families in the world, including all of the gradation of morphological complexity from isolating (Lolo-Burmese, Tujia) to polysynthetic (Gyalrongic, Kiranti) languages. While Sinitic languages are normally taken to be a prototypical example of the isolating morphological type, southern Chinese languages express this trait far more strongly than northern Chinese languages do.

====Voice and Voicing alternation====
Initial consonant alternations related to transitivity are pervasive in Sino-Tibetan; while devoicing (or aspiration) of the initial is associated with a transitive/causative verb, voicing is linked to its intransitive/anticausative counterpart. This is argued to reflect morphological derivations that existed in earlier stages of the family. Even in Chinese, one would find semantically-related pairs of verbs such as 見 &#x27;to see&#x27; (MC: &quot;kenH&quot;) and 現 &#x27;to appear&#x27; (&quot;ɣenH&quot;), which are respectively reconstructed as &quot;*[k]ˤen-s&quot; and &quot;*N-[k]ˤen-s&quot; in the Baxter-Sagart system of Old Chinese.

====Ergativity====
In morphosyntactic alignment, many Tibeto-Burman languages have ergative and/or anti-ergative (an argument that is not an actor) case marking. However, the anti-ergative case markings can not be reconstructed at higher levels in the family and are thought to be innovations.

====Person indexation====
Many Sino-Tibetan languages exhibit a system of person indexation. Notably, Gyalrongic and Kiranti have an inverse marker prefixed to a transitive verb when the agent is lower than the patient in a certain person hierarchy.

Hodgson had in 1849 noted a dichotomy between &quot;pronominalized&quot; (inflecting) languages, stretching across the Himalayas from Himachal Pradesh to eastern Nepal, and &quot;non-pronominalized&quot; (isolating) languages. Konow (1909) explained the pronominalized languages as due to a Munda substratum, with the idea that Indo-Chinese languages were essentially isolating as well as tonal. Maspero later attributed the putative substratum to Indo-Aryan. It was not until Benedict that the inflectional systems of these languages were recognized as (partially) native to the family. Scholars disagree over the extent to which the agreement system in the various languages can be reconstructed for the proto-language.

===Evidentiality, mirativity, and egophoricity===
Although not very common in some families and linguistic areas like Standard Average European, fairly complex systems of evidentiality (grammatical marking of information source) are found in many Tibeto-Burman languages. The family has also contributed to the study of mirativity and egophoricity, which are relatively new concepts in linguistic typology.

==Vocabulary==


==Proposed external relationships==
Beyond the traditionally recognized families of Southeast Asia, some possible broader relationships have been suggested.

===Austronesian===

Laurent Sagart proposes a &quot;Sino-Austronesian&quot; family with Sino-Tibetan and Austronesian (including Kra–Dai as a subbranch) as primary branches. Stanley Starosta has extended this proposal with a further branch called &quot;Yangzian&quot; joining Hmong–Mien and Austroasiatic. The proposal has been largely rejected by other linguists who argue that the similarities between Austronesian and Sino-Tibetan more likely arose from contact rather than being genetic.

===Dené–Yeniseian===
As noted by Tailleur and Werner, some of the earliest proposals of genetic relations of Yeniseian, by M.A. Castrén (1856), James Byrne (1892), and G.J. Ramstedt (1907), suggested that Yeniseian was a northern relative of the Sino–Tibetan languages. These ideas were followed much later by Kai Donner and Karl Bouda. A 2008 study found further evidence for a possible relation between Yeniseian and Sino–Tibetan, citing several possible cognates. Gao Jingyi (2014) identified twelve Sinitic and Yeniseian shared etymologies that belonged to the basic vocabulary, and argued that these Sino-Yeniseian etymologies could not be loans from either language into the other.

The &quot;Sino-Caucasian&quot; hypothesis of Sergei Starostin posits that the Yeniseian languages form a clade with Sino-Tibetan, which he called Sino-Yeniseian. The Sino-Caucasian hypothesis has been expanded by others to &quot;Dené–Caucasian&quot; to include the Na-Dené languages of North America, Burushaski, Basque and, occasionally, Etruscan. A narrower binary Dené–Yeniseian family has recently been well received. The validity of the rest of the family, however, is viewed as doubtful or rejected by nearly all historical linguists. An updated tree by Georgiy Starostin now groups Na-Dene with Sino-Tibetan and Yeniseian with Burushaski (Karasuk hypothesis).

A link between the Na–Dené languages and Sino-Tibetan languages, known as Sino–Dené had also been proposed by Edward Sapir. Around 1920 Sapir became convinced that Na-Dené was more closely related to Sino-Tibetan than to other American families. He wrote a series of letters to Alfred Kroeber where he enthusiastically spoke of a connection between Na-Dene and &quot;Indo-Chinese&quot;. In 1925, a supporting article summarizing his thoughts, albeit not written by him, entitled &quot;The Similarities of Chinese and Indian Languages&quot;, was published in Science Supplements. The Sino-Dene hypothesis never gained foothold in the United States outside of Sapir’s circle, though it was later revitalized by Robert Shafer (1952, 1957, 1969) and Morris Swadesh (1952, 1965). Edward Vadja&#x27;s Dené–Yeniseian proposal renewed interest among linguists such as Geoffrey Caveney (2014) to look into support for the Sino–Dené hypothesis. Caveney considered a link between Sino-Tibetan, Na-Dené, and Yeniseian to be plausible but did not support the hypothesis that Sino-Tibetan and Na-Dené were related to the Caucasian languages (Sino–Caucasian and Dené–Caucasian).

A 2023 analysis by David Bradley using the standard techniques of comparative linguistics supports a distant genetic link between the Sino-Tibetan, Na-Dené, and Yeniseian language families. Bradley argues that any similarities Sino-Tibetan shares with other language families of the East Asia area such as Hmong-Mien, Altaic (which is a sprachbund), Austroasiatic, Kra–Dai, Austronesian came through contact; but as there has been no recent contact between the Sino-Tibetan, Na-Dené, and Yeniseian language families, any similarities these groups share must be residual.

===Indo-European===
August Conrad proposed the Sino-Tibetan-Indo-European language family. This hypothesis holds that there is a genetic relationship between the Sino-Tibetan language family and the Indo-European language family. The earliest comparative linguistic study of Chinese and Indo-European languages was by the 18th-century Nordic scholar Olaus Rudbeck. He compared the vocabulary of Gothic and Chinese and guessed that the two may be of the same origin. In the second half of the 19th century, Kong Haogu, Shigude, Ijosser, etc. successively proposed that Chinese and European languages are homologous. Among them, Kong Haogu, through the comparison of Chinese and Indo-European domestic animal vocabulary, first proposed an Indo-Chinese language macrofamily (including Chinese, Tibetan, Burmese, and Indo-European languages).

In the 20th century, R. Shafer put forward the conjecture of a Eurasial language super-family and listed hundreds of similar words between Tibeto-Burman and Indo-European languages.

==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Works cited===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* (preprint )
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* reprinted as 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
**
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
**


===General===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

*James Matisoff, &quot;Tibeto-Burman languages and their subgrouping&quot;
*Sino-Tibetan Branches Project (STBP)
*Behind the Sino-Tibetan Database of Lexical Cognates: Introductory remarks
*Sinotibetan Lexical Homology Database
*Guillaume Jacques, &quot;The Genetic Position of Chinese&quot;
*Marc Miyake (2014), &quot;Why Sino-Tibetan reconstruction is not like Indo-European reconstruction (yet)&quot;
*Andrew Hsiu (2018), &quot;Linking the Sino-Tibetan fallen leaves&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q45961" start="0" end="12" title="Sino-Tibetan languages" label="Sino-Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q45961" start="34" end="49" title="Sino-Tibetan languages" label="Trans-Himalayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="56" end="62" title="language family" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="106" end="119" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q33857" start="273" end="290" title="Sinitic languages" label="Sinitic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9228" start="360" end="367" title="Burmese language" label="Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641150" start="389" end="406" title="Tibetic languages" label="Tibetic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="425" end="439" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="455" end="460" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="462" end="471" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="473" end="480" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="486" end="492" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="598" end="607" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569300" start="613" end="635" title="Southeast Asian Massif" label="Southeast Asian Massif"/>
<link wikidata="Q179842" start="665" end="680" title="Tibetan Plateau" label="Tibetan Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2210319" start="835" end="848" title="linguistic reconstruction" label="reconstructed"/>
<link wikidata="Q206577" start="874" end="888" title="proto-language" label="proto-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33857" start="1069" end="1076" title="Sinitic languages" label="Sinitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="1106" end="1119" title="Tibeto-Burman languages" label="Tibeto-Burman"/>
<link wikidata="Q34171" start="1208" end="1215" title="Kra–Dai languages" label="Kra–Dai"/>
<link wikidata="Q33322" start="1220" end="1240" title="Hmong–Mien languages" label="Hmong–Mien languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128415" start="1384" end="1416" title="classification schemes for Southeast Asian languages" label="links to other language families"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="1484" end="1504" title="Genetic relationship (linguistics)" label="genetic relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="1921" end="1934" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="1938" end="1951" title="Austroasiatic languages" label="Austroasiatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q735026" start="2502" end="2524" title="Brian Houghton Hodgson" label="Brian Houghton Hodgson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383023" start="2736" end="2758" title="James Richardson Logan" label="James Richardson Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364815" start="2770" end="2775" title="Karen languages" label="Karen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554024" start="2815" end="2841" title="Linguistic Survey of India" label="Linguistic Survey of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q477514" start="2859" end="2869" title="Sten Konow" label="Sten Konow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="2917" end="2930" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q749720" start="3106" end="3109" title="Tai languages" label="Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="3111" end="3120" title="Mon–Khmer languages" label="Mon–Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q143158" start="3125" end="3142" title="Malayo-Polynesian languages" label="Malayo-Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q77068" start="3144" end="3159" title="Julius Klaproth" label="Julius Klaproth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499736" start="3237" end="3247" title="vocabulary" label="vocabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="3257" end="3261" title="Thai language" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q13349" start="3263" end="3266" title="Mon language" label="Mon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="3272" end="3282" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360586" start="3305" end="3315" title="Ernst Kuhn" label="Ernst Kuhn"/>
<link wikidata="Q70421" start="3388" end="3402" title="August Conrady" label="August Conrady"/>
<link wikidata="Q121200" start="3617" end="3637" title="Franz Nikolaus Finck" label="Franz Nikolaus Finck"/>
<link wikidata="Q12900505" start="3698" end="3712" title="Jean Przyluski" label="Jean Przyluski"/>
<link wikidata="Q347001" start="3810" end="3817" title="Antoine Meillet" label="Meillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q969286" start="3822" end="3827" title="Marcel Cohen" label="Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q33322" start="3994" end="4004" title="Hmong–Mien" label="Hmong–Mien"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585476" start="4103" end="4107" title="Gordon Luce" label="Luce"/>
<link wikidata="Q311538" start="4172" end="4186" title="Alfred Kroeber" label="Alfred Kroeber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200079" start="4245" end="4273" title="Works Project Administration" label="Works Project Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="4291" end="4325" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q532753" start="4400" end="4416" title="Paul K. Benedict" label="Paul K. Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251864" start="5030" end="5058" title="Proto-Tibeto-Burman language" label="Proto-Tibeto-Burman language"/>
<link wikidata="Q214090" start="5465" end="5470" title="place of articulation" label="place"/>
<link wikidata="Q210847" start="5475" end="5497" title="manner of articulation" label="manner of articulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2676921" start="5581" end="5598" title="Roy Andrew Miller" label="Roy Andrew Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="5901" end="5908" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="5914" end="5927" title="Tibeto-Burman" label="Tibeto-Burman"/>
<link wikidata="Q967263" start="5932" end="5952" title="Christopher Beckwith" label="Christopher Beckwith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737190" start="6117" end="6126" title="causative" label="causative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166153" start="6147" end="6159" title="intransitive" label="intransitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q35137" start="6375" end="6386" title="Old Chinese" label="Old Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083651" start="6771" end="6795" title="phonology of Old Chinese" label="phonology of Old Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016252" start="6851" end="6865" title="Middle Chinese" label="Middle Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="6917" end="6935" title="Chinese characters" label="Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593681" start="7023" end="7046" title="Grammata Serica Recensa" label="Grammata Serica Recensa"/>
<link wikidata="Q167112" start="7056" end="7072" title="Bernard Karlgren" label="Bernard Karlgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053183" start="7448" end="7478" title="reconstructions of Old Chinese" label="reconstructions of Old Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q22696816" start="7564" end="7579" title="Nicholas Bodman" label="Nicholas Bodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641150" start="8010" end="8017" title="Tibetic languages" label="Tibetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431480" start="8084" end="8098" title="Tibetan Empire" label="Tibetan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9228" start="8147" end="8154" title="Burmese language" label="Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q494132" start="8181" end="8200" title="Myazedi inscription" label="Myazedi inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q185083" start="8343" end="8356" title="Brahmi script" label="Brahmi script"/>
<link wikidata="Q64653" start="8487" end="8494" title="Heinrich August Jäschke" label="Jäschke"/>
<link wikidata="Q366131" start="8509" end="8515" title="Adoniram Judson" label="Judson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727930" start="8622" end="8628" title="Tangut language" label="Tangut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427" start="8650" end="8661" title="Western Xia" label="Western Xia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581683" start="8841" end="8858" title="Gong Hwang-cherng" label="Gong Hwang-cherng"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="9769" end="9774" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="9788" end="9796" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636765" start="9952" end="9969" title="Qiangic languages" label="Qiangic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="9981" end="9988" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="10406" end="10415" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569300" start="10421" end="10443" title="Southeast Asian Massif" label="Southeast Asian Massif"/>
<link wikidata="Q179842" start="10472" end="10487" title="Tibetan Plateau" label="Tibetan Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q33857" start="10580" end="10597" title="Sinitic languages" label="Sinitic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q283127" start="10707" end="10718" title="oracle bone" label="oracle bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q35137" start="10744" end="10755" title="Old Chinese" label="Old Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355" start="10800" end="10812" title="Yellow River" label="Yellow River"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="10919" end="10936" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q147304" start="11012" end="11029" title="North China Plain" label="North China Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9228" start="11032" end="11039" title="Burmese language" label="Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="11068" end="11075" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q26076" start="11171" end="11180" title="Irrawaddy River" label="Irrawaddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="11212" end="11218" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045322" start="11282" end="11289" title="Nanzhao" label="Nanzhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627675" start="11309" end="11324" title="Pyu city-states" label="Pyu city-states"/>
<link wikidata="Q865713" start="11332" end="11349" title="Burmish languages" label="Burmish languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q999132" start="11370" end="11387" title="Dehong Prefecture" label="Dehong Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q888574" start="11442" end="11455" title="Pagan Kingdom" label="Pagan Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q494132" start="11521" end="11540" title="Myazedi inscription" label="Myazedi inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q37035" start="11596" end="11613" title="Loloish languages" label="Loloish languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641150" start="11762" end="11779" title="Tibetic languages" label="Tibetic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q179842" start="11823" end="11838" title="Tibetan Plateau" label="Tibetan Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="11869" end="11878" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="11891" end="11898" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085214" start="11924" end="11935" title="Old Tibetan" label="Old Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296063" start="11972" end="11986" title="Yarlung Valley" label="Yarlung Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431480" start="12032" end="12046" title="Tibetan Empire" label="Tibetan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128314" start="12123" end="12140" title="Classical Tibetan" label="Classical Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="12192" end="12208" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364815" start="12284" end="12299" title="Karen languages" label="Karen languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369706" start="12418" end="12429" title="Karen Hills" label="Karen Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="12677" end="12686" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12414903" start="12772" end="12816" title="Eighth Schedule to the Constitution of India" label="Eighth Schedule to the Constitution of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q33868" start="12865" end="12871" title="Meitei language" label="Meitei"/>
<link wikidata="Q33223" start="12905" end="12909" title="Bodo language" label="Bodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458559" start="12984" end="12992" title="urheimat" label="urheimat"/>
<link wikidata="Q854631" start="13247" end="13263" title="Yangshao culture" label="Yangshao culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355" start="13292" end="13304" title="Yellow River" label="Yellow River"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="13340" end="13346" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748296" start="13426" end="13433" title="Varieties of Chinese" label="Sinitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="13454" end="13477" title="Tibeto-Burman languages" label="Tibeto-Burman languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310602" start="13501" end="13517" title="Majiayao culture" label="Majiayao culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q179842" start="13609" end="13624" title="Tibetan plateau" label="Tibetan plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106273" start="13639" end="13653" title="James Matisoff" label="James Matisoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="13789" end="13796" title="Yangtze" label="Yangtze"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="13798" end="13804" title="Mekong" label="Mekong"/>
<link wikidata="Q26422" start="13806" end="13813" title="Salween River" label="Salween"/>
<link wikidata="Q45403" start="13818" end="13829" title="Brahmaputra River" label="Brahmaputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206769" start="13840" end="13856" title="George van Driem" label="George van Driem"/>
<link wikidata="Q271294" start="13897" end="13910" title="Sichuan Basin" label="Sichuan Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4088081" start="14134" end="14146" title="Roger Blench" label="Roger Blench"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="14374" end="14383" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q863038" start="14387" end="14402" title="Northeast India" label="Northeast India"/>
<link wikidata="Q978917" start="15315" end="15329" title="Cishan culture" label="Cishan culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635712" start="15592" end="15604" title="Lolo-Burmese languages" label="Lolo-Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q206577" start="15704" end="15718" title="proto-language" label="proto-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33648" start="15900" end="15908" title="language isolate" label="isolates"/>
<link wikidata="Q610562" start="16076" end="16088" title="Li Fang-Kuei" label="Li Fang-Kuei"/>
<link wikidata="Q749720" start="16186" end="16189" title="Tai languages" label="Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921933" start="16209" end="16216" title="Kam–Tai languages" label="Kam–Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q33322" start="16221" end="16229" title="Hmong–Mien languages" label="Miao–Yao"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="16246" end="16259" title="Tibeto-Burman" label="Tibeto-Burman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423311" start="16311" end="16320" title="isolating language" label="isolating"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="16331" end="16335" title="tone (linguistics)" label="tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q601193" start="16654" end="16693" title="Mainland Southeast Asia linguistic area" label="Mainland Southeast Asia linguistic area"/>
<link wikidata="Q516291" start="16816" end="16841" title="André-Georges Haudricourt" label="André-Georges Haudricourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q116773186" start="16923" end="16938" title="Proto-Mon–Khmer language" label="Proto-Mon–Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34171" start="17126" end="17133" title="Kra–Dai languages" label="Kra–Dai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921933" start="17149" end="17156" title="Kam–Tai languages" label="Kam–Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022087" start="17183" end="17196" title="Kra languages" label="Kra languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33322" start="17558" end="17568" title="Hmong–Mien languages" label="Hmong–Mien"/>
<link wikidata="Q34171" start="17573" end="17580" title="Kra–Dai languages" label="Kra–Dai"/>
<link wikidata="Q783816" start="17598" end="17608" title="Austro-Tai languages" label="Austro-Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364815" start="17708" end="17713" title="Karen languages" label="Karen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="17883" end="17896" title="Tibeto-Burman languages" label="Tibeto-Burman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="18017" end="18030" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q345265" start="18054" end="18067" title="Henri Maspero" label="Henri Maspero"/>
<link wikidata="Q4090000" start="18234" end="18239" title="Bodo–Garo languages" label="Baric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106273" start="18432" end="18446" title="James Matisoff" label="James Matisoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q35137" start="19170" end="19181" title="Old Chinese" label="Old Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q870433" start="19269" end="19278" title="Stammbaum" label="Stammbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q104243458" start="19331" end="19381" title="Sino-Tibetan Etymological Dictionary and Thesaurus" label="Sino-Tibetan Etymological Dictionary and Thesaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217538" start="19605" end="19609" title="Tani languages" label="Tani"/>
<link wikidata="Q56409" start="19615" end="19619" title="Digaro languages" label="Deng"/>
<link wikidata="Q832413" start="19624" end="19633" title="Kukish languages" label="Kuki-Chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11323745" start="19644" end="19648" title="Naga languages" label="Naga"/>
<link wikidata="Q615474" start="19686" end="19688" title="Ao languages" label="Ao"/>
<link wikidata="Q530460" start="19701" end="19715" title="Angami–Pochuri languages" label="Angami–Pochuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q189291" start="19727" end="19731" title="Zeme languages" label="Zeme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516657" start="19743" end="19753" title="Tangkhul languages" label="Tangkhulic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33868" start="19758" end="19764" title="Meitei language" label="Meitei"/>
<link wikidata="Q56591" start="19777" end="19782" title="Karbi language" label="Karbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16908870" start="19787" end="19790" title="Mruic languages" label="Mru"/>
<link wikidata="Q889900" start="19795" end="19798" title="Sal languages" label="Sal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4090000" start="19804" end="19813" title="Bodo–Garo languages" label="Bodo–Garo"/>
<link wikidata="Q774590" start="19835" end="19844" title="Konyak languages" label="Konyakian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515454" start="19850" end="19865" title="Kachin–Luic languages" label="Jingpho–Asakian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309428" start="19884" end="19898" title="Tibeto-Kanauri languages" label="Tibeto-Kanauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301695" start="19904" end="19922" title="West Himalayish languages" label="Western Himalayish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814078" start="19928" end="19933" title="Bodish languages" label="Bodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35990" start="19939" end="19945" title="Lepcha language" label="Lepcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309439" start="19951" end="19960" title="Tamangic languages" label="Tamangish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207648" start="19966" end="19972" title="Dhimal languages" label="Dhimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q33979" start="19977" end="19982" title="Newar language" label="Newar"/>
<link wikidata="Q922148" start="19987" end="19994" title="Kiranti languages" label="Kiranti"/>
<link wikidata="Q33305" start="19999" end="20003" title="Kham language" label="Kham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064367" start="20004" end="20009" title="Magaric languages" label="Magar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5091697" start="20010" end="20017" title="Chepangic languages" label="Chepang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727930" start="20038" end="20044" title="Tangut language" label="Tangut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636765" start="20049" end="20056" title="Qiangic languages" label="Qiangic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56936" start="20061" end="20072" title="Rgyalrongic languages" label="Rgyalrongic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515482" start="20076" end="20082" title="Nungish languages" label="Nungic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512084" start="20086" end="20091" title="Tujia language" label="Tujia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635712" start="20117" end="20129" title="Lolo-Burmese languages" label="Lolo-Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982999" start="20134" end="20138" title="Naic languages" label="Naxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364815" start="20142" end="20149" title="Karenic languages" label="Karenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35103" start="20153" end="20156" title="Bai language" label="Bai"/>
<link wikidata="Q922148" start="20220" end="20237" title="Kiranti languages" label="Kiranti languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206769" start="20788" end="20804" title="George van Driem" label="George van Driem"/>
<link wikidata="Q832413" start="21331" end="21362" title="Kuki-Naga languages" label="&amp;quot;Kuki–Naga&amp;quot; languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q832413" start="21364" end="21368" title="Kukish languages" label="Kuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q36147" start="21370" end="21374" title="Mizo language" label="Mizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33868" start="21376" end="21382" title="Meitei language" label="Meitei"/>
<link wikidata="Q889900" start="21742" end="21745" title="Sal languages" label="Sal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207648" start="21748" end="21754" title="Dhimal languages" label="Dhimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4090000" start="21756" end="21765" title="Bodo–Garo languages" label="Bodo–Garo"/>
<link wikidata="Q774590" start="21767" end="21773" title="Konyak languages" label="Konyak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515454" start="21775" end="21786" title="Kachin–Luic languages" label="Kachin–Luic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814078" start="21851" end="21857" title="Bodish languages" label="Bodish"/>
<link wikidata="Q922148" start="21859" end="21867" title="Kiranti languages" label="Kirantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301695" start="21869" end="21884" title="West Himalayish languages" label="West Himalayish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309439" start="21886" end="21894" title="Tamangic languages" label="Tamangic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33857" start="21935" end="21942" title="Sinitic languages" label="Sinitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635712" start="21976" end="21988" title="Lolo-Burmese languages" label="Lolo-Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364815" start="21990" end="21997" title="Karen languages" label="Karenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636765" start="22017" end="22024" title="Qiangic languages" label="Qiangic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56936" start="22026" end="22035" title="Jiarongic languages" label="Jiarongic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33979" start="22098" end="22103" title="Newar language" label="Newar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515482" start="22105" end="22112" title="Nungish languages" label="Nungish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064367" start="22114" end="22121" title="Magaric languages" label="Magaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q35137" start="22367" end="22378" title="Old Chinese" label="Old Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q56477" start="22533" end="22538" title="Limbu language" label="Limbu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814078" start="23360" end="23366" title="Bodish languages" label="Bodish"/>
<link wikidata="Q36840" start="23374" end="23382" title="Tshangla language" label="Tshangla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301695" start="23390" end="23405" title="West Himalayish languages" label="West Himalayish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309439" start="23407" end="23415" title="Tamangic languages" label="Tamangic"/>
<link wikidata="Q55625069" start="23417" end="23424" title="Newaric languages" label="Newaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q922148" start="23426" end="23433" title="Kiranti languages" label="Kiranti"/>
<link wikidata="Q35990" start="23441" end="23447" title="Lepcha language" label="Lepcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064367" start="23455" end="23462" title="Magaric languages" label="Magaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5091697" start="23464" end="23473" title="Chepangic languages" label="Chepangic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286250" start="23475" end="23485" title="Raji–Raute languages" label="Raji–Raute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449842" start="23493" end="23497" title="Dura language" label="Dura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695204" start="23511" end="23520" title="&amp;#x27;Ole language" label="&amp;#x27;Ole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669221" start="23534" end="23541" title="Gongduk language" label="Gongduk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436603" start="23555" end="23561" title="Lhokpu language" label="Lhokpu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7506818" start="23569" end="23576" title="Siangic languages" label="Siangic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401917" start="23578" end="23585" title="Kho-Bwa languages" label="Kho-Bwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632501" start="23587" end="23594" title="Hrusish languages" label="Hrusish"/>
<link wikidata="Q56409" start="23596" end="23604" title="Digaro languages" label="Digarish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843504" start="23606" end="23614" title="Miju languages" label="Midžuish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217538" start="23616" end="23620" title="Tani languages" label="Tani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207648" start="23622" end="23631" title="Dhimalish languages" label="Dhimalish"/>
<link wikidata="Q889900" start="23633" end="23645" title="Brahmaputran languages" label="Brahmaputran"/>
<link wikidata="Q36259" start="23659" end="23662" title="Pyu language (Burma)" label="Pyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q615474" start="23670" end="23672" title="Ao languages" label="Ao"/>
<link wikidata="Q530460" start="23674" end="23688" title="Angami–Pochuri languages" label="Angami–Pochuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516657" start="23690" end="23698" title="Tangkhul languages" label="Tangkhul"/>
<link wikidata="Q189291" start="23700" end="23704" title="Zeme languages" label="Zeme"/>
<link wikidata="Q33868" start="23712" end="23719" title="Meithei language" label="Meithei"/>
<link wikidata="Q832413" start="23727" end="23733" title="Kukish languages" label="Kukish"/>
<link wikidata="Q56591" start="23741" end="23746" title="Karbi language" label="Karbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16908870" start="23754" end="23757" title="Mruic languages" label="Mru"/>
<link wikidata="Q33857" start="23759" end="23766" title="Sinitic languages" label="Sinitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963847" start="23768" end="23771" title="Bai languages" label="Bai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512084" start="23773" end="23778" title="Tujia language" label="Tujia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635712" start="23780" end="23792" title="Lolo-Burmese languages" label="Lolo-Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636765" start="23794" end="23801" title="Qiangic languages" label="Qiangic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56335" start="23803" end="23810" title="Ersu languages" label="Ersuish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982999" start="23812" end="23816" title="Naic languages" label="Naic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56936" start="23818" end="23829" title="Rgyalrongic languages" label="Rgyalrongic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515454" start="23831" end="23839" title="Kachin–Luic languages" label="Kachinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515482" start="23841" end="23848" title="Nungish languages" label="Nungish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364815" start="23850" end="23857" title="Karenic languages" label="Karenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4088081" start="24243" end="24255" title="Roger Blench" label="Roger Blench"/>
<link wikidata="Q56591" start="24862" end="24867" title="Karbi language" label="Karbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16908870" start="24878" end="24884" title="Mruic languages" label="Mruish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217538" start="24893" end="24897" title="Tani languages" label="Tani"/>
<link wikidata="Q615474" start="24910" end="24912" title="Ao languages" label="Ao"/>
<link wikidata="Q832413" start="24914" end="24923" title="Kuki-Chin languages" label="Kuki-Chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516657" start="24925" end="24933" title="Tangkhul languages" label="Tangkhul"/>
<link wikidata="Q189291" start="24935" end="24939" title="Zeme languages" label="Zeme"/>
<link wikidata="Q530460" start="24941" end="24955" title="Angami–Pochuri languages" label="Angami–Pochuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q33868" start="24960" end="24966" title="Meitei language" label="Meitei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669221" start="24980" end="24987" title="Gongduk language" label="Gongduk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695204" start="24989" end="24998" title="&amp;#x27;Ole language" label="&amp;#x27;Ole"/>
<link wikidata="Q999071" start="25000" end="25011" title="Mahakiranti languages" label="Mahakiranti"/>
<link wikidata="Q35990" start="25013" end="25019" title="Lepcha language" label="Lepcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064367" start="25021" end="25041" title="Magaric languages" label="Kham–Magaric–Chepang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309439" start="25043" end="25051" title="Tamangic languages" label="Tamangic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436603" start="25057" end="25063" title="Lhokpu language" label="Lhokpu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364815" start="25068" end="25075" title="Karen languages" label="Karenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q889900" start="25080" end="25099" title="Sal languages" label="Jingpho–Konyak–Bodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512084" start="25118" end="25123" title="Tujia language" label="Tujia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963847" start="25129" end="25132" title="Macro-Bai languages" label="Bai"/>
<link wikidata="Q56559" start="25138" end="25154" title="Northern Qiang language" label="Northern Qiangic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56563" start="25160" end="25176" title="Southern Qiang language" label="Southern Qiangic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748296" start="25183" end="25190" title="Varieties of Chinese" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635712" start="25207" end="25219" title="Lolo-Burmese languages" label="Lolo-Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982999" start="25220" end="25224" title="Naic languages" label="Naic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814078" start="25231" end="25237" title="Bodish languages" label="Bodish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515482" start="25243" end="25250" title="Nungish languages" label="Nungish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048842" start="25741" end="25750" title="Pan Wuyun" label="Pan Wuyun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6201879" start="25755" end="25761" title="Jin Li" label="Jin Li"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="25785" end="25802" title="phylogenetic tree" label="phylogenetic tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963847" start="26191" end="26194" title="Macro-Bai languages" label="Bai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364815" start="26196" end="26203" title="Karenic languages" label="Karenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16908870" start="26209" end="26214" title="Mruic languages" label="Mruic"/>
<link wikidata="Q539808" start="26276" end="26287" title="subject–object–verb" label="object–verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q651641" start="26343" end="26362" title="subject–verb–object" label="subject–verb–object"/>
<link wikidata="Q601193" start="26605" end="26644" title="Mainland Southeast Asia linguistic area" label="Mainland Southeast Asia linguistic area"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="26821" end="26826" title="Tone (linguistics)" label="tones"/>
<link wikidata="Q567905" start="26904" end="26909" title="Purgi language" label="Purik"/>
<link wikidata="Q678132" start="26911" end="26920" title="Phonation" label="Phonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635712" start="26975" end="26987" title="Lolo-Burmese languages" label="Lolo-Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251864" start="27025" end="27044" title="Proto-Tibeto-Burman language" label="Proto-Tibeto-Burman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27209" end="27220" title="Tone (linguistics)#Origin and developmen" label="tonogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635712" start="27431" end="27443" title="Lolo-Burmese languages" label="Lolo-Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512084" start="27445" end="27450" title="Tujia language" label="Tujia"/>
<link wikidata="Q56936" start="27470" end="27480" title="Gyalrongic languages" label="Gyalrongic"/>
<link wikidata="Q922148" start="27482" end="27489" title="Kiranti languages" label="Kiranti"/>
<link wikidata="Q33857" start="27508" end="27515" title="Sinitic languages" label="Sinitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423311" start="27581" end="27590" title="Isolating language" label="isolating"/>
<link wikidata="Q438358" start="27768" end="27780" title="Alternation (linguistics)" label="alternations"/>
<link wikidata="Q830012" start="27792" end="27804" title="Transitivity (grammar)" label="transitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737190" start="27915" end="27924" title="causative" label="causative"/>
<link wikidata="Q575983" start="27969" end="27982" title="anticausative" label="anticausative"/>
<link wikidata="Q728001" start="28022" end="28046" title="morphological derivation" label="morphological derivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016252" start="28192" end="28194" title="Middle Chinese" label="MC"/>
<link wikidata="Q35137" start="28383" end="28394" title="Old Chinese" label="Old Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536018" start="28419" end="28444" title="morphosyntactic alignment" label="morphosyntactic alignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q324305" start="28480" end="28488" title="ergative case" label="ergative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444799" start="28496" end="28509" title="anti-ergative" label="anti-ergative"/>
<link wikidata="Q56936" start="28794" end="28804" title="Gyalrongic languages" label="Gyalrongic"/>
<link wikidata="Q922148" start="28809" end="28816" title="Kiranti languages" label="Kiranti"/>
<link wikidata="Q892484" start="28825" end="28832" title="Direct–inverse alignment" label="inverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q48612" start="29017" end="29027" title="Synthetic language" label="inflecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="29062" end="29070" title="Himalaya" label="Himalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177" start="29077" end="29093" title="Himachal Pradesh" label="Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="29105" end="29110" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423311" start="29148" end="29157" title="isolating language" label="isolating"/>
<link wikidata="Q33892" start="29234" end="29239" title="Munda languages" label="Munda"/>
<link wikidata="Q20730913" start="29240" end="29250" title="Substrata (linguistics)" label="substratum"/>
<link wikidata="Q33577" start="29391" end="29401" title="Indo-Aryan languages" label="Indo-Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q206577" start="29649" end="29663" title="proto-language" label="proto-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q839463" start="29762" end="29778" title="Sprachbund" label="linguistic areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q471271" start="29784" end="29809" title="Standard Average European" label="Standard Average European"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223979" start="29837" end="29850" title="evidentiality" label="evidentiality"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="29913" end="29936" title="Tibeto-Burman languages" label="Tibeto-Burman languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356464" start="29986" end="29996" title="mirativity" label="mirativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q122942906" start="30001" end="30013" title="egophoricity" label="egophoricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q192625" start="30052" end="30071" title="linguistic typology" label="linguistic typology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128415" start="30196" end="30226" title="Classification schemes for Southeast Asian languages" label="possible broader relationships"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="30354" end="30366" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34171" start="30378" end="30385" title="Kra–Dai languages" label="Kra–Dai"/>
<link wikidata="Q783816" start="30391" end="30400" title="Austro-Tai languages" label="subbranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q55949550" start="30423" end="30439" title="Stanley Starosta" label="Stanley Starosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q27639" start="30851" end="30860" title="Yeniseian languages" label="Yeniseian"/>
<link wikidata="Q531582" start="30865" end="30877" title="Matthias Castrén" label="M.A. Castrén"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="31199" end="31207" title="cognates" label="cognates"/>
<link wikidata="Q507968" start="31441" end="31455" title="Sino-Caucasian" label="Sino-Caucasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q705907" start="31476" end="31492" title="Sergei Starostin" label="Sergei Starostin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27639" start="31509" end="31528" title="Yeniseian languages" label="Yeniseian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="31536" end="31541" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q507968" start="31660" end="31674" title="Dené–Caucasian languages" label="Dené–Caucasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26986" start="31696" end="31713" title="Na-Dené languages" label="Na-Dené languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q216286" start="31732" end="31742" title="Burushaski language" label="Burushaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="31744" end="31750" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="31770" end="31778" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21103" start="31798" end="31812" title="Dené–Yeniseian" label="Dené–Yeniseian"/>
<link wikidata="Q190375" start="31950" end="31970" title="Historical linguistics" label="historical linguists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440681" start="31991" end="32008" title="Georgiy Starostin" label="Georgiy Starostin"/>
<link wikidata="Q216286" start="32065" end="32075" title="Burushaski" label="Burushaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368654" start="32077" end="32084" title="Karasuk languages" label="Karasuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q191095" start="32209" end="32221" title="Edward Sapir" label="Edward Sapir"/>
<link wikidata="Q311538" start="32377" end="32391" title="Alfred Kroeber" label="Alfred Kroeber"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="32732" end="32745" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q333227" start="32845" end="32859" title="Morris Swadesh" label="Morris Swadesh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32959" end="32975" title="Geoffrey Caveney" label="Geoffrey Caveney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231653" start="33283" end="33296" title="David Bradley (linguist)" label="David Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q37845" start="33582" end="33588" title="Altaic languages" label="Altaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q839463" start="33601" end="33611" title="sprachbund" label="sprachbund"/>
<link wikidata="Q350198" start="34186" end="34199" title="Olaus Rudbeck" label="Olaus Rudbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106273" start="35089" end="35103" title="James Matisoff" label="James Matisoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119983" start="35317" end="35334" title="Guillaume Jacques" label="Guillaume Jacques"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755616" start="35381" end="35392" title="Marc Miyake" label="Marc Miyake"/>
</links>
</doc>
