<doc id="25734" wikidata="Q865" url="?curid=25734" title="Taiwan">
<text>Taiwan, officially the Republic of China (ROC), is a country in East Asia. The main island of Taiwan, also known as &quot;Formosa&quot;, lies between the East and South China Sea in the northwestern Pacific Ocean, with the People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC) to the northwest, Japan to the northeast, and the Philippines to the south. It has an area of , with mountain ranges dominating the eastern two-thirds and plains in the western third, where its highly urbanized population is concentrated. The combined territories under ROC control consist of 168 islands in total covering . The largest metropolitan area is formed by Taipei (the capital), New Taipei City, and Keelung. With around 23.9 million inhabitants, Taiwan is among the most densely populated countries.

Taiwan has been settled for at least 25,000 years. Ancestors of Taiwanese indigenous peoples settled the island around 6,000 years ago. In the 17th century, large-scale Han Chinese immigration began under a Dutch colony and continued under the Kingdom of Tungning, the first predominantly Han Chinese state in Taiwanese history. The island was annexed in 1683 by the Qing dynasty of China and ceded to the Empire of Japan in 1895. The Republic of China, which had overthrown the Qing in 1912 under the leadership of Sun Yat-sen, took control following the surrender of Japan in 1945. The immediate resumption of the Chinese Civil War resulted in the loss of the Chinese mainland to Communist forces, who established the People&#x27;s Republic of China, and the flight of the ROC central government to Taiwan in 1949. The effective jurisdiction of the ROC has since been limited to Taiwan, Penghu, and smaller islands.

From the early 1960s, Taiwan saw rapid economic growth and industrialization known as the &quot;Taiwan Miracle&quot;. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, the ROC transitioned from a one-party state under martial law to a multi-party democracy, with democratically elected presidents beginning in 1996. Taiwan&#x27;s export-oriented economy is the 21st-largest in the world by nominal GDP and the 20th-largest by PPP measures, with a focus on steel, machinery, electronics, and chemicals manufacturing. Taiwan is a developed country. It is ranked highly in terms of civil liberties, healthcare, and human development.

The political status of Taiwan is contentious. Despite being a founding member, the ROC no longer represents China as a member of the United Nations after UN members voted in 1971 to recognize the PRC instead. The ROC maintained its claim of being the sole legitimate representative of China and its territory until 1991, when it ceased to regard the Chinese Communist Party as a rebellious group and acknowledged its control over mainland China. Taiwan is claimed by the PRC, which refuses to establish diplomatic relations with countries that recognise the ROC. Taiwan maintains official diplomatic relations with 11 out of 193 UN member states and the Holy See. Many others maintain unofficial diplomatic ties through representative offices and institutions that function as &quot;de facto&quot; embassies and consulates. International organizations in which the PRC participates either refuse to grant membership to Taiwan or allow it to participate on a non-state basis. Domestically, the major political contention is between the Pan-Blue Coalition, who favors eventual Chinese unification under the ROC and promoting a pan-Chinese identity, contrasted with the Pan-Green Coalition, which favors eventual Taiwanese independence and promoting a Taiwanese identity; in the 21st century, both sides have moderated their positions to broaden their appeal.

==Etymology==

===Names for the island===
In his &quot;Daoyi Zhilüe&quot; (1349), Wang Dayuan used &quot;Liuqiu&quot; as a name for the island, or the part of it closest to Penghu. Elsewhere, the name was used for the Ryukyu Islands in general or Okinawa specifically; the name &quot;Ryūkyū&quot; is the Japanese form of &quot;Liúqiú&quot;. The name also appears in the &quot;Book of Sui&quot; (636) and other early works, but scholars cannot agree on whether these references are to the Ryukyus, Taiwan or even Luzon.

The name Formosa () dates from 1542, when Portuguese sailors noted it on their maps as &quot;Ilha Formosa&quot; (Portuguese for &quot;beautiful island&quot;). The name &quot;Formosa&quot; eventually &quot;replaced all others in European literature&quot; and remained in common use among English speakers into the 20th century.

In 1603, a Chinese expedition fleet anchored at a place in Taiwan called Dayuan, a variant of &quot;Taiwan&quot;. In the early 17th century, the Dutch East India Company established a commercial post at Fort Zeelandia (modern-day Anping) on a coastal sandbar called &quot;Tayouan&quot;, after their ethnonym for a nearby Taiwanese aboriginal tribe, possibly Taivoan people. This name was also adopted into the Chinese vernacular as the name of the sandbar and nearby area (Tainan). The modern word &quot;Taiwan&quot; is derived from this usage, which is written in different transliterations ( or ) in Chinese historical records. The area occupied by modern-day Tainan was the first permanent settlement by both European colonists and Chinese immigrants. The settlement grew to be the island&#x27;s most important trading center and served as its capital until 1887.

Use of the current Chinese name () became official as early as 1684 during the Qing dynasty with the establishment of Taiwan Prefecture centered in modern-day Tainan. Through its rapid development the entire Taiwanese mainland eventually became known as &quot;Taiwan&quot;.

===Names of the country and jurisdiction===
The official name of the country in English is the &quot;Republic of China&quot;. Shortly after the ROC&#x27;s establishment in 1912, while it was still located on the Chinese mainland, the government used the short form &quot;China&quot; (&quot;&quot;, ) to refer to itself, derived from (&quot;central&quot; or &quot;middle&quot;) and (&quot;state, nation-state&quot;). The term developed under the Zhou dynasty in reference to its royal demesne, and was then applied to the area around Luoyi (present-day Luoyang) during the Eastern Zhou and later to China&#x27;s Central Plain, before being used as an occasional synonym for the state during the Qing era. The name of the republic had stemmed from the party manifesto of the Tongmenghui in 1905, which says the four goals of the Chinese revolution was &quot;to expel the Manchu rulers, to revive &quot;Chunghwa&quot;, to establish a Republic, and to distribute land equally among the people.&quot; Revolutionary leader Sun Yat-sen proposed the name &quot;Chunghwa Minkuo&quot; as the assumed name of the new country when the revolution succeeded.

During the 1950s and 1960s, after the ROC government had withdrawn to Taiwan, it was commonly referred to as &quot;Nationalist China&quot; (or &quot;Free China&quot;) to differentiate it from &quot;communist China&quot; (or &quot;Red China&quot;). Over subsequent decades, the Republic of China has become commonly known as &quot;Taiwan&quot;, after the main island. To avoid confusion, the ROC government in Taiwan began to put &quot;Taiwan&quot; next to its official name in 2005. In ROC government publications, the name is written as &quot;Republic of China (Taiwan)&quot;, &quot;Republic of China/Taiwan&quot;, or sometimes &quot;Taiwan (ROC)&quot;.

&quot;Taiwan Area&quot; was defined to mean the island of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen, Matsu, and other territory under ROC&#x27;s effective control, in contrast to &quot;Mainland Area&quot; which refers to ROC territory outside the Taiwan Area and under Chinese Communist control.

The Republic of China participates in most international forums and organizations under the name &quot;Chinese Taipei&quot; as a compromise with the People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC). For instance, it is the name under which it has participated in the Olympic Games as well as the APEC. &quot;Taiwan authorities&quot; is sometimes used by the PRC to refer to the government in Taiwan.

==History==


=== Pre-colonial period ===

Taiwan was joined to the Asian mainland in the Late Pleistocene, until sea levels rose about 10,000 years ago. Human remains and Paleolithic artifacts dated 20,000 to 30,000 years ago have been found. Study of the human remains suggested they were Australo-Papuan people similar to Negrito populations in the Philippines. Paleolithic Taiwanese likely settled the Ryukyu Islands 30,000 years ago. Slash-and-burn agriculture practices started at least 11,000 years ago.

Stone tools of the Changbin culture have been found in Taitung and Eluanbi. Archaeological remains suggest they were initially hunter-gatherers that slowly shifted to intensive fishing. The distinct Wangxing culture, found in Miaoli County, were initially gatherers who shifted to hunting.

Around 6,000 years ago, Taiwan was settled by farmers of the Dapenkeng culture, most likely from what is now southeast China. These cultures are the ancestors of modern Taiwanese Indigenous peoples and the originators of the Austronesian language family. Trade with the Philippines persisted from the early 2nd millennium BCE, including the use of Taiwanese jade in the Philippine jade culture.

The Dapenkeng culture was succeeded by a variety of cultures throughout the island, including the Tahu and Yingpu; the Yuanshan were characterized by rice harvesting. Iron appeared in such cultures as the Niaosung culture, influenced by trade with China and Maritime Southeast Asia. The Plains Indigenous peoples mainly lived in permanent walled villages, with a lifestyle based on agriculture, fishing, and hunting. They had traditionally matriarchal societies.

=== Early colonial period (to 1683) ===

The Penghu Islands were inhabited by Han Chinese fishermen by 1171, and in 1225 Penghu was attached to Jinjiang. The Yuan dynasty officially incorporated Penghu under the jurisdiction of Tong&#x27;an County in 1281. Penghu was evacuated in the 15th century by the Ming dynasty as part of their maritime ban, which lasted until the late 16th century. In 1349, Wang Dayuan provided the first written account of a visit to Taiwan. By the 1590s, a small number of Chinese from Fujian had started cultivating land in southwestern Taiwan. Some 1,500-2,000 Chinese lived or stayed temporarily on the southern coast of Taiwan, mostly for seasonal fishing but also subsistence farming and trading, by the early 17th century. In 1603, Chen Di visited Taiwan on an anti-wokou expedition and recorded an account of the Taiwanese Indigenous people.

In 1591, Japan sent envoys to deliver a letter requesting tribute relations with Taiwan. They found no leader to deliver the letter to and returned home. In 1609, a Japanese expedition was sent to survey Taiwan. After being attacked by the Indigenous people, they took some prisoners and returned home. In 1616, a Japanese fleet of 13 ships were sent to Taiwan. Due to a storm, only one ship made it there and is presumed to have returned to Japan.
In 1624, the Dutch East India Company (VOC) established Fort Zeelandia on the coastal islet of Tayouan (in modern Tainan). The lowland areas were occupied by 11 Indigenous chiefdoms, some of which fell under Dutch control, including the Kingdom of Middag. When the Dutch arrived, southwestern Taiwan was already frequented by a mostly transient Chinese population numbering close to 1,500. The VOC encouraged Chinese farmers to immigrate and work the lands under Dutch control and by the 1660s, some 30,000 to 50,000 Chinese were living on the island. Most of the farmers cultivated rice for local consumption and sugar for export while some immigrants engaged in deer hunting for export.

In 1626, the Spanish Empire occupied northern Taiwan as a trading base, first at Keelung and in 1628 building Fort Santo Domingo at Tamsui. This colony lasted until 1642, when the last Spanish fortress fell to Dutch forces. The Dutch then marched south, subduing hundreds of villages in the western plains.
Following the fall of the Ming dynasty in Beijing in 1644, Koxinga (Zheng Chenggong) pledged allegiance to the Yongli Emperor and attacked the Qing dynasty along the southeastern coast of China. In 1661, under increasing Qing pressure, he moved his forces from his base in Xiamen to Taiwan, expelling the Dutch the following year. The Dutch retook the northern fortress at Keelung in 1664, but left the island in 1668 in the face of indigenous resistance.

The Zheng regime, known as the Kingdom of Tungning, proclaimed its loyalty to the overthrown Ming, but ruled independently. However, Zheng Jing&#x27;s return to China to participate in the Revolt of the Three Feudatories paved the way for the Qing invasion and occupation of Taiwan in 1683.

===Qing rule (1683–1895)===

Following the defeat of Koxinga&#x27;s grandson by an armada led by Admiral Shi Lang in 1683, the Qing dynasty formally annexed Taiwan in May 1684, making it a prefecture of Fujian province while retaining its administrative seat (now Tainan) under Koxinga as the capital.

The Qing government generally tried to restrict migration to Taiwan throughout the duration of its administration because it believed that Taiwan could not sustain too large a population without leading to conflict. After the defeat of the Kingdom of Tungning, most of its population in Taiwan was sent back to the mainland, leaving the official population count at only 50,000, including 10,000 troops. Despite official restrictions, officials in Taiwan solicited settlers from the mainland, causing tens of thousands of annual arrivals by 1711. A permit system was officially recorded in 1712, but it likely existed as early as 1684; its restrictions included only allowing those to enter who had property on the mainland, family in Taiwan, and who were not accompanied by wives or children. Many of the male migrants married local Indigenous women. Over the 18th century, restrictions were relaxed. In 1732, families were allowed to move to Taiwan. By 1811, there were more than two million Han settlers in Taiwan, and profitable sugar and rice production industries provided exports to the mainland. In 1875, restrictions on entering Taiwan were repealed.

Three counties nominally covered the entire western plains, but actual control was restricted to a smaller area. A government permit was required for settlers to go beyond the Dajia River. Qing administration expanded across the western plains area over the 18th century due to continued illegal crossings and settlement. The Taiwanese Indigenous peoples were categorized by the Qing administration into acculturated aborigines who had adopted Han culture and non-acculturated aborigines who had not. The Qing did little to administer or subjugate them. When Taiwan was annexed, there were 46 aboriginal villages under its control, likely inherited from the Kingdom of Tungning. During the early Qianlong period there were 93 acculturated villages and 61 non-acculturated villages that paid taxes. In response to the Zhu Yigui settler rebellion in 1722, separation of aboriginals and settlers became official policy via 54 stelae used to mark the frontier boundary. The markings were changed four times over the latter half of the 18th century due to continued settler encroachment. Two aboriginal affairs sub-prefects, one for the north and one for the south, were appointed in 1766.

During the 200 years of Qing rule in Taiwan, the Plains Indigenous peoples rarely rebelled against the government and the mountain Indigenous peoples were left to their own devices until the last 20 years of Qing rule. Most of the more than 100 rebellions during the Qing period, such as the Lin Shuangwen rebellion, were caused by Han settlers. Their frequency was evoked by the common saying &quot;every three years an uprising, every five years a rebellion&quot; (三年一反、五年一亂), primarily in reference to the period between 1820 and 1850.

Many officials stationed in Taiwan called for an active colonization policy over the 19th century. In 1788, Taiwan Prefect Yang Tingli supported the efforts of a settler named Wu Sha to claim land held by the Kavalan people. In 1797, Wu Sha was able to recruit settlers with financial support from the local government but was unable to officially register the land. In the early 1800s, local officials convinced the emperor to officially incorporate the area by playing up the issue of piracy if the land was left alone. In 1814, some settlers attempted to colonize central Taiwan by fabricating rights to lease aboriginal land. They were evicted by government troops two years later. Local officials continued to advocate for the colonization of the area but were ignored.

The Qing took on a more active colonization policy after 1874 when Japan invaded Indigenous territory in southern Taiwan and the Qing government was forced to pay an indemnity for them to leave. The administration of Taiwan was expanded with new prefectures, sub-prefectures, and counties. Mountain roads were constructed to make inner Taiwan more accessible. Restrictions on entering Taiwan were ended in 1875 and agencies for recruiting settlers were established on the mainland, but efforts to promote settlement ended soon after. In 1884, Keelung in northern Taiwan was occupied during the Sino-French War but the French forces failed to advance any further inland while their victory at Penghu in 1885 resulted in disease and retreat soon afterward as the war ended. Colonization efforts were renewed under Liu Mingchuan. In 1887, Taiwan&#x27;s status was upgraded to a province. Taipei became the permanent capital in 1893. Liu&#x27;s efforts to increase revenues on Taiwan&#x27;s produce were hampered by foreign pressure not to increase levies. A land reform was implemented, increasing revenue which still fell short of expectation. Modern technologies such as electric lighting, a railway, telegraph lines, steamship service, and industrial machinery were introduced under Liu&#x27;s governance, but several of these projects had mixed results. A campaign to formally subjugate the Indigenous peoples ended with the loss of a third of the army after fierce resistance from the Mkgogan and Msbtunux peoples. Liu resigned in 1891 due to criticism of these costly projects.

By the end of the Qing period, the western plains were fully developed as farmland with about 2.5 million Chinese settlers. The mountainous areas were still largely autonomous under the control of Indigenous peoples. Indigenous land loss under the Qing occurred at a relatively slow pace due to the absence of state-sponsored land deprivation for the majority of Qing rule.

===Japanese rule (1895–1945)===

Following the Qing defeat in the First Sino-Japanese War (1894–1895), Taiwan, its associated islands, and the Penghu archipelago were ceded to Japan by the Treaty of Shimonoseki. Inhabitants wishing to remain Qing subjects had to move to mainland China within a two-year grace period, which few saw as feasible. Estimates say around 4,000 to 6,000 departed before the expiration of the grace period, and 200,000 to 300,000 followed during the subsequent disorder. On 25 May 1895, a group of pro-Qing high officials proclaimed the Republic of Formosa to resist impending Japanese rule. Japanese forces entered the capital at Tainan and quelled this resistance on 21 October 1895. About 6,000 inhabitants died in the initial fighting and some 14,000 died in the first year of Japanese rule. Another 12,000 &quot;bandit-rebels&quot; were killed from 1898 to 1902. Subsequent rebellions against the Japanese (the Beipu uprising of 1907, the Tapani incident of 1915, and the Musha incident of 1930) were unsuccessful but demonstrated opposition to Japanese rule.

The colonial period was instrumental to the industrialization of the island, with its expansion of railways and other transport networks, the building of an extensive sanitation system, the establishment of a formal education system, and an end to the practice of headhunting. The resources of Taiwan were used to aid the development of Japan. The production of cash crops such as sugar greatly increased, and large areas were therefore diverted from the production of rice. By 1939, Taiwan was the seventh-greatest sugar producer in the world.

The Han and Indigenous populations were classified as second- and third-class citizens, and many prestigious government and business positions were closed to them. After suppressing Han guerrillas in the first decade of their rule, Japanese authorities engaged in bloody campaigns against the Indigenous people residing in mountainous regions, culminating in the Musha Incident of 1930. Intellectuals and laborers who participated in left-wing movements were also arrested and massacred (e.g. Chiang Wei-shui and Masanosuke Watanabe). Around 1935, the Japanese began an island-wide assimilation project. Chinese-language newspapers and curriculums were abolished. Taiwanese music and theater were outlawed. A national Shinto religion was promoted in parallel with the suppression of traditional Taiwanese beliefs. Starting from 1940, families were also required to adopt Japanese surnames, although only 2% had done so by 1943. By 1938, 309,000 Japanese were residing in Taiwan.

During the Second World War, the island was developed into a naval and air base while its agriculture, industry, and commerce suffered. Air attacks and the subsequent invasion of the Philippines were launched from Taiwan. The Imperial Japanese Navy operated heavily from Taiwanese ports, and its think tank &quot;South Strike Group&quot; was based at Taihoku Imperial University. Military bases and industrial centers, such as Kaohsiung and Keelung, became targets of heavy Allied bombings, which destroyed many of the factories, dams, and transport facilities built by the Japanese. In October 1944, the Formosa Air Battle was fought between American carriers and Japanese forces in Taiwan. Over 200,000 of Taiwanese served in the Japanese military, with over 30,000 casualties. Over 2,000 women, euphemistically called &quot;comfort women&quot;, were forced into sexual slavery for Imperial Japanese troops.

After Japan&#x27;s surrender, most Japanese residents were expelled.

===Republic of China (1945–present)===


While Taiwan was under Japanese rule, the Republic of China was founded on mainland China on 1 January 1912 following the Xinhai Revolution of 1911. Central authority waxed and waned in response to warlordism (1915–28), Japanese invasion (1937–45), and the Chinese Civil War (1927–49), with central authority strongest during the Nanjing decade (1927–37), when most of China came under the control of the Kuomintang (KMT). During World War II, the 1943 Cairo Declaration specified that Formosa and the Pescadores be returned by Japan to the ROC; the terms were later repeated in the 1945 Potsdam Declaration that Japan agreed to carry out in its instrument of surrender. On 25 October 1945, Japan surrendered Taiwan to the ROC, and in the Treaty of San Francisco, Japan formally renounced their claims to the islands, though without specifying to whom they were surrendered. In the same year, Japan and the ROC signed a peace treaty.

While initially enthusiastic about the return of Chinese administration and the Three Principles of the People, Formosans grew increasingly dissatisfied about being excluded from higher positions, the postponement of local elections even after the enactment of a constitution on the mainland, the smuggling of valuables off the island, the expropriation of businesses into government-operated monopolies, and the hyperinflation of 1945–1949. The shooting of a civilian on 28 February 1947 triggered island-wide unrest, which was suppressed with military force in what is now called the February 28 Incident. Mainstream estimates of the number killed range from 18,000 to 30,000. Chen was later replaced by Wei Tao-ming, who made an effort to undo previous mismanagement by re-appointing a good proportion of islanders and re-privatizing businesses.

After the end of World War II, the Chinese Civil War resumed. A series of Chinese Communist offensives in 1949 led to the capture of its capital Nanjing on 23 April and the subsequent defeat of the Nationalists on the mainland. The Communists founded the People&#x27;s Republic of China on 1 October. On 7 December 1949, Chiang Kai-Shek evacuated his Nationalist government to Taiwan and made Taipei the temporary capital of the ROC. Some 2 million people, mainly soldiers, members of the ruling Kuomintang and intellectual and business elites, were evacuated to Taiwan, adding to the earlier population of approximately six million. These people and their descendants became known in Taiwan as &quot;waisheng ren&quot; (). The ROC government took to Taipei many national treasures and much of China&#x27;s gold and foreign currency reserves. Most of the gold was used to pay soldiers&#x27; salaries, with some used to issue the New Taiwan dollar, part of a price stabilization program to slow inflation in Taiwan.

After losing control of mainland China in 1949, the ROC retained control of Taiwan and Penghu (Taiwan, ROC), parts of Fujian (Fujian, ROC)—specifically Kinmen, Wuqiu (now part of Kinmen) and the Matsu Islands and two major islands in the South China Sea. The ROC also briefly retained control of the entirety of Hainan, parts of Zhejiang (Chekiang)—specifically the Dachen Islands and Yijiangshan Islands—and portions of Tibet, Qinghai, Xinjiang and Yunnan. The Communists captured Hainan in 1950, captured the Dachen Islands and Yijiangshan Islands during the First Taiwan Strait Crisis in 1955 and defeated the ROC revolts in Northwest China in 1958. ROC forces entered Burma and Thailand in the 1950s and were defeated by Communists in 1961. Since losing control of mainland China, the Kuomintang continued to claim sovereignty over &#x27;all of China&#x27;, which it defined to include mainland China (including Tibet), Taiwan (including Penghu), Outer Mongolia, and other minor territories.

====Martial law era (1949–1987)====


Martial law, declared on Taiwan in May 1949, continued to be in effect until 1987, and was used to suppress political opposition. During the White Terror, as the period is known, 140,000 people were imprisoned or executed for being perceived as anti-KMT or pro-Communist. Many citizens were arrested, tortured, imprisoned or executed for their real or perceived link to the Chinese Communist Party. Since these people were mainly from the intellectual and social elite, an entire generation of political and social leaders was destroyed.

Following the eruption of the Korean War, US President Harry S. Truman dispatched the United States Seventh Fleet into the Taiwan Strait to prevent hostilities between the ROC and the PRC. The United States also passed the Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty and the Formosa Resolution of 1955, granting substantial foreign aid to the KMT regime between 1951 and 1965. The US foreign aid stabilized prices in Taiwan by 1952. The KMT government instituted many laws and land reforms that it had never effectively enacted on mainland China. Economic development was encouraged by American aid and programs such as the Joint Commission on Rural Reconstruction, which turned the agricultural sector into the basis for later growth. Under the combined stimulus of the land reform and the agricultural development programs, agricultural production increased at an average annual rate of 4 percent from 1952 to 1959. The government also implemented a policy of import substitution industrialization, attempting to produce imported goods domestically. The policy promoted the development of textile, food, and other labor-intensive industries.

As the Chinese Civil War continued, the government built up military fortifications throughout Taiwan. Veterans built the Central Cross-Island Highway through the Taroko Gorge in the 1950s. During the Second Taiwan Strait Crisis in 1958, Nike Hercules missiles were added to the formation of missile batteries throughout the island.
During the 1960s and 1970s, the ROC maintained an authoritarian, single-party government under the Kuomintang&#x27;s Dang Guo system while its economy became industrialized and technology-oriented. This rapid economic growth, known as the Taiwan Miracle, occurred following a strategy of prioritizing agriculture, light industries, and heavy industries, in that order. Export-oriented industrialization was achieved by tax rebate for exports, removal of import restriction, moving from multiple exchange rate to single exchange rate system, and depreciation of the New Taiwan dollar. Infrastructure projects such as the Sun Yat-sen Freeway, Taoyuan International Airport, Taichung Harbor, and Jinshan Nuclear Power Plant were launched, while the rise of steel, petrochemical, and shipbuilding industries in southern Taiwan saw the transformation of Kaohsiung into a special municipality on par with Taipei. In the 1970s, Taiwan became the second fastest growing economy in Asia. Real growth in GDP averaged over 10 percent. In 1978, the combination of tax incentives and a cheap, well-trained labor force attracted investments of over $1.9 billion from overseas Chinese, the United States, and Japan. By 1980, foreign trade reached $39 billion per year and generated a surplus of $46.5 million. Along with Hong Kong, Singapore, and South Korea, Taiwan became known as one of the Four Asian Tigers.

Because of the Cold War, most Western nations and the United Nations regarded the ROC as the sole legitimate government of China until the 1970s. Eventually, especially after Taiwan&#x27;s expulsion from the United Nations, most nations switched diplomatic recognition to the PRC. Until the 1970s, the ROC government was regarded by Western critics as undemocratic for upholding martial law, severely repressing any political opposition, and controlling the media. The KMT did not allow the creation of new parties and competitive democratic elections did not exist.

From the late 1970s to the 1990s, Taiwan underwent political and social reforms that transformed it into a democracy. Chiang Ching-kuo, Chiang Kai-shek&#x27;s son, served as premier from 1972 and rose to the presidency in 1978. He sought to move more authority to &quot;bensheng ren&quot; (residents of Taiwan before Japan&#x27;s surrender and their descendants). Pro-democracy activists &quot;Tangwai&quot; emerged as the opposition. In 1979, the Kaohsiung Incident took place in Kaohsiung on Human Rights Day. Although the protest was rapidly crushed by the authorities, it is considered as the main event that united Taiwan&#x27;s opposition.

In 1984, Chiang Ching-kuo selected Lee Teng-hui as his vice-president. After the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) was (illegally) founded as the first opposition party in Taiwan to counter the KMT in 1986, Chiang announced that he would allow the formation of new parties. On 15 July 1987, Chiang lifted martial law on the main island of Taiwan.

====Transition to democracy====


After Chiang Ching-kuo&#x27;s death in 1988, Lee Teng-hui became the first president of the ROC born in Taiwan. Lee&#x27;s administration oversaw a period of democratization in which the Temporary Provisions against the Communist Rebellion were abolished and the Additional Articles of the Constitution were introduced. Congressional representation was allocated to only the Taiwan Area, and Taiwan underwent a process of localization in which Taiwanese culture and history were promoted over a pan-China viewpoint while assimilationist policies were replaced with support for multiculturalism. In 1996, Lee was re-elected in the first direct presidential election. During Lee&#x27;s administration, both he and his party were involved in corruption controversies that came to be known as &quot;black gold&quot; politics.

Chen Shui-bian of the DPP was elected as the first non-KMT president in 2000. However, Chen lacked legislative majority. The opposition KMT developed the Pan-Blue Coalition with other parties, mustering a slim majority over the DPP-led Pan-Green Coalition. Polarized politics emerged in Taiwan with the Pan-Blue preference for eventual Chinese unification, while the Pan-Green prefers Taiwanese independence.

Chen&#x27;s reference to &quot;One Country on Each Side&quot; of the Taiwan Strait undercut cross-Strait relations in 2002. He pushed for the first national referendum on cross-Strait relations, and called for an end to the National Unification Council. State-run companies began dropping &quot;China&quot; references in their names and including &quot;Taiwan&quot;. In 2008, referendums asked whether Taiwan should join the UN. This act alienated moderate constituents who supported the status quo, as well as those with cross-strait economic ties. It also created tension with the mainland and disagreements with the United States. Chen&#x27;s administration was also dogged by public concerns over reduced economic growth, legislative gridlock, and corruption investigations.

The KMT&#x27;s nominee Ma Ying-jeou won the 2008 presidential election on a platform of increased economic growth and better ties with the PRC under a policy of &quot;mutual non-denial&quot;. Under Ma, Taiwan and China opened up direct flights and cargo shipments. The PRC government even made the atypical decision to not demand that Taiwan be barred from the annual World Health Assembly. Ma also made an official apology for the White Terror. However, closer economic ties with China raised concerns about its political consequences. In 2014, university students occupied the Legislative Yuan and prevented the ratification of the Cross-Strait Service Trade Agreement in what became known as the Sunflower Student Movement. The movement gave rise to youth-based third parties such as the New Power Party, and is viewed to have contributed to the DPP&#x27;s victories in the 2016 presidential and legislative elections, the latter of which resulted in the first DPP legislative majority in Taiwanese history.
In January 2024, William Lai Ching-te of the ruling Democratic Progressive Party won Taiwan&#x27;s presidential elections. However, no party won a majority in the simultaneous Taiwan&#x27;s legislative election for the first time since 2004, meaning 51 seats for the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), 52 seats for the Kuomintang (KMT), and the Taiwan People&#x27;s Party (TPP) secured eight seats.

==Geography==


The land controlled by the ROC consists of 168 islands with a combined area of . The main island, known historically as &quot;Formosa&quot;, makes up 99 percent of this area, measuring and lying some across the Taiwan Strait from the southeastern coast of mainland China. The East China Sea lies to its north, the Philippine Sea to its east, the Luzon Strait directly to its south and the South China Sea to its southwest. Smaller islands include the Penghu Islands in the Taiwan Strait, the Kinmen, Matsu and Wuqiu islands near the Chinese coast, and some of the South China Sea islands.

The main island is a tilted fault block, characterized by the contrast between the eastern two-thirds, consisting mostly of five rugged mountain ranges parallel to the east coast, and the flat to gently rolling plains of the western third, where the majority of Taiwan&#x27;s population reside. There are several peaks over 3,500 metres, the highest being Yu Shan at , making Taiwan the world&#x27;s fourth-highest island. The tectonic boundary that formed these ranges is still active, and the island experiences many earthquakes. There are also many active submarine volcanoes in the Taiwan Strait.

Taiwan contains four terrestrial ecoregions: Jian Nan subtropical evergreen forests, South China Sea Islands, South Taiwan monsoon rain forests, and Taiwan subtropical evergreen forests. The eastern mountains are heavily forested and home to a diverse range of wildlife, while land use in the western and northern lowlands is intensive. The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 6.38/10, ranking it 76th globally out of 172 countries.

===Climate===


Taiwan lies on the Tropic of Cancer, and its general climate is marine tropical. The northern and central regions are subtropical, whereas the south is tropical and the mountainous regions are temperate. The average rainfall is per year for the island proper; the rainy season is concurrent with the onset of the summer East Asian Monsoon in May and June. The entire island experiences hot, humid weather from June through September. Typhoons are most common in July, August and September. During the winter (November to March), the northeast experiences steady rain, while the central and southern parts of the island are mostly sunny.

Due to climate change, the average temperature in Taiwan has risen in the last 100 years, twice the worldwide temperature rise. The goal of the Taiwanese government is to cut carbon emissions by 20 percent in 2030 and by 50 percent in 2050, compared to 2005 levels. Carbon emissions increased by 0.92 percent between 2005 and 2016.

===Geology===


The island of Taiwan lies in a complex tectonic area between the Yangtze Plate to the west and north, the Okinawa Plate on the north-east, and the Philippine Mobile Belt on the east and south. The upper part of the crust on the island is primarily made up of a series of terranes, mostly old island arcs which have been forced together by the collision of the forerunners of the Eurasian Plate and the Philippine Sea Plate. These have been further uplifted as a result of the detachment of a portion of the Eurasian Plate as it was subducted beneath remnants of the Philippine Sea Plate, a process which left the crust under Taiwan more buoyant.

The east and south of Taiwan are a complex system of belts formed by, and part of the zone of, active collision between the North Luzon Trough portion of the Luzon Volcanic Arc and South China, where accreted portions of the Luzon Arc and Luzon forearc form the eastern Coastal Range and parallel inland Longitudinal Valley of Taiwan, respectively.

The major seismic faults in Taiwan correspond to the various suture zones between the various terranes. These have produced major quakes. On 21 September 1999, a 7.3 quake known as the &quot;921 earthquake&quot; killed more than 2,400 people. The seismic hazard map for Taiwan by the USGS shows 9/10 of the island at the most hazardous rating.

==Government and politics==

=== Government ===

The government of the Republic of China was founded on the 1947 Constitution of the ROC and its Three Principles of the People, which states that the ROC &quot;shall be a democratic republic of the people, to be governed by the people and for the people&quot;. It underwent significant revisions in the 1990s, known collectively as the Additional Articles. The government is divided into five branches (&quot;Yuan&quot;): the Executive Yuan (cabinet), the Legislative Yuan (Congress or Parliament), the Judicial Yuan, the Control Yuan (audit agency), and the Examination Yuan (civil service examination agency).
The head of state and commander-in-chief of the armed forces is the president, who is elected by popular vote for a maximum of 2 four-year terms on the same ticket as the vice-president. The president appoints the members of the Executive Yuan as their cabinet, including a premier, who is officially the President of the Executive Yuan; members are responsible for policy and administration.

The main legislative body is the unicameral Legislative Yuan with 113 seats. Seventy-three are elected by popular vote from single-member constituencies; thirty-four are elected based on the proportion of nationwide votes received by participating political parties in a separate party list ballot; and six are elected from two three-member aboriginal constituencies. Members serve four-year terms. Originally the unicameral National Assembly, as a standing constitutional convention and electoral college, held some parliamentary functions, but the National Assembly was abolished in 2005 with the power of constitutional amendments handed over to the Legislative Yuan and all eligible voters of the Republic via referendums.
The premier is selected by the president without the need for approval from the legislature, and neither the president nor the premier wields veto power. Historically, the ROC has been dominated by strongman single party politics. This legacy has resulted in executive powers currently being concentrated in the office of the president rather than the premier.

The Judicial Yuan is the highest judicial organ. It interprets the constitution and other laws and decrees, judges administrative suits, and disciplines public functionaries. The president and vice-president of the Judicial Yuan and additional thirteen justices form the Constitutional Court, which was established in 1993 to resolve constitutional disputes, regulate the activities of political parties and accelerate the democratization process. The Constitutional Court was formerly called the Council of Grand Justices. They are nominated and appointed by the president, with the consent of the Legislative Yuan. The highest court, the Supreme Court, consists of a number of civil and criminal divisions, each of which is formed by a presiding judge and four associate judges, all appointed for life. The right to a fair public trial is protected by law and respected in practice. There is no trial by jury, however many cases are presided over by multiple judges.

The Control Yuan is a watchdog agency that monitors the actions of the executive. It can be considered a standing commission for administrative inquiry, like the Court of Auditors of the European Union or the Government Accountability Office of the United States. It is also responsible for the National Human Rights Commission.

The Examination Yuan is in charge of validating the qualification of civil servants. It is based on the imperial examination system used in dynastic China. It can be compared to the European Personnel Selection Office of the European Union or the Office of Personnel Management of the United States. It was downsized in 2019, and there have been calls for its abolition.

=== Constitution ===
The constitution was drafted by the KMT while the ROC still governed the Chinese mainland. Political reforms beginning in the late 1970s resulted in the end of martial law in 1987, and Taiwan transformed into a multiparty democracy in the early 1990s. The constitutional basis for this transition to democracy was gradually laid in the Additional Articles of the Constitution. These articles suspended portions of the Constitution designed for the governance of mainland China and replacing them with articles adapted for the governance of and guaranteeing the political rights of residents of the Taiwan Area, as defined in the Cross-Strait Act.

National boundaries were not explicitly prescribed by the 1947 Constitution, and the Constitutional Court declined to define these boundaries in a 1993 interpretation, viewing the question as a political question to be resolved by the Executive and Legislative Yuans. The 1947 Constitution included articles regarding representatives from former Qing dynasty territories including Tibet and Mongol banners. The ROC recognized Mongolia as an independent country in 1946 after signing the 1945 Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance, but after retreating to Taiwan in 1949 it reneged to preserve its claim over mainland China. The Additional Articles of the 1990s did not alter national boundaries, but suspended articles regarding Mongolian and Tibetan representatives. The ROC began to accept the Mongolian passport and removed clauses referring to Outer Mongolia from the Act Governing Relations between the People of the Taiwan Area and the Mainland Area in 2002. In 2012 the Mainland Affairs Council issued a statement clarifying that Outer Mongolia was not part of the ROC&#x27;s national territory in 1947. The Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission in the Executive Yuan was abolished in 2017.

===Major camps===
Taiwan&#x27;s political scene is divided into two major camps in terms of cross-Strait relations, i.e. how Taiwan should relate to China or the PRC. The Pan-Green Coalition (e.g. the Democratic Progressive Party) leans pro-independence, and the Pan-Blue Coalition (e.g. the Kuomintang) leans pro-unification. Moderates in both camps regard the Republic of China as a sovereign independent state, but the Pan-Green Coalition regard the ROC as synonymous with Taiwan, while moderates in the Pan-Blue Coalition view it as synonymous with China. These positions formed against the backdrop of the PRC&#x27;s Anti-Secession Law, which threatens the use of &quot;non-peaceful means&quot; to respond to formal Taiwanese independence. The ROC government has understood this to mean a military invasion of Taiwan.
The Pan-Green Coalition is mainly led by the pro-independence Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), Taiwan Statebuilding Party (TSP) and Green Party (GPT). They oppose the idea that Taiwan is part of China, and seek wide diplomatic recognition and an eventual declaration of formal Taiwan independence. In September 2007, the then ruling DPP approved a resolution asserting separate identity from China and called for the enactment of a new constitution for a &quot;&quot;normal country&quot;. It called also for general use of &quot;Taiwan&quot;&quot; as the country&#x27;s name, without abolishing its formal name, the &quot;Republic of China&quot;. The name &quot;Taiwan&quot; has been used increasingly often after the emergence of the Taiwanese independence movement. Some members of the coalition, such as former President Chen Shui-bian, argue that it is unnecessary to proclaim independence because &quot;Taiwan is already an independent, sovereign country&quot; and the Republic of China is the same as Taiwan. Despite being a member of KMT prior to and during his presidency, Lee Teng-hui also held a similar view and was a supporter of the Taiwanization movement. TSP and GPT have adopted a line that aggressive route more than the DPP, in order to win over pro-independence voters who are dissatisfied with the DPP&#x27;s conservative stance.

The Pan-Blue Coalition, composed of the pro-unification Kuomintang (KMT), People First Party (PFP) and New Party generally support the spirit of the 1992 Consensus, where the KMT claimed that there is one China, but that the ROC and PRC have different interpretations of what &quot;China&quot; means. They favor eventual unification with China. Regarding independence, the mainstream Pan-Blue position is to maintain the status quo, while refusing immediate unification. President Ma Ying-jeou stated that there will be no unification nor declaration of independence during his presidency. Some Pan-Blue members seek to improve relationships with PRC, with a focus on improving economic ties.

===National identity===
 
Roughly 84 percent of Taiwan&#x27;s population are descendants of Han Chinese immigrants between 1683 and 1895. Another significant fraction descends from Han Chinese who immigrated from mainland China in the late 1940s and early 1950s. The shared cultural origin as well as hostility between the rival ROC and PRC have resulted in national identity being a contentious issue with political overtones.

Since democratic reforms and the lifting of martial law, a distinct Taiwanese identity is often at the heart of political debates. Its acceptance makes the island distinct from mainland China, and therefore may be seen as a step towards forming a consensus for &quot;de jure&quot; Taiwan independence. The Pan-Green camp supports a predominantly Taiwanese identity (although &quot;Chinese&quot; may be viewed as cultural heritage), while the Pan-Blue camp supports a predominantly Chinese identity (with &quot;Taiwanese&quot; as a regional/diasporic Chinese identity). The KMT has downplayed this stance in the recent years and now supports a Taiwanese identity as part of a Chinese identity.

Taiwanese identification has increased substantially since the early 1990s, while Chinese identification has fallen to a low level, and identification as both has also seen a reduction. In 1992, 17.6 percent of respondents identified as Taiwanese, 25.5 percent as Chinese, 46.4 percent as both, and 10.5 percent non-response. In June 2021, 63.3 percent identified as Taiwanese, 2.6 percent as Chinese, 31.4 percent as both, and 2.7 percent non-response. A survey conducted in Taiwan by Global Views Survey Research Center in July 2009 showed that 82.8 percent of respondents consider the ROC and the PRC two separate countries with each developing on its own but 80.2 percent think they are members of the Chinese.

====Public opinion====
Domestic public opinion has preferred maintaining the status quo, though pro-independence sentiment has steadily risen since 1994. In June 2021, an annual poll found that 28.2 percent supported the status quo and postponing a decision, 27.5 percent supported maintaining the status quo indefinitely, 25.8 percent supported the status quo with a move toward independence, 5.9 percent supported the status quo with a move toward unification, 5.7 percent gave no response, 5.6 percent supported independence as soon as possible, and 1.5 percent supported unification as soon as possible. A referendum question in 2018 asked if Taiwan&#x27;s athletes should compete under &quot;Taiwan&quot; in the 2020 Summer Olympics but did not pass; the &quot;New York Times&quot; attributed the failure to a campaign cautioning that a name change might lead to Taiwan being banned &quot;under Chinese pressure&quot;.

The KMT, the largest Pan-Blue party, supports the status quo for the indefinite future with a stated ultimate goal of unification. However, it does not support unification in the short term with the PRC as such a prospect would be unacceptable to most of its members and the public. Ma Ying-jeou, chairman of the KMT and former president of the ROC, has set out democracy, economic development to a level near that of Taiwan, and equitable wealth distribution as the conditions that the PRC must fulfill for unification to occur. Ma stated that the cross-Strait relations are neither between two Chinas nor two states. It is a special relationship. Further, he stated that the sovereignty issues between the two cannot be resolved at present.

The Democratic Progressive Party, the largest Pan-Green party, officially seeks independence, but in practice also supports the status quo because neither independence nor unification seems likely in the short or even medium term. In 2017, Taiwanese premier William Lai said that he was a &quot;political worker who advocates Taiwan independence&quot;, but that as Taiwan was already an independent country called the Republic of China, it had no need to declare independence.

===Foreign relations and international status===

The political and legal statuses of Taiwan are contentious issues. The People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC) claims that Taiwan is Chinese territory and that the PRC replaced the ROC government in 1949, becoming the sole legal government of China. The ROC, however, has its own currency, widely accepted passport, postage stamps, internet TLD, armed forces, constitution, and institutions. It has not formally renounced its claim to the mainland, but ROC government publications have increasingly downplayed this historical claim.

Until 1928, the foreign policy of Republican China was complicated by a lack of internal unity—competing centers of power all claimed legitimacy. This situation changed after the defeat of the Peiyang Government by the Kuomintang (KMT), which led to widespread diplomatic recognition of the Republic of China. After the KMT retreated to Taiwan, most countries, especially those of the Western Bloc – save the United Kingdom, which recognized the PRC in 1950 – continued to maintain formal relations with the ROC; but recognition gradually eroded and many countries switched recognition to the People&#x27;s Republic of China in the 1970s. On 25 October 1971, UN Resolution 2758 was adopted by 76 votes to 35 with 17 abstentions, recognizing the PRC as China&#x27;s sole representative in the United Nations.
The PRC refuses to have diplomatic relations with any nation that has diplomatic relations with the ROC, and requires all nations with which it has diplomatic relations to make a statement on its claims to Taiwan. As a result, only and the Holy See maintain official diplomatic relations with the Republic of China. The ROC maintains unofficial relations with other countries via &quot;de facto&quot; embassies and consulates mostly called Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Offices (TECRO), with branch offices called &quot;Taipei Economic and Cultural Offices&quot; (TECO). Both TECRO and TECO are &quot;unofficial commercial entities&quot; of the ROC in charge of maintaining diplomatic relations, providing consular services, and serving the national interests of the ROC.

From 1954 to 1979, the United States was a partner with Taiwan in a mutual defense treaty. The United States remains one of the main supporters of Taiwan and, through the Taiwan Relations Act passed in 1979, has continued selling arms and providing military training to the Republic of China Armed Forces. The PRC considers US involvement disruptive to the stability of the region. The official position of the United States is that the PRC is expected to &quot;use no force or threat[en] to use force against Taiwan&quot; and the ROC is to &quot;exercise prudence in managing all aspects of Cross-Strait relations.&quot; Both are to refrain from performing actions or espousing statements &quot;that would unilaterally alter Taiwan&#x27;s status&quot;. While not officially classified as a major non-NATO ally, it has been &quot;de facto&quot; treated this way by the United States since at least 2003.

Taiwan, since 2016 under the Tsai administration&#x27;s New Southbound Policy, has pursued closer economic relations with South and Southeast Asian countries, increasing cooperation on investments and people-to-people exchanges despite the region&#x27;s general lack of official diplomatic ties with Taipei. The policy has led to Taiwan receiving an increased number of migrants and students from the region. However, a few scandals of Southeast Asians, particularly Indonesians, experiencing exploitation in scholarship programs and in some labor industries have emerged as setbacks for the policy as well as for Indonesia-Taiwan relations.

====Relations with the PRC====
The Mainland Affairs Council (MAC) of Taiwan is responsible for relations with the PRC, while the Taiwan Affairs Office (TAO) of the PRC is responsible for relations with Taiwan. Exchanges are conducted through private organizations both founded in 1991: the Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF) of Taiwan and the Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits (ARATS) of the PRC.

In November 1992, the ARATS and SEF held a meeting which would later become known as the 1992 Consensus. The SEF announced that both sides agreed that there was only one China, but disagreed on the definition of China (i.e. the ROC vs. PRC), while the ARATS announced that the two agreed on the One China principle, but did not mention differences regarding its definition made in the SEF statement. In Taiwan, the ruling Democratic Progressive Party has rejected the 1992 Consensus since early 2019. President Lai Ching-te has stated that the ROC and the PRC are not subordinate to each other.

The PRC&#x27;s One China principle states that Taiwan and mainland China are both part of China, and that the PRC is the only legitimate government of China. It seeks to prevent or reduce any formal recognition of the ROC as an independent sovereign state, meaning that Taiwan participates in many international forums as a non-state member under names such as &quot;Chinese Taipei&quot;. The PRC suggested the &quot;one country, two systems&quot; employed in Hong Kong as a model for peaceful unification with Taiwan. While it aims for peaceful reunification, the PRC does not rule out the use of force. The political environment is complicated by the potential for military conflict should events outlined in the PRC&#x27;s Anti-Secession Law occur, such as Taiwan declaring &quot;de jure&quot; independence. There is a substantial military presence on the Fujian coast as well as PRC sorties into Taiwan&#x27;s air defense identification zone (ADIZ).

====Participation in international events and organizations====
The ROC was a founding member of United Nations, and held the seat of China on the Security Council and other UN bodies until 1971, when it was expelled by Resolution 2758 and replaced with the PRC as the ROC now has neither official membership nor observer status in the organization. Since 1993, the ROC has petitioned the UN for entry, but its applications have not made it past committee stage. Due to the One China policy, most UN member states, including the United States, do not wish to discuss the issue of the ROC&#x27;s political status for fear of souring diplomatic ties with the PRC.

The ROC government shifted its focus to organizations affiliated with the UN, as well as organizations outside the UN system. The government sought to participate in the World Health Organization (WHO) since 1997, their efforts were rejected until 2009, when they participated as an observer under the name &quot;Chinese Taipei&quot; after reaching an agreement with Beijing. In 2017, Taiwan again began to be excluded from the WHO even in an observer capacity. This exclusion caused a number of scandals during the COVID-19 outbreak.
The Nagoya Resolution in 1979 approved by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) provided a compromise for the ROC to use the name &quot;Chinese Taipei&quot; in international events where the PRC is also a party, such as the Olympic Games. Under the IOC charter, ROC flags cannot be flown at any official Olympic venue or gathering. The ROC also participates in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum (since 1991) and the World Trade Organization (since 2002) under the names &quot;Chinese Taipei&quot; and &quot;Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu&quot;, respectively. It was a founding member of the Asian Development Bank, but since China&#x27;s ascension in 1986 has participated under the name &quot;Taipei, China&quot;. The ROC is able to participate as &quot;China&quot; in organizations in which the PRC does not participate, such as the World Organization of the Scout Movement.

Due to its limited international recognition, the Republic of China has been a member of the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization (UNPO) since the foundation of the organization in 1991, represented by a government-funded organization, the Taiwan Foundation for Democracy (TFD), under the name &quot;Taiwan&quot;.

===Military===


The Republic of China Armed Forces takes its roots in the National Revolutionary Army, which was established by Sun Yat-sen in 1924 in Guangdong with a goal of reunifying China under the Kuomintang. When the People&#x27;s Liberation Army won the Chinese Civil War, much of the National Revolutionary Army retreated to Taiwan along with the government. The 1947 Constitution of the ROC reformed it into the Republic of China Armed Forces, making it the national army rather than the army of a political party. Units which surrendered and remained in mainland China were either disbanded or incorporated into the People&#x27;s Liberation Army.

From 1949 to the 1970s, the primary mission of the Taiwanese military was to &quot;retake mainland China&quot; through Project National Glory. As this mission has transitioned away from attack because the relative strength of the PRC has massively increased, the ROC military has begun to shift emphasis from the traditionally dominant Army to the air force and navy. Control of the armed forces has also passed into the hands of the civilian government.

The ROC began a series of force reduction plans since the 1990s to scale down its military from a level of 450,000 in 1997 to 380,000 in 2001. , the total strength of the Armed Forces is capped at 215,000 with 90 percent manning ratio for volunteer military. Conscription remains universal for qualified males reaching age eighteen, but as a part of the reduction effort many are given the opportunity to fulfill their draft requirement through alternative service. The military&#x27;s reservists is around 2.5 million including first-wave reservists numbered at 300,000 . Taiwan&#x27;s defense spending as a percentage of its GDP fell below three percent in 1999 and had been trending downwards over the first two decades of the twenty-first century. The ROC government pledged to raise the spending as high as proposed three percent of GDP. In 2024, Taiwan proposed 2.45 percent of projected GDP in defense spending for the following year.

The ROC and the United States signed the Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty in 1954, and established the United States Taiwan Defense Command. About 30,000 US troops were stationed in Taiwan, until the United States established diplomatic relations with the PRC in 1979. A significant amount of military hardware has been bought from the United States, and continues to be legally guaranteed by the Taiwan Relations Act. France and the Netherlands have also sold military weapons and hardware to the ROC, but they almost entirely stopped in the 1990s under pressure of the PRC.

There is no guarantee in the Taiwan Relations Act or any other treaty that the United States will defend Taiwan, even in the event of invasion. The joint declaration on security between the US and Japan signed in 1996 may imply that Japan would be involved in any response. However, Japan has refused to stipulate whether the &quot;area surrounding Japan&quot; mentioned in the pact includes Taiwan. The Australia, New Zealand, United States Security Treaty (ANZUS Treaty) may mean that other US allies, such as Australia, could be involved. While this would risk damaging economic ties with China, a conflict over Taiwan could lead to an economic blockade of China by a greater coalition.

===LGBT rights===

On 24 May 2017, the Constitutional Court ruled that then-current marriage laws had been violating the Constitution by denying same-sex couples the right to marry. The Court ruled that if the Legislative Yuan did not pass adequate amendments to Taiwanese marriage laws within two years, same-sex marriages would automatically become lawful in Taiwan. In a referendum question in 2018, however, voters expressed overwhelming opposition to same-sex marriage and supported the removal of content about homosexuality from primary school textbooks. According to the &quot;New York Times&quot;, the referendum questions were subject to a &quot;well-funded and highly organized campaign led by conservative Christians and other groups&quot; involving the use of misinformation. Nevertheless, the vote against same-sex marriage does not affect the court ruling, and on 17 May 2019, Taiwan&#x27;s parliament approved a bill legalizing same-sex marriage, making it the first country in Asia to do so.

Taiwan has an annual pride event, Taiwan Pride. It currently holds the record for the largest LGBT gathering in East Asia, rivaling Tel Aviv Pride in Israel. The event draws more than 200,000 people.

===Administrative divisions===

According to the 1947 constitution, the territory of the ROC is according to its &quot;existing national boundaries&quot;. The ROC is, &quot;de jure&quot; constitutionally, divided into , special municipalities (which are further divided into districts for local administration), and the province-level Tibet Area. Each province is subdivided into cities and counties, which are further divided into townships and county-administered cities, each having elected mayors and city councilors who share duties with the county. Some divisions are indigenous divisions which have different degrees of autonomy to standard ones. In addition, districts, cities and townships are further divided into villages and neighborhoods. The provinces have been &quot;streamlined&quot; and are no longer functional. Similarly, Mongol banners for China&#x27;s Inner Mongolia also existed, but they were abolished in 2006 and the ROC reaffirmed its recognition of Mongolia (formerly known as Outer Mongolia in Taiwan) in 2002, as stipulated in the 1946 constitution.

With provinces non-functional, Taiwan is in practice divided into 22 subnational divisions, each with a self-governing body led by an elected leader and a legislative body with elected members. Duties of local governments include social services, education, urban planning, public construction, water management, environmental protection, transport, public safety, and more.

When the ROC retreated to Taiwan in 1949, its claimed territory consisted of 35 provinces, 12 special municipalities, 1 special administrative region and 2 autonomous regions. However, since its retreat, the ROC has controlled only Taiwan Province and some islands of Fujian Province. The ROC also controls the Pratas Islands and Taiping Island in the Spratly Islands, which are part of the disputed South China Sea Islands. They were placed under Kaohsiung administration after the retreat to Taiwan.

==Economy==

The quick industrialization and rapid growth of Taiwan during the latter half of the 20th century has been called the &quot;Taiwan Miracle&quot;. Taiwan is one of the &quot;Four Asian Tigers&quot; alongside Hong Kong, South Korea and Singapore. As of October 2022, Taiwan is the 21st largest economy in the world by nominal GDP.

Since 2001, agriculture constituted less than 2 percent of GDP, down from 32 percent in 1951. Unlike its neighbors, South Korea and Japan, the Taiwanese economy is dominated by small and medium-sized enterprises, rather than the large business groups. Traditional labor-intensive industries are steadily being moved offshore and with more capital and technology-intensive industries replacing them. High-technology science parks have sprung up in Taiwan.

Today Taiwan has a dynamic, capitalist, export-driven economy with gradually decreasing state involvement in investment and foreign trade. In keeping with this trend, some large government-owned banks and industrial firms are being privatized. Exports have provided the primary impetus for industrialization. The trade surplus is substantial, and Taiwan remained one of the world&#x27;s largest forex reserve holders. Taiwan&#x27;s total trade in 2022 reached US$907 billion. Both exports and imports for the year reached record levels, totaling US$479.52 billion and US$427.60 billion, respectively. China, United States and Japan are Taiwan&#x27;s three largest trading partners, accounting for over 40 percent of total trade.

Since the beginning of the 1990s, economic ties between Taiwan and China have been extensive. In 2002, China surpassed the United States to become Taiwan&#x27;s largest export market for the first time. China is also the most important target of outward foreign direct investment. From 1991 to 2022, more than US$200 billion have been invested in China by Taiwanese companies. China hosts around 4,200 Taiwanese enterprises and over 240,000 Taiwanese work in China. Although the economy of Taiwan benefits from this situation, some have expressed the view that the island has become increasingly dependent on the mainland Chinese economy. Others argue that close economic ties between Taiwan and mainland China would make any military intervention by the PLA against Taiwan very costly, and therefore less probable.

Since the 1980s, a number of Taiwan-based technology firms have expanded their reach around the world. Taiwan is a key player in the supply chain for advanced chips. Taiwan&#x27;s rise in the key semiconductor industry was largely attributed to Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. (TSMC) and United Microelectronic Corporation (UMC). TSMC was founded 21 February 1987 and as of December 2021 its market capitalization equated to roughly 90% of Taiwan&#x27;s GDP. The company is the 9th largest in the world by market capitalization as well as the world&#x27;s biggest semiconductor manufacturing company, surpassing Intel and Samsung. UMC, another major company in Taiwan&#x27;s high-tech exports and global semiconductors, competes with the American GlobalFoundries, and others, for less advanced semiconductor processes and for silicon wafers. Other well-known international technology companies based in Taiwan include personal computer manufacturers Acer Inc. and Asus, as well as Foxconn, an electronics contract manufacturer.

===Transport===
The Ministry of Transportation and Communications of Taiwan is the cabinet-level governing body of the transport network in Taiwan. Civilian transport in Taiwan is characterized by extensive use of scooters. In March 2019, 13.86 million were registered, twice that of cars. Both highways and railways are concentrated near the coasts, where the majority of the population resides, with of motorway. Railways in Taiwan are primarily used for passenger services, with Taiwan Railways Administration (TRA) operating a circular route around the island and Taiwan High Speed Rail (THSR) running high speed services on the west coast. Urban transit systems include Taipei Metro, Kaohsiung Metro, Taoyuan Metro, New Taipei Metro, and Taichung Metro.

Major airports include Taiwan Taoyuan, Kaohsiung, Taipei Songshan and Taichung. There are currently seven Taiwanese passenger airlines, with the largest two being China Airlines and EVA Air. There are seven international seaports: Keelung, Taipei, Suao, Taichung, Kaohsiung, Anping, and Hualien. The Port of Kaohsiung handled the largest volume of cargo in Taiwan, with about 440 million shipping tonnes, which accounted for 58.6% of Taiwan&#x27;s total throughput in 2021. The shipping tonnage followed by Taichung (18.6%), Taipei (12%) and Keelung (8.7%).

==Demographics==
Taiwan has a population of about 23.4 million, most of whom are on the island of Taiwan. The remainder live on the outlying islands of Penghu (101,758), Kinmen (127,723), and Matsu (12,506).

===Largest cities and counties===
The figures below are the March 2019 estimates for the twenty most populous administrative divisions; a different ranking exists when considering the total metropolitan area populations (in such rankings the Taipei-Keelung metro area is by far the largest agglomeration). The figures reflect the number of household registrations in each city, which may differ from the number of actual residents.
===Ethnic groups===

The ROC government reports that 95 percent of the population is ethnically Han Chinese. There are also 2.4 percent indigenous Austronesian peoples and 2.6 percent new immigrants primarily from China and Southeast Asia.

Most Han Taiwanese are descended from the Hoklo people, native to the coastal regions of southern Fujian, and the Hakka people, native to eastern Guangdong. Hoklo and Hakka migrants arrived in large numbers during the 17th and 18th century. Descendants of Hoklo now compose approximately 70 percent of Taiwan&#x27;s population. Descendants of Hakka make up about 15 percent of the population. Another minority group, called &quot;waishengren&quot;, comprises those who arrived from China during the 1940s or are descended from them. Genetic studies indicate that the Han people in Taiwan are closer to southern Chinese compared to northern Chinese and, similar to several other groups of Han Chinese, had mixed with Island Southeast Asians, likely before their migration to Taiwan.

Taiwanese Indigenous peoples number about 584,000, and the government recognises 16 groups. The Ami, Atayal, Bunun, Kanakanavu, Kavalan, Paiwan, Puyuma, Rukai, Saisiyat, Saaroa, Sakizaya, Sediq, Thao, Truku and Tsou live mostly in the eastern half of the island, while the Yami inhabit Orchid Island.

===Languages===

The Republic of China does not have any legally designated official language. Mandarin is the primary language used in business and education, and is spoken by the vast majority of the population. Traditional Chinese is used as the writing system.

Around 70% of Taiwan&#x27;s population belong to the Hoklo ethnic group and are native speakers of Taiwanese Hokkien. The Hakka group, comprising some 14–18 percent of the population, speak Hakka. Although Mandarin is the language of instruction in schools and dominates television and radio, non-Mandarin Chinese varieties have undergone a revival in public life in Taiwan, particularly since restrictions on their use were lifted in the 1990s.

Formosan languages are spoken primarily by the indigenous peoples of Taiwan. They do not belong to the Chinese or Sino-Tibetan language family, but to the Austronesian language family, and are written in the Latin alphabet. Their use among aboriginal minority groups has been in decline as usage of Mandarin has risen. Of the 14 extant languages, five are considered moribund.

Since the May Fourth Movement, written vernacular Chinese had replaced Classical Chinese and emerged as the mainstream written Chinese in the Republic of China. Classical Chinese continued to be widely used in government documents until reforms in the 1970s to shift the written style to a more integrated vernacular Chinese and Classical Chinese style (). On 1 January 2005, the Executive Yuan also changed its long-standing convention on the direction of writing in official documents from vertical to horizontal. Standalone Classical Chinese is occasionally used in formal or ceremonial occasions, such as religious or cultural rites. The &quot;National Anthem of the Republic of China&quot; (), for example, is in Classical Chinese. Most official government, legal, and judiciary documents, as well as courts rulings use a combined vernacular Chinese and Classical Chinese style. As many legal documents are still written in Classical Chinese, which is not easily understood by the general public, a group of Taiwanese have launched the Legal Vernacular Movement, hoping to bring more vernacular Chinese into the legal writings of the Republic of China.

Taiwan is officially multilingual. A national language in Taiwan is legally defined as &quot;a natural language used by an original people group of Taiwan and the Taiwan Sign Language&quot;.

===Religion===

The Constitution of the Republic of China protects people&#x27;s freedom of religion and the practices of belief. The government respects freedom of religion, and Taiwan scores highly on the International IDEA&#x27;s Global State of Democracy Indices for religious freedom.

In 2005, the census reported that the five largest religions were: Buddhism, Taoism, Yiguandao, Protestantism, and Roman Catholicism. According to Pew Research, the religious composition of Taiwan in 2020 is estimated to be 43.8 percent Folk religions, 21.2 percent Buddhist, 15.5 Others (including Taoism), 13.7 percent Unaffiliated, 5.8 percent Christian and 1% Muslim. Taiwanese aborigines comprise a notable subgroup among professing Christians. There has been a small Muslim community of Hui people in Taiwan since the 17th century.

Confucianism serves as the foundation of both Chinese and Taiwanese culture. The majority of Taiwanese people usually combine the secular moral teachings of Confucianism with whatever religions they are affiliated with.

, there were 15,175 religious buildings in Taiwan, approximately one place of worship per 1,572 residents. 12,279 temples were dedicated to Taoism and Buddhism. There were 9,684 Taoist Temples and 2,317 Buddhist Temples. For Christianity, there are 2,845 Churches. On average, there is one temple or church (church) or religious building for every square kilometer. The density of religions and religious buildings in Taiwan is among the highest in the world.

A significant percentage of the population is non-religious. Taiwan&#x27;s lack of state-sanctioned discrimination, and generally high regard for freedom of religion or belief earned it a joint #1 ranking in the 2018 Freedom of Thought Report. On the other hand, the Indonesian migrant worker community in Taiwan (estimated to total 258,084 people) has experienced religious restrictions by local employers or the government.

===Education===

Taiwan is well known for adhering to the Confucian paradigm of valuing education as a means to improve one&#x27;s socioeconomic position in society. Heavy investment and a cultural valuing of education has made the resource-poor nation to be consistently ranked to the top of global education rankings. Taiwan is one of the top-performing countries in reading literacy, mathematics and sciences. In 2015, Taiwanese students achieved one of the world&#x27;s best results in mathematics, science and literacy, as tested by the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), with the average student scoring 519, compared with the OECD average of 493, placing it seventh in the world.

The Taiwanese education system has been praised for its comparatively high test results and its major role in promoting Taiwan&#x27;s economic development while creating one of the world&#x27;s most highly educated workforces. Taiwan has also been praised for its high university entrance rate where the university acceptance rate has increased from around 20 percent before the 1980s to 49 percent in 1996 and over 95 percent since 2008, among the highest in Asia. The nation&#x27;s high university entrance rate has created a highly skilled workforce making Taiwan one of the most highly educated countries in the world with 68.5 percent of Taiwanese high school students going on to attend university. Taiwan has a high percentage of its citizens holding a tertiary education degree where 45 percent of Taiwanese aged 25–64 hold a bachelor&#x27;s degree or higher compared with the average of 33 percent among member countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).

On the other hand, the education system has been criticized for placing excessive pressure on students while eschewing creativity and producing an excess supply of overeducated university graduates. Many graduates consequently face unemployment or underemployment due to a lack of graduate-level jobs. Taiwan&#x27;s universities have also been under criticism for not being able to fully meet the requirements and demands of Taiwan&#x27;s 21st-century fast-moving labor market, citing a skills mismatch among a large number of self-assessed, overeducated graduates who do not fit the demands of the modern Taiwanese labor market. The Taiwanese government has been criticized for failing to adequately address this discrepancy in labor supply and demand.

As the Taiwanese economy is largely science and technology based, the labor market demands people who have achieved some form of higher education, particularly related to science and engineering to gain a competitive edge when searching for employment. Although current Taiwanese law mandates only nine years of schooling, 95 percent of junior high graduates go on to attend a senior vocational high school, university, junior college, trade school, or other higher education institution. Many Taiwanese students attend cram schools, or &quot;buxiban&quot;, to improve skills and knowledge on problem solving against exams.

Since Made in China 2025 was announced in 2015, aggressive campaigns to recruit Taiwanese chip industry talent to support its mandates resulted in the loss of more than 3,000 chip engineers to mainland China, and raised concerns of a &quot;brain drain&quot; in Taiwan.

, the literacy rate in Taiwan was 99.03 percent.

===Health===

The current healthcare system, known as National Health Insurance (NHI), was instituted in 1995. NHI is a single-payer compulsory social insurance plan that centralizes the disbursement of healthcare funds. The system promises equal access to healthcare for all citizens, and the population coverage had reached 99 percent by the end of 2004. NHI is mainly financed through premiums, which are based on the payroll tax, and is supplemented with out-of-pocket co-payments and direct government funding. Low-income families, veterans, centenarians, children under three, and catastrophic diseases are exempt from co-payments. Co-pays are reduced for disabled and low-income households maintain 100 percent premium coverage.

Early in the program, the payment system was predominantly fee-for-service. Most health providers operate in the private sector and form a competitive market on the health delivery side. However, many healthcare providers took advantage of the system by offering unnecessary services. In the face of increasing loss and the need for cost containment, NHI changed the payment system from fee-for-service to a global budget, a kind of prospective payment system, in 2002.

The implementation of universal healthcare created fewer health disparities for lower-income citizens in Taiwan. According to a recently published survey, out of 3,360 patients surveyed at a randomly chosen hospital, 75.1 percent of the patients said they are &quot;very satisfied&quot; with the hospital service; 20.5 percent said they are &quot;okay&quot; with the service. Only 4.4 percent of the patients said they are either &quot;not satisfied&quot; or &quot;very not satisfied&quot; with the service or care provided.

The Taiwanese disease control authority is the Taiwan Centers for Disease Control (CDC). During the SARS outbreak in March 2003 there were 347 confirmed cases. During the outbreak the CDC and local governments set up monitoring stations throughout public transportation, recreational sites and other public areas. With full containment in July 2003, there has not been a case of SARS since. Owing to the lessons from SARS, a was established in 2004, which includes the Central Epidemic Command Center (CECC). The CECC has played a central role in Taiwan&#x27;s approach to epidemics, including COVID-19.

In 2019, the infant mortality rate was 4.2 deaths per 1,000 live births, with 20 physicians and 71 hospital beds per 10,000 people. Life expectancy at birth in 2020 is 77.5 years and 83.9 years for males and females, respectively.

==Culture==

The cultures of Taiwan are a hybrid blend from various sources, incorporating elements of the majority traditional Chinese culture, aboriginal cultures, Japanese cultural influence, traditional Confucianist beliefs, and increasingly, Western values.

During the martial law period, the Kuomintang promoted an official traditional Chinese culture over Taiwan in order to emphasize that the Republic of China represents the true orthodoxy to Chinese Culture as opposed to Communist China. The government launched what&#x27;s known as the Chinese Cultural Renaissance movement in Taiwan in opposition to the cultural destructions caused by the Chinese Communist Party during the Cultural Revolution. The General Assembly of Chinese Culture was established to help promote Chinese culture in Taiwan and overseas. It was Kuomintang&#x27;s first structured plan for cultural development on Taiwan. The Chinese Cultural Renaissance movement in Taiwan had led to some aspects of Chinese Culture being better preserved there than in mainland China, for example the continued use of Traditional Chinese. The influence of Confucianism can be found in the behavior of Taiwanese people, known for their friendliness and politeness.

The lifting of martial law ushered a period of democratization whereby Freedom of Speech and Expression led to a flourishing Taiwanese literature and mass media in Taiwan. The Taiwanese Constitution protects &quot;speech, teaching, writing and publication.&quot; In 2022, the Economist Intelligence Unit&#x27;s Democracy Index ranked Taiwan as having the second highest democracy score in Asia and Australasia. Freedom House has ranked Taiwan the second freest place in Asia while CIVICUS rated Taiwan and New Zealand as the only &quot;open&quot; countries in the Asia-Pacific. In the aftermath of China gaining control of Hong Kong and restricting freedom of speech and protest, 36,789 Hong Kong residents moved to Taiwan from 2019 to 2022, an average of about 9,000 immigrants per year. In 2018, Taiwan only had 4,000 Hong Kong immigrants.
Reflecting the continuing controversy surrounding the political status of Taiwan, politics continues to play a role in the conception and development of a Taiwanese cultural identity, especially in its relationship to Chinese culture. In recent years, the concept of Taiwanese multiculturalism has been proposed as a relatively apolitical alternative view, which has allowed for the inclusion of mainlanders and other minority groups into the continuing re-definition of Taiwanese culture as collectively held systems of meaning and customary patterns of thought and behavior shared by the people of Taiwan. Identity politics, along with the over one hundred years of political separation from mainland China, has led to distinct traditions in many areas, including cuisine and music.

===Arts===

Acclaimed classical musicians include violinist Cho-Liang Lin, pianist Ching-Yun Hu, and the Lincoln Center Chamber Music Society artist director Wu Han. Other musicians include Teresa Teng, Jay Chou and groups such as Mayday and heavy metal band Chthonic, led by singer Freddy Lim, which has been referred to as the &quot;Black Sabbath of Asia&quot;.

Taiwanese films have won various international awards at film festivals around the world. Ang Lee, a Taiwanese director, has directed critically acclaimed films such as: &quot;Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon&quot;; &quot;Eat Drink Man Woman&quot;; &quot;Sense and Sensibility&quot;; &quot;Brokeback Mountain&quot;; &quot;Life of Pi&quot;; and &quot;Lust, Caution&quot;. Other famous Taiwanese directors include Tsai Ming-liang, Edward Yang, and Hou Hsiao-hsien. Taiwan has hosted the Golden Horse Film Festival and Awards since 1962.

The National Palace Museum houses more than 650,000 pieces of Chinese bronze, jade, calligraphy, painting, and porcelain and is considered one of the greatest collections of Chinese art and objects in the world.

===Popular culture===
Karaoke is extremely popular in Taiwan, where it is known as KTV. KTV businesses operate in a hotel-like style, renting out small rooms and ballrooms according to the number of guests. Many KTV establishments partner with restaurants and buffets to form all-encompassing and elaborate evening affairs. Tour busses that travel around Taiwan have several TVs, primarily for singing karaoke.

Taiwan has a high density of 24-hour convenience stores, which provide services on behalf of financial institutions or government agencies, such as collection of parking fees, utility bills, traffic fines, and credit card payments. Chains such as FamilyMart provide clothing laundry services in select stores, and tickets for TRA and THSR are available at 7-Eleven, FamilyMart, Hi-Life and .

===Cuisine===
Taiwanese culinary history is murky and is intricately tied to patterns of migration and colonization. Local and international Taiwanese cuisine, including its history, is a politically contentious topic. Famous Taiwanese dishes include Taiwanese beef noodle soup, Gua bao, Zongzi, Khong bah png, Taiwanese fried chicken, oyster vermicelli, Sanbeiji, and Aiyu jelly. Bubble tea, created in Taiwan in the 1980s, has now become popular globally. In 2014, &quot;The Guardian&quot; called Taiwanese night markets the &quot;best street food markets in the world&quot;. The Michelin Guide began reviewing restaurants in Taiwan in 2018.

===Sports===

Baseball is commonly considered Taiwan&#x27;s national sport and is a popular spectator sport. The men&#x27;s team won medals across all levels of baseball in 2022, including the U-12, U-15, U-18, U-23, and Baseball5 competitions, the only team to do so in baseball history. The results made Taiwan&#x27;s national baseball team one of the top-ranked teams in the WBSC World Rankings. Professional baseball in Taiwan started with the founding of the Chinese Professional Baseball League (CPBL) in 1989. As of 2024, the CPBL has six teams, with an average attendance of over 7,000 per game. Some elite players signed with overseas professional teams in the Major League Baseball (MLB) or the Nippon Professional Baseball (NPB). There have been seventeen Taiwanese MLB players as of the 2024 MLB season, including former pitchers Chien-Ming Wang and Wei-Yin Chen. As for variations of baseball, Taiwan also has a strong women&#x27;s softball team. The Chinese Taipei women&#x27;s national softball team won a bronze medal at the 2022 World Games.

Basketball is Taiwan&#x27;s other major sport. The P. League+ and Taiwan Professional Basketball League are the country&#x27;s two professional basketball leagues. A semi-professional Super Basketball League (SBL) has also been in play since 2003. Other team sports include volleyball and football. Taiwan is also a major competitor in korfball.

Taiwan participates in international sporting organizations and events under the name of &quot;Chinese Taipei&quot;. Taiwan has hosted several multi-sport events in the past, including the 2009 World Games in Kaohsiung and the 2009 Summer Deaflympics and 2017 Summer Universiade in Taipei. Taipei and New Taipei City will host the 2025 Summer World Masters Games. Hualien will host the 2026 International Children&#x27;s Games. Other major recurring events held by Taiwan include:
* Taipei Marathon (marathon)
* New Taipei City Wan Jin Shi Marathon (marathon)
* Taipei Open (badminton)
* U-12 Baseball World Cup (baseball)
* William Jones Cup (basketball)
* Tour de Taiwan (road bicycle racing)
Taekwondo was introduced to Taiwan in 1966 for military training and has become a mature and successful combat sport in Taiwan. The first two Olympic gold medals won by Taiwanese athletes belong to the sport. In the 2004 Olympics, Chen Shih-hsin and Chu Mu-yen won gold medals in the women&#x27;s flyweight event and the men&#x27;s flyweight event, respectively. Subsequent taekwondo competitors have strengthened Taiwan&#x27;s taekwondo culture.

There are many outstanding Taiwanese players at other individual sports, such as badminton, tennis, table tennis, and golf. Taiwan&#x27;s strength in badminton is demonstrated by Tai Tzu-ying, who spent most weeks as world No. 1 women&#x27;s singles player in BWF World Ranking, and her compatriots in the BWF World Tour. Taiwan also has a long history of strong international presence in table tennis. Six-time Olympian Chuang Chih-yuan made the most appearances at the Olympic Games among Taiwanese athletes. Yani Tseng is the youngest golf player ever, male or female, to win five major championships and was ranked number 1 in the Women&#x27;s World Golf Rankings for 109 consecutive weeks from 2011 to 2013. In tennis, Hsieh Su-wei is the country&#x27;s most successful female tennis player.

===Calendar===

The standard Gregorian calendar is used for most purposes. The year is often denoted by the Minguo era system which starts in 1912, the year the ROC was founded. 2024 is year 113 Minguo (民國113年). The East Asian date format is used in Chinese. Prior to standardization in 1929, the Chinese calendar was officially used. It is a Lunisolar calendar system which remains in use for traditional festivals such as the Lunar New Year, the Lantern Festival, and the Dragon Boat Festival.

==See also==

* Index of Taiwan-related articles
* Outline of Taiwan

==Notes==

=== Words in native languages ===
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Works cited===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
*
*
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

===Overviews and data===
* Taiwan. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Taiwan from &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot; (archived)
* Taiwan country profile – BBC News
* Background Note: Taiwan – US Department of State
* Taiwan&#x27;s 400 years of history. New Taiwan, Ilha Formosa.
* Key Development Forecasts for Taiwan from International Futures
* Chinese Taipei. OECD.

===Government agencies===
* Office of the Government
* Office of the President
* Executive Yuan
* Judicial Yuan
* Control Yuan
* Examination Yuan
* Ministry of Foreign Affairs
* Republic of China (Taiwan) Embassies and Missions Abroad
* Taiwan, The Heart of Asia. . Tourism Bureau. Republic of China (Taiwan).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="0" end="6" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="23" end="40" title="Taiwan" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="42" end="45" title="Taiwan" label="ROC"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="64" end="73" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22528" start="84" end="100" title="geography of Taiwan" label="island of Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q45341" start="154" end="158" title="East China Sea" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="163" end="178" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="199" end="212" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="223" end="254" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="279" end="284" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="311" end="322" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621443" start="455" end="471" title="Urbanization by country" label="highly urbanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q245107" start="513" end="542" title="Free area of the Republic of China" label="territories under ROC control"/>
<link wikidata="Q712598" start="554" end="565" title="list of islands of Taiwan" label="168 islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q712937" start="590" end="615" title="Taipei–Keelung metropolitan area" label="largest metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="629" end="635" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q244898" start="651" end="666" title="New Taipei City" label="New Taipei City"/>
<link wikidata="Q249996" start="672" end="679" title="Keelung" label="Keelung"/>
<link wikidata="Q176310" start="739" end="771" title="List of countries and dependencies by population density" label="most densely populated countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q216839" start="838" end="866" title="Taiwanese indigenous peoples" label="Taiwanese indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="943" end="954" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q699446" start="981" end="993" title="Dutch Formosa" label="Dutch colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q152855" start="1018" end="1037" title="Kingdom of Tungning" label="Kingdom of Tungning"/>
<link wikidata="Q378008" start="1084" end="1101" title="History of Taiwan" label="Taiwanese history"/>
<link wikidata="Q391189" start="1118" end="1133" title="Taiwan under Qing rule" label="annexed in 1683"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="1141" end="1153" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q269655" start="1167" end="1172" title="Treaty of Shimonoseki" label="ceded"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="1180" end="1195" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="1209" end="1226" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="1238" end="1265" title="1911 Revolution" label="overthrown the Qing in 1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="1290" end="1301" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="1330" end="1348" title="surrender of Japan" label="surrender of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="1390" end="1407" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="1436" end="1452" title="Chinese mainland" label="Chinese mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="1456" end="1472" title="Communist Party of China" label="Communist forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872057" start="1478" end="1525" title="Proclamation of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="established the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165653" start="1531" end="1581" title="Retreat of the government of Republic of China to Taiwan" label="the flight of the ROC central government to Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q918799" start="1663" end="1669" title="Penghu" label="Penghu"/>
<link wikidata="Q701364" start="1789" end="1803" title="Taiwan Miracle" label="Taiwan Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="1874" end="1889" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="1896" end="1907" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="1913" end="1934" title="multi-party democracy" label="multi-party democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q431657" start="1988" end="1992" title="1996 Taiwanese presidential election" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832242" start="2008" end="2031" title="export-oriented economy" label="export-oriented economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="2039" end="2051" title="list of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="21st-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="2088" end="2100" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="20th-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="2206" end="2223" title="developed country" label="developed country"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="2257" end="2272" title="civil liberties" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679133" start="2274" end="2284" title="Healthcare in Taiwan" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917873" start="2290" end="2307" title="Human development (economics)" label="human development"/>
<link wikidata="Q706243" start="2314" end="2340" title="political status of Taiwan" label="political status of Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2444" end="2458" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334327" start="2493" end="2510" title="United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2758" label="recognize the PRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559326" start="2567" end="2601" title="Two Chinas" label="legitimate representative of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q708927" start="2650" end="2706" title="Temporary Provisions against the Communist Rebellion" label="regard the Chinese Communist Party as a rebellious group"/>
<link wikidata="Q197428" start="2881" end="2920" title="foreign relations of Taiwan" label="maintains official diplomatic relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="2965" end="2973" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q579581" start="3031" end="3053" title="Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office" label="representative offices"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3088" end="3133" title="de facto embassy#Taiwan" label="&amp;quot;de facto&amp;quot; embassies and consulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350503" start="3346" end="3364" title="Pan-Blue Coalition" label="Pan-Blue Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3386" end="3419" title="Chinese unification#Pan-Blue interpretation" label="Chinese unification under the ROC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058841" start="3436" end="3456" title="Chinese nationalism" label="pan-Chinese identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q715136" start="3478" end="3497" title="Pan-Green Coalition" label="Pan-Green Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q708772" start="3521" end="3543" title="Taiwan independence movement" label="Taiwanese independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q218505" start="3560" end="3578" title="Taiwanese nationalism" label="Taiwanese identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221512" start="3724" end="3736" title="Daoyi Zhilüe" label="Daoyi Zhilüe"/>
<link wikidata="Q835720" start="3751" end="3762" title="Wang Dayuan" label="Wang Dayuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969231" start="3774" end="3780" title="Liuqiu (medieval)" label="Liuqiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q918799" start="3842" end="3848" title="Penghu" label="Penghu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897416" start="3887" end="3901" title="Ryukyu Islands" label="Ryukyu Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q600614" start="3916" end="3923" title="Okinawa Island" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156924" start="4045" end="4056" title="Book of Sui" label="Book of Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q125384" start="4181" end="4186" title="Luzon" label="Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q266680" start="4268" end="4272" title="Portolan chart" label="maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="4302" end="4312" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="4662" end="4686" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q20706255" start="4720" end="4734" title="Fort Zeelandia (Taiwan)" label="Fort Zeelandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q703607" start="4747" end="4753" title="Anping District" label="Anping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137656" start="4816" end="4824" title="ethnonym" label="ethnonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q216839" start="4838" end="4858" title="Taiwanese indigenous peoples" label="Taiwanese aboriginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15912275" start="4875" end="4889" title="Taivoan people" label="Taivoan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="5464" end="5476" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726430" start="5503" end="5520" title="Taiwan Prefecture" label="Taiwan Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q140631" start="5544" end="5550" title="Tainan" label="Tainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="6105" end="6117" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q155231" start="6138" end="6151" title="demesne" label="royal demesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q187136" start="6212" end="6219" title="Luoyang" label="Luoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q307066" start="6232" end="6244" title="Eastern Zhou" label="Eastern Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q190277" start="6271" end="6284" title="Central Plain (China)" label="Central Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q950326" start="6433" end="6444" title="Tongmenghui" label="Tongmenghui"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="6529" end="6535" title="Manchu people" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6554" end="6574" title="Names of China#Zhongguo" label="&amp;quot;Chunghwa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="6677" end="6688" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q245107" start="6955" end="6965" title="Free area of the Republic of China" label="Free China"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="7036" end="7045" title="China" label="Red China"/>
<link wikidata="Q216923" start="7843" end="7857" title="Chinese Taipei" label="Chinese Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="7996" end="8009" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q170481" start="8025" end="8029" title="Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation" label="APEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q498831" start="8220" end="8236" title="Late Pleistocene" label="Late Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="8302" end="8313" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3960" start="8421" end="8436" title="Australo-Papuan" label="Australo-Papuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q845985" start="8455" end="8474" title="Negrito" label="Negrito populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897416" start="8536" end="8550" title="Ryukyu Islands" label="Ryukyu Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q622543" start="8569" end="8583" title="Slash-and-burn" label="Slash-and-burn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8661" end="8677" title="Changbin culture" label="Changbin culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q249904" start="8697" end="8704" title="Taitung County" label="Taitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q707309" start="8709" end="8716" title="Eluanbi" label="Eluanbi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8841" end="8857" title="Wangxing culture" label="Wangxing culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q63706" start="8868" end="8881" title="Miaoli County" label="Miaoli County"/>
<link wikidata="Q9884947" start="8994" end="9011" title="Dapenkeng culture" label="Dapenkeng culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q216839" start="9102" end="9130" title="Taiwanese indigenous peoples" label="Taiwanese Indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458559" start="9139" end="9150" title="Linguistic homeland" label="originators"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="9158" end="9186" title="Austronesian language family" label="Austronesian language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="9203" end="9214" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q175089" start="9291" end="9295" title="jade" label="jade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675680" start="9427" end="9431" title="Tahu culture" label="Tahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q949415" start="9436" end="9442" title="Yingpu culture" label="Yingpu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024092" start="9534" end="9550" title="Niaosung culture" label="Niaosung culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="9587" end="9610" title="Maritime Southeast Asia" label="Maritime Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q697914" start="9616" end="9641" title="Plains Indigenous peoples" label="Plains Indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="9711" end="9722" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="9724" end="9731" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="9737" end="9744" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q185681" start="9769" end="9790" title="Matriarchal society" label="matriarchal societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q918799" start="9838" end="9852" title="Penghu" label="Penghu Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="9871" end="9882" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q128883" start="9937" end="9945" title="Jinjiang, Fujian" label="Jinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="9951" end="9963" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025342" start="10021" end="10033" title="Tong&amp;#x27;an" label="Tong&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="10098" end="10110" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569008" start="10128" end="10140" title="Haijin" label="maritime ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q835720" start="10193" end="10204" title="Wang Dayuan" label="Wang Dayuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="10307" end="10313" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q699303" start="10559" end="10566" title="Chen Di" label="Chen Di"/>
<link wikidata="Q697605" start="10593" end="10598" title="wokou" label="wokou"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="11133" end="11157" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q20706255" start="11176" end="11190" title="Fort Zeelandia (Taiwan)" label="Fort Zeelandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q140631" start="11234" end="11240" title="Tainan" label="Tainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642488" start="11292" end="11300" title="chiefdom" label="chiefdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q706488" start="11357" end="11374" title="Kingdom of Middag" label="Kingdom of Middag"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="11823" end="11837" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q249996" start="11891" end="11898" title="Keelung" label="Keelung"/>
<link wikidata="Q713077" start="11920" end="11938" title="Fort Santo Domingo" label="Fort Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q570509" start="11942" end="11948" title="Tamsui" label="Tamsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q197615" start="12176" end="12183" title="Koxinga" label="Koxinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326844" start="12228" end="12242" title="Yongli Emperor" label="Yongli Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q68744" start="12390" end="12396" title="Xiamen" label="Xiamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q697621" start="12408" end="12427" title="Siege of Fort Zeelandia" label="expelling the Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q152855" start="12605" end="12624" title="Kingdom of Tungning" label="Kingdom of Tungning"/>
<link wikidata="Q84018" start="12707" end="12717" title="Zheng Jing" label="Zheng Jing"/>
<link wikidata="Q112501" start="12763" end="12794" title="Revolt of the Three Feudatories" label="Revolt of the Three Feudatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q197615" start="12919" end="12926" title="Koxinga" label="Koxinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q701449" start="12971" end="12979" title="Shi Lang" label="Shi Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726430" start="13055" end="13065" title="Taiwan prefecture" label="prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q714246" start="14506" end="14517" title="Dajia River" label="Dajia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="15026" end="15034" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Qianlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q698943" start="15147" end="15156" title="Zhu Yigui" label="Zhu Yigui"/>
<link wikidata="Q697914" start="15565" end="15590" title="Plains Indigenous peoples" label="Plains Indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q499468" start="15808" end="15831" title="Lin Shuangwen rebellion" label="Lin Shuangwen rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q718347" start="16265" end="16279" title="Kavalan people" label="Kavalan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q703942" start="16905" end="16933" title="Mudan Incident" label="invaded Indigenous territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q249996" start="17375" end="17382" title="Keelung" label="Keelung"/>
<link wikidata="Q706183" start="17426" end="17441" title="Sino-French War" label="Sino-French War"/>
<link wikidata="Q707594" start="17644" end="17657" title="Liu Mingchuan" label="Liu Mingchuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q32081" start="17707" end="17715" title="Taiwan Province" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="17717" end="17723" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="18855" end="18878" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="First Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="18965" end="18970" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q269655" start="18978" end="18999" title="Treaty of Shimonoseki" label="Treaty of Shimonoseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q319881" start="19352" end="19371" title="Republic of Formosa" label="Republic of Formosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10902675" start="19731" end="19745" title="Beipu uprising" label="Beipu uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q707864" start="19759" end="19774" title="Tapani incident" label="Tapani incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q714535" start="19792" end="19806" title="Wushe incident" label="Musha incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219941" start="20097" end="20113" title="education in Taiwan" label="education system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345851" start="20145" end="20156" title="headhunting" label="headhunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q932139" start="20243" end="20253" title="cash crops" label="cash crops"/>
<link wikidata="Q698031" start="20920" end="20935" title="Chiang Wei-shui" label="Chiang Wei-shui"/>
<link wikidata="Q11562282" start="20940" end="20959" title="Masanosuke Watanabe" label="Masanosuke Watanabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q17991037" start="21009" end="21029" title="Japanization" label="assimilation project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197248" start="21145" end="21151" title="State Shinto" label="Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q96389217" start="21298" end="21314" title="Japanese surname" label="Japanese surname"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="21590" end="21601" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="21633" end="21655" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21720" end="21738" title="Nanshin-ron#Theoretical development" label="South Strike Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q32746" start="21758" end="21785" title="Taihoku Imperial University" label="Taihoku Imperial University"/>
<link wikidata="Q181557" start="21834" end="21843" title="Kaohsiung" label="Kaohsiung"/>
<link wikidata="Q249996" start="21848" end="21855" title="Keelung" label="Keelung"/>
<link wikidata="Q698975" start="21881" end="21896" title="Raid on Taipei" label="Allied bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470224" start="22012" end="22030" title="Formosa Air Battle" label="Formosa Air Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676607" start="22115" end="22156" title="Taiwanese Imperial Japan Serviceman" label="Taiwanese served in the Japanese military"/>
<link wikidata="Q713540" start="22234" end="22247" title="comfort women" label="comfort women"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="22324" end="22346" title="Japan&amp;#x27;s surrender" label="Japan&amp;#x27;s surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036444" start="22377" end="22385" title="World War II evacuation and expulsion" label="expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="22471" end="22488" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="22504" end="22518" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="22551" end="22568" title="Xinhai Revolution" label="Xinhai Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201263" start="22627" end="22637" title="Warlord Era" label="warlordism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="22649" end="22666" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Japanese invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="22686" end="22703" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083391" start="22759" end="22773" title="Nanjing decade" label="Nanjing decade"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="22834" end="22844" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="22859" end="22871" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q702120" start="22882" end="22899" title="1943 Cairo Declaration" label="Cairo Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q163244" start="23017" end="23036" title="Potsdam Declaration" label="Potsdam Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q665554" start="23071" end="23098" title="Japanese Instrument of Surrender" label="its instrument of surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q697228" start="23103" end="23118" title="Retrocession Day" label="25 October 1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q392541" start="23168" end="23191" title="Treaty of San Francisco" label="Treaty of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q707269" start="23347" end="23361" title="Treaty of Taipei" label="a peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q260998" start="23444" end="23474" title="Three Principles of the People" label="Three Principles of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q213099" start="23627" end="23639" title="ROC Constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q185565" start="23777" end="23791" title="hyperinflation" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q244939" start="23950" end="23970" title="February 28 Incident" label="February 28 Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q701051" start="24070" end="24082" title="Wei Tao-ming" label="Wei Tao-ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="24359" end="24366" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872057" start="24457" end="24500" title="Proclamation of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="founded the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="24535" end="24550" title="Chiang Kai-Shek" label="Chiang Kai-Shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165653" start="24551" end="24597" title="Retreat of the Republic of China to Taiwan" label="evacuated his Nationalist government to Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q377283" start="24618" end="24635" title="temporary capital" label="temporary capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360579" start="24915" end="24927" title="waisheng ren" label="waisheng ren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046879" start="25021" end="25025" title="gold reserves" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q208526" start="25143" end="25160" title="New Taiwan dollar" label="New Taiwan dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q32081" start="25325" end="25336" title="Taiwan Province" label="Taiwan, ROC"/>
<link wikidata="Q63698" start="25356" end="25367" title="Fujian Province, Republic of China" label="Fujian, ROC"/>
<link wikidata="Q706550" start="25390" end="25395" title="Wuqiu, Kinmen" label="Wuqiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141500" start="25453" end="25483" title="South China Sea Islands" label="islands in the South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="25542" end="25548" title="Hainan" label="Hainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967" start="25559" end="25567" title="Zhejiang" label="Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089762" start="25569" end="25577" title="Chekiang Province, Republic of China" label="Chekiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753346" start="25596" end="25610" title="Dachen Islands" label="Dachen Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q856381" start="25615" end="25634" title="Yijiangshan Islands" label="Yijiangshan Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444884" start="25651" end="25656" title="Tibet (1912–1951)" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q45833" start="25658" end="25665" title="Qinghai" label="Qinghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083808" start="25667" end="25675" title="Xinjiang Province, Republic of China" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="25680" end="25686" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484605" start="25703" end="25718" title="battle of Hainan Island" label="captured Hainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421268" start="25791" end="25817" title="First Taiwan Strait Crisis" label="First Taiwan Strait Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445249" start="25843" end="25873" title="Kuomintang Islamic insurgency" label="ROC revolts in Northwest China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027771" start="25938" end="25973" title="1960–61 campaign at the China–Burma border" label="were defeated by Communists in 1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q909566" start="26181" end="26195" title="Outer Mongolia" label="Outer Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q701661" start="26201" end="26224" title="administrative divisions of Taiwan" label="other minor territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="26265" end="26276" title="Martial law" label="Martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995467" start="26406" end="26418" title="White Terror (Taiwan)" label="White Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="26834" end="26844" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="26859" end="26874" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q484950" start="26890" end="26917" title="United States Seventh Fleet" label="United States Seventh Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q127031" start="26927" end="26940" title="Taiwan Strait" label="Taiwan Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524749" start="27027" end="27062" title="Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty" label="Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470230" start="27071" end="27097" title="Formosa Resolution of 1955" label="Formosa Resolution of 1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892491" start="27120" end="27131" title="United States foreign aid" label="foreign aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q118899444" start="27273" end="27285" title="Land reform in Taiwan" label="land reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931668" start="27420" end="27460" title="Sino-American Joint Commission on Rural Reconstruction" label="Joint Commission on Rural Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660379" start="27758" end="27795" title="import substitution industrialization" label="import substitution industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060681" start="28063" end="28091" title="Central Cross-Island Highway" label="Central Cross-Island Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q707427" start="28104" end="28116" title="Taroko Gorge" label="Taroko Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q700442" start="28142" end="28169" title="Second Taiwan Strait Crisis" label="Second Taiwan Strait Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q482925" start="28179" end="28192" title="Nike Hercules" label="Nike Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215935" start="28391" end="28399" title="Dang Guo" label="Dang Guo"/>
<link wikidata="Q701364" start="28513" end="28527" title="Taiwan Miracle" label="Taiwan Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q495274" start="28643" end="28676" title="Export-oriented industrialization" label="Export-oriented industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q697351" start="28858" end="28881" title="Ten Major Construction Projects" label="Infrastructure projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q572051" start="28894" end="28913" title="Sun Yat-sen Freeway" label="Sun Yat-sen Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q44856" start="28915" end="28944" title="Taoyuan International Airport" label="Taoyuan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231281" start="28946" end="28961" title="Taichung Harbor" label="Taichung Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q712574" start="28967" end="28994" title="Jinshan Nuclear Power Plant" label="Jinshan Nuclear Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="29268" end="29271" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q779191" start="29427" end="29443" title="overseas Chinese" label="overseas Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q190918" start="29653" end="29670" title="Four Asian Tigers" label="Four Asian Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334327" start="29848" end="29895" title="United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2758" label="Taiwan&amp;#x27;s expulsion from the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058726" start="29919" end="29941" title="diplomatic recognition" label="diplomatic recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q313598" start="30359" end="30375" title="Chiang Ching-kuo" label="Chiang Ching-kuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q702650" start="30415" end="30422" title="Premier of the Republic of China" label="premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q707133" start="30511" end="30523" title="bensheng ren" label="bensheng ren"/>
<link wikidata="Q444056" start="30635" end="30642" title="Tangwai movement" label="Tangwai"/>
<link wikidata="Q717780" start="30689" end="30707" title="Kaohsiung Incident" label="Kaohsiung Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q181557" start="30722" end="30731" title="Kaohsiung" label="Kaohsiung"/>
<link wikidata="Q206206" start="30735" end="30751" title="Human Rights Day" label="Human Rights Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q315528" start="30923" end="30935" title="Lee Teng-hui" label="Lee Teng-hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q903822" start="30969" end="30997" title="Democratic Progressive Party" label="Democratic Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q315528" start="31316" end="31328" title="Lee Teng-hui" label="Lee Teng-hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064441" start="31429" end="31444" title="democratization" label="democratization"/>
<link wikidata="Q708927" start="31458" end="31510" title="Temporary Provisions against the Communist Rebellion" label="Temporary Provisions against the Communist Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458244" start="31534" end="31573" title="Additional Articles of the Constitution of the Republic of China" label="Additional Articles of the Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q245107" start="31646" end="31657" title="Free area of the Republic of China" label="Taiwan Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q218505" start="31693" end="31705" title="Taiwanese nationalism" label="localization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31766" end="31785" title="Chinese nationalism#In Taiwan" label="pan-China viewpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="31792" end="31807" title="Cultural assimilation" label="assimilationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="31848" end="31864" title="multiculturalism" label="multiculturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q431657" start="31897" end="31935" title="1996 Taiwanese presidential election" label="the first direct presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q699029" start="32066" end="32076" title="black gold (politics)" label="black gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q22368" start="32094" end="32108" title="Chen Shui-bian" label="Chen Shui-bian"/>
<link wikidata="Q710233" start="32124" end="32170" title="2000 Taiwanese presidential election" label="elected as the first non-KMT president in 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350503" start="32248" end="32266" title="Pan-Blue Coalition" label="Pan-Blue Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q715136" start="32330" end="32349" title="Pan-Green Coalition" label="Pan-Green Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100919" start="32430" end="32449" title="Chinese unification" label="Chinese unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q708772" start="32479" end="32501" title="Taiwan independence movement" label="Taiwanese independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092544" start="32535" end="32559" title="One Country on Each Side" label="One Country on Each Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q591903" start="32596" end="32618" title="cross-Strait relations" label="cross-Strait relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314457" start="32646" end="32671" title="2004 Taiwanese cross-Strait relations referendum" label="first national referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067039" start="32728" end="32756" title="National Unification Council" label="National Unification Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314440" start="32880" end="32891" title="2008 Taiwanese United Nations membership referendums" label="referendums"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090892" start="33256" end="33281" title="Chen Shui-bian corruption charges" label="corruption investigations"/>
<link wikidata="Q19216" start="33307" end="33319" title="Ma Ying-jeou" label="Ma Ying-jeou"/>
<link wikidata="Q700833" start="33328" end="33354" title="2008 Republic of China presidential election" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574844" start="33451" end="33468" title="Special non-state-to-state relations" label="mutual non-denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188366" start="33652" end="33673" title="World Health Assembly" label="World Health Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q15240451" start="33918" end="33954" title="Cross-Strait Service Trade Agreement" label="Cross-Strait Service Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q15972916" start="33983" end="34009" title="Sunflower Student Movement" label="Sunflower Student Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q19825637" start="34075" end="34090" title="New Power Party" label="New Power Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q20683626" start="34161" end="34178" title="2016 Taiwanese presidential election" label="2016 presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q17370547" start="34183" end="34204" title="2016 Taiwanese legislative election" label="legislative elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847080" start="34312" end="34332" title="Lai Ching-te" label="William Lai Ching-te"/>
<link wikidata="Q84026635" start="34394" end="34416" title="2024 Taiwanese presidential election" label="presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q112889081" start="34485" end="34505" title="2024 Taiwanese legislative election" label="legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q66029902" start="34641" end="34667" title="Taiwan People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Taiwan People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q712598" start="34755" end="34766" title="list of islands of Taiwan" label="168 islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q127031" start="34923" end="34936" title="Taiwan Strait" label="Taiwan Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="34968" end="34982" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q45341" start="34988" end="35002" title="East China Sea" label="East China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q159183" start="35026" end="35040" title="Philippine Sea" label="Philippine Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q908741" start="35058" end="35070" title="Luzon Strait" label="Luzon Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="35101" end="35116" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q918799" start="35163" end="35177" title="Penghu" label="Penghu Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q249870" start="35204" end="35210" title="Kinmen" label="Kinmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q609255" start="35212" end="35217" title="Matsu Islands" label="Matsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q706550" start="35222" end="35227" title="Wuqiu, Kinmen" label="Wuqiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="35276" end="35291" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q992062" start="35330" end="35341" title="fault block" label="fault block"/>
<link wikidata="Q500275" start="35658" end="35665" title="Yu Shan" label="Yu Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381625" start="35702" end="35723" title="list of islands by highest point" label="fourth-highest island"/>
<link wikidata="Q674775" start="35861" end="35878" title="submarine volcano" label="submarine volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079331" start="35949" end="35987" title="Jian Nan subtropical evergreen forests" label="Jian Nan subtropical evergreen forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q70029517" start="36014" end="36047" title="South Taiwan monsoon rain forests" label="South Taiwan monsoon rain forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967658" start="36053" end="36089" title="Taiwan subtropical evergreen forests" label="Taiwan subtropical evergreen forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520600" start="36264" end="36296" title="Forest Landscape Integrity Index" label="Forest Landscape Integrity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q176635" start="36403" end="36419" title="Tropic of Cancer" label="Tropic of Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="36437" end="36444" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q135712" start="36455" end="36463" title="tropical climate" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q658486" start="36648" end="36660" title="East Asian rainy season" label="rainy season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126515" start="36704" end="36722" title="East Asian Monsoon" label="East Asian Monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q130244136" start="36818" end="36826" title="Typhoons in Taiwan" label="Typhoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q104842978" start="37029" end="37043" title="Climate change in Taiwan" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="37197" end="37213" title="carbon emissions" label="carbon emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q193343" start="37410" end="37418" title="tectonics" label="tectonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323550" start="37436" end="37449" title="Yangtze Plate" label="Yangtze Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201001" start="37477" end="37490" title="Okinawa Plate" label="Okinawa Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671480" start="37518" end="37540" title="Philippine Mobile Belt" label="Philippine Mobile Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q509037" start="37642" end="37649" title="terrane" label="terrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515058" start="37663" end="37673" title="island arc" label="island arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q188521" start="37750" end="37764" title="Eurasian Plate" label="Eurasian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q339748" start="37773" end="37793" title="Philippine Sea Plate" label="Philippine Sea Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="37903" end="37912" title="subduction" label="subducted"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706635" start="38176" end="38194" title="Luzon Volcanic Arc" label="Luzon Volcanic Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q707571" start="38280" end="38301" title="Haian Range" label="eastern Coastal Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q710647" start="38322" end="38341" title="Huatung Valley" label="Longitudinal Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q714320" start="38559" end="38573" title="1999 Jiji (Chichi) earthquake" label="921 earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632490" start="38615" end="38633" title="seismic hazard map" label="seismic hazard map"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="38652" end="38656" title="United States Geological Survey" label="USGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q213099" start="38826" end="38849" title="Constitution of the Republic of China" label="Constitution of the ROC"/>
<link wikidata="Q260998" start="38858" end="38888" title="Three Principles of the People" label="Three Principles of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q715869" start="39218" end="39234" title="Legislative Yuan" label="Legislative Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31041" start="39265" end="39278" title="Judicial Yuan" label="Judicial Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q702839" start="39284" end="39296" title="Control Yuan" label="Control Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q718405" start="39321" end="39337" title="Examination Yuan" label="Examination Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="39378" end="39391" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="39396" end="39414" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q887003" start="39442" end="39451" title="President of the Republic of China" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q702650" start="39648" end="39655" title="Premier of the Republic of China" label="premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="39777" end="39793" title="Legislature" label="legislative body"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="39801" end="39811" title="Unicameralism" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900755" start="40226" end="40251" title="Constitutional convention (political meeting)" label="constitutional convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141323" start="40256" end="40273" title="electoral college" label="electoral college"/>
<link wikidata="Q712983" start="40318" end="40335" title="National Assembly (Republic of China)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="40890" end="40898" title="judiciary" label="judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q722785" start="41497" end="41510" title="Supreme Court of the Republic of China" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q13368786" start="41754" end="41767" title="jury trial" label="trial by jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q327333" start="41941" end="41951" title="Government agency" label="commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8900" start="41989" end="42006" title="Court of Auditors" label="Court of Auditors"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="42014" end="42028" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q749118" start="42036" end="42068" title="Government Accountability Office" label="Government Accountability Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q104846487" start="42122" end="42154" title="National Human Rights Commission (Taiwan)" label="National Human Rights Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408" start="42261" end="42281" title="imperial examination" label="imperial examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378014" start="42339" end="42374" title="European Personnel Selection Office" label="European Personnel Selection Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890847" start="42404" end="42434" title="Office of Personnel Management" label="Office of Personnel Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458244" start="42886" end="42925" title="Additional Articles of the Constitution of the Republic of China" label="Additional Articles of the Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q15720463" start="43179" end="43195" title="Cross-Strait Act" label="Cross-Strait Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="43579" end="43584" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q806869" start="43589" end="43602" title="Banners of Inner Mongolia" label="Mongol banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="43624" end="43632" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q844551" start="43690" end="43735" title="Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance" label="Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q707551" start="44321" end="44361" title="Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission" label="Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q715136" start="44579" end="44598" title="Pan-Green Coalition" label="Pan-Green Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q903822" start="44609" end="44637" title="Democratic Progressive Party" label="Democratic Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350503" start="44671" end="44689" title="Pan-Blue Coalition" label="Pan-Blue Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="44700" end="44710" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q10925409" start="44868" end="44890" title="Four-Stage Theory of the Republic of China" label="synonymous with Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q834354" start="44945" end="44966" title="1992 Consensus" label="synonymous with China"/>
<link wikidata="Q574556" start="45030" end="45048" title="Anti-Secession Law" label="Anti-Secession Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q715136" start="45235" end="45254" title="Pan-Green Coalition" label="Pan-Green Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q17500520" start="45329" end="45355" title="Taiwan Statebuilding Party" label="Taiwan Statebuilding Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q713302" start="45366" end="45377" title="Green Party (Taiwan)" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q708772" start="45511" end="45530" title="Taiwan independence movement" label="Taiwan independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516564" start="46380" end="46393" title="Taiwanization" label="Taiwanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350503" start="46589" end="46607" title="Pan-Blue Coalition" label="Pan-Blue Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442482" start="46659" end="46677" title="People First Party (Republic of China)" label="People First Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284361" start="46688" end="46697" title="New Party (Republic of China)" label="New Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q834354" start="46734" end="46748" title="1992 Consensus" label="1992 Consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q55390763" start="49728" end="49755" title="2018 Taiwanese referendum" label="referendum question in 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q181278" start="49835" end="49855" title="2020 Summer Olympics" label="2020 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350503" start="50064" end="50072" title="Pan-Blue Coalition" label="Pan-Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q19216" start="50326" end="50338" title="Ma Ying-jeou" label="Ma Ying-jeou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847080" start="51045" end="51056" title="William Lai" label="William Lai"/>
<link wikidata="Q208526" start="51589" end="51601" title="New Taiwan dollar" label="own currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076937" start="51603" end="51627" title="Taiwan passport" label="widely accepted passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q60788314" start="51629" end="51643" title="Postage stamps and postal history of Taiwan" label="postage stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="51654" end="51657" title="Top-level domain" label="TLD"/>
<link wikidata="Q181648" start="51863" end="51877" title="foreign policy" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q814959" start="52040" end="52058" title="Beiyang Government" label="Peiyang Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507074" start="52232" end="52244" title="Western Bloc" label="Western Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889" start="52679" end="52699" title="diplomacy" label="diplomatic relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="52895" end="52903" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q213283" start="53056" end="53065" title="embassy" label="embassies"/>
<link wikidata="Q207978" start="53070" end="53080" title="consul (representative)" label="consulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q579581" start="53095" end="53145" title="Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office" label="Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314462" start="53570" end="53585" title="Republic of China-United States relations" label="main supporters"/>
<link wikidata="Q476667" start="53613" end="53633" title="Taiwan Relations Act" label="Taiwan Relations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q458428" start="53716" end="53746" title="Republic of China Armed Forces" label="Republic of China Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q591903" start="54034" end="54056" title="Cross-Strait relations" label="Cross-Strait relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q145560" start="54233" end="54252" title="major non-NATO ally" label="major non-NATO ally"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="54311" end="54324" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224083" start="54403" end="54424" title="New Southbound Policy" label="New Southbound Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="54479" end="54493" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15896775" start="54961" end="54987" title="Indonesia-Taiwan relations" label="Indonesia-Taiwan relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q705141" start="55025" end="55049" title="Mainland Affairs Council" label="Mainland Affairs Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021636" start="55119" end="55140" title="Taiwan Affairs Office" label="Taiwan Affairs Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q834463" start="55280" end="55307" title="Straits Exchange Foundation" label="Straits Exchange Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q834446" start="55332" end="55383" title="Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits" label="Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q834354" start="55494" end="55508" title="1992 Consensus" label="1992 Consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q608889" start="55571" end="55580" title="one China" label="one China"/>
<link wikidata="Q903822" start="55827" end="55855" title="Democratic Progressive Party" label="Democratic Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847080" start="55916" end="55928" title="Lai Ching-te" label="Lai Ching-te"/>
<link wikidata="Q723713" start="56418" end="56442" title="one country, two systems" label="one country, two systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="56461" end="56470" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q574556" start="56727" end="56745" title="Anti-Secession Law" label="Anti-Secession Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="56784" end="56791" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q290329" start="56915" end="56946" title="air defense identification zone" label="air defense identification zone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57034" end="57067" title="Member states of the United Nations#Original members" label="founding member of United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917181" start="57082" end="57095" title="China and the United Nations" label="seat of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="57103" end="57119" title="United Nations Security Council" label="Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q608889" start="57430" end="57439" title="One China" label="One China"/>
<link wikidata="Q160016" start="57453" end="57469" title="Member states of the United Nations" label="UN member states"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="57789" end="57814" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="58135" end="58143" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58158" end="58175" title="Republic of China at the Olympics#Nagoya Resolution" label="Nagoya Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="58200" end="58231" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="58382" end="58395" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q173535" start="58420" end="58429" title="Flag of the Republic of China" label="ROC flags"/>
<link wikidata="Q170481" start="58523" end="58556" title="Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation" label="Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="58584" end="58608" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="58791" end="58813" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q210347" start="59035" end="59075" title="World Organization of the Scout Movement" label="World Organization of the Scout Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q215613" start="59171" end="59217" title="Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization" label="Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4449821" start="59328" end="59359" title="Taiwan Foundation for Democracy" label="Taiwan Foundation for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q458428" start="59424" end="59454" title="Republic of China Armed Forces" label="Republic of China Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q714843" start="59478" end="59505" title="National Revolutionary Army" label="National Revolutionary Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="59532" end="59543" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="59555" end="59564" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="59628" end="59657" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q702659" start="60411" end="60420" title="Republic of China Air Force" label="air force"/>
<link wikidata="Q702116" start="60425" end="60429" title="Republic of China Navy" label="navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162769" start="60778" end="60790" title="Conscription in Taiwan" label="Conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q937312" start="61106" end="61122" title="Military budget" label="defense spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892234" start="61568" end="61604" title="United States Taiwan Defense Command" label="United States Taiwan Defense Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q476667" start="61862" end="61882" title="Taiwan Relations Act" label="Taiwan Relations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q295875" start="62446" end="62499" title="Australia, New Zealand, United States Security Treaty" label="Australia, New Zealand, United States Security Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62772" end="62792" title="Judicial Yuan#Constitutional Court" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q55390763" start="63107" end="63134" title="2018 Taiwanese referendum" label="referendum question in 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676561" start="63777" end="63789" title="Taiwan Pride" label="Taiwan Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="63837" end="63841" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="63855" end="63864" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3725327" start="63875" end="63889" title="Tel Aviv Pride" label="Tel Aviv Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="63893" end="63899" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225003" start="64164" end="64186" title="special municipality (Taiwan)" label="special municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2792093" start="64279" end="64289" title="Tibet Area (administrative division)" label="Tibet Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q83020" start="64324" end="64330" title="provincial city (Taiwan)" label="cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q706447" start="64335" end="64343" title="county (Taiwan)" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q806869" start="64785" end="64799" title="Banners of Inner Mongolia" label="Mongol banners"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="64817" end="64831" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q909566" start="64948" end="64962" title="Outer Mongolia" label="Outer Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q32081" start="65632" end="65647" title="Taiwan Province" label="Taiwan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q63698" start="65668" end="65683" title="Fujian Province, Republic of China" label="Fujian Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q11103595" start="65711" end="65725" title="Pratas Islands" label="Pratas Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q701264" start="65730" end="65744" title="Taiping Island" label="Taiping Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q215664" start="65752" end="65767" title="Spratly Islands" label="Spratly Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141500" start="65800" end="65823" title="South China Sea Islands" label="South China Sea Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q181557" start="65848" end="65857" title="Kaohsiung" label="Kaohsiung"/>
<link wikidata="Q701364" start="66040" end="66054" title="Taiwan Miracle" label="Taiwan Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q190918" start="66089" end="66106" title="Four Asian Tigers" label="Four Asian Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="66208" end="66243" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="economy in the world by nominal GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q622439" start="66423" end="66457" title="small and medium-sized enterprises" label="small and medium-sized enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66645" end="66674" title="Economy of Taiwan#Science and industrial parks" label="High-technology science parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="66730" end="66740" title="capitalism" label="capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="66934" end="66944" title="privatized" label="privatized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324629" start="67076" end="67118" title="List of countries by foreign-exchange reserves" label="world&amp;#x27;s largest forex reserve holders"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="67686" end="67711" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="68187" end="68190" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="PLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="68408" end="68413" title="integrated circuit" label="chips"/>
<link wikidata="Q713418" start="68494" end="68539" title="TSMC" label="Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. (TSMC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q143616" start="68544" end="68584" title="United Microelectronics Corporation" label="United Microelectronic Corporation (UMC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q471719" start="68648" end="68669" title="market capitalization" label="market capitalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="68868" end="68873" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716" start="68878" end="68885" title="Samsung Semiconductor Inc." label="Samsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q691592" start="69003" end="69018" title="GlobalFoundries" label="GlobalFoundries"/>
<link wikidata="Q481778" start="69206" end="69215" title="Acer Inc." label="Acer Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q152864" start="69220" end="69224" title="Asus" label="Asus"/>
<link wikidata="Q463094" start="69237" end="69244" title="Foxconn" label="Foxconn"/>
<link wikidata="Q697182" start="69305" end="69350" title="Ministry of Transportation and Communications (Taiwan)" label="Ministry of Transportation and Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q193234" start="69499" end="69507" title="Scooter (motorcycle)" label="scooters"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="69690" end="69698" title="Controlled-access highway" label="motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q697926" start="69767" end="69797" title="Taiwan Railways Administration" label="Taiwan Railways Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q706198" start="69853" end="69882" title="Taiwan High Speed Rail" label="Taiwan High Speed Rail (THSR)"/>
<link wikidata="Q714810" start="69960" end="69972" title="Taipei Metro" label="Taipei Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q700041" start="69974" end="69989" title="Kaohsiung Metro" label="Kaohsiung Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684358" start="69991" end="70004" title="Taoyuan Metro" label="Taoyuan Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q30950115" start="70006" end="70022" title="New Taipei Metro" label="New Taipei Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972247" start="70028" end="70042" title="Taichung Metro" label="Taichung Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q44856" start="70068" end="70082" title="Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport" label="Taiwan Taoyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16810" start="70084" end="70093" title="Kaohsiung International Airport" label="Kaohsiung"/>
<link wikidata="Q702019" start="70095" end="70110" title="Taipei Songshan Airport" label="Taipei Songshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q374558" start="70115" end="70123" title="Taichung Airport" label="Taichung"/>
<link wikidata="Q51756" start="70208" end="70222" title="China Airlines" label="China Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q715113" start="70227" end="70234" title="EVA Air" label="EVA Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q699334" start="70276" end="70283" title="Port of Keelung" label="Keelung"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231276" start="70285" end="70291" title="Port of Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231281" start="70299" end="70307" title="Port of Taichung" label="Taichung"/>
<link wikidata="Q713449" start="70309" end="70318" title="Port of Kaohsiung" label="Kaohsiung"/>
<link wikidata="Q10946672" start="70320" end="70326" title="Port of Anping" label="Anping"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847201" start="70332" end="70339" title="Port of Hualien" label="Hualien"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71003" end="71032" title="List of metropolitan areas in Taiwan#Metropolitan areas in Taiwan" label="metropolitan area populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q712937" start="71055" end="71080" title="Taipei–Keelung metropolitan area" label="Taipei-Keelung metro area"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="71341" end="71352" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="71392" end="71404" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q24007826" start="71491" end="71504" title="Han Taiwanese" label="Han Taiwanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q703914" start="71528" end="71540" title="Hoklo people" label="Hoklo people"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="71584" end="71590" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q660947" start="71600" end="71612" title="Hakka people" label="Hakka people"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="71632" end="71641" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360579" start="71916" end="71927" title="waishengren" label="waishengren"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747877" start="72019" end="72034" title="Genetic history of East Asians" label="Genetic studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404264" start="72209" end="72225" title="Ethnic groups in Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asians"/>
<link wikidata="Q216839" start="72269" end="72297" title="Taiwanese Indigenous peoples" label="Taiwanese Indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q205006" start="72365" end="72368" title="Amis people" label="Ami"/>
<link wikidata="Q701676" start="72370" end="72376" title="Atayal people" label="Atayal"/>
<link wikidata="Q701704" start="72378" end="72383" title="Bunun people" label="Bunun"/>
<link wikidata="Q15939915" start="72385" end="72395" title="Kanakanavu people" label="Kanakanavu"/>
<link wikidata="Q718347" start="72397" end="72404" title="Kavalan people" label="Kavalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q715238" start="72406" end="72412" title="Paiwan people" label="Paiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q706500" start="72414" end="72420" title="Puyuma people" label="Puyuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q715994" start="72422" end="72427" title="Rukai people" label="Rukai"/>
<link wikidata="Q333484" start="72429" end="72437" title="Saisiyat people" label="Saisiyat"/>
<link wikidata="Q17370580" start="72439" end="72445" title="Saaroa people" label="Saaroa"/>
<link wikidata="Q710817" start="72447" end="72455" title="Sakizaya people" label="Sakizaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q707464" start="72457" end="72462" title="Sediq people" label="Sediq"/>
<link wikidata="Q714393" start="72464" end="72468" title="Thao people" label="Thao"/>
<link wikidata="Q709963" start="72470" end="72475" title="Truku people" label="Truku"/>
<link wikidata="Q619481" start="72480" end="72484" title="Tsou people" label="Tsou"/>
<link wikidata="Q706528" start="72542" end="72546" title="Yami people" label="Yami"/>
<link wikidata="Q701647" start="72555" end="72568" title="Orchid Island" label="Orchid Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="72647" end="72664" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380827" start="72666" end="72674" title="Taiwanese Mandarin" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q178528" start="72785" end="72804" title="Traditional Chinese" label="Traditional Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q703914" start="72890" end="72895" title="Hoklo" label="Hoklo"/>
<link wikidata="Q36778" start="72936" end="72953" title="Taiwanese Hokkien" label="Taiwanese Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q660947" start="72959" end="72964" title="Hakka" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q33375" start="73027" end="73032" title="Hakka Chinese" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748296" start="73143" end="73160" title="varieties of Chinese" label="Chinese varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q715278" start="73284" end="73302" title="Formosan languages" label="Formosan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="73439" end="73467" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q15926648" start="73492" end="73506" title="Writing systems of Formosan languages" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q335214" start="73651" end="73659" title="moribund language" label="moribund"/>
<link wikidata="Q279790" start="73672" end="73691" title="May Fourth Movement" label="May Fourth Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q783605" start="73693" end="73719" title="written vernacular Chinese" label="written vernacular Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q37041" start="73733" end="73750" title="Classical Chinese" label="Classical Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q783605" start="73781" end="73796" title="Written vernacular Chinese" label="written Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q715055" start="74042" end="74056" title="Executive Yuan" label="Executive Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q889482" start="74106" end="74126" title="Horizontal and vertical writing in East Asian scripts" label="direction of writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q864979" start="74310" end="74350" title="National Anthem of the Republic of China" label="National Anthem of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589404" start="74413" end="74423" title="Government of the Republic of China" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503489" start="74425" end="74430" title="Law of Taiwan" label="legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q697109" start="74436" end="74445" title="Ministry of Justice (Taiwan)" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q722785" start="74468" end="74482" title="Supreme Court of the Republic of China" label="courts rulings"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="74801" end="74818" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q34019" start="74984" end="75004" title="Taiwan Sign Language" label="Taiwan Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="75094" end="75113" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500804" start="75143" end="75186" title="Freedom of religion in Taiwan" label="The government respects freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q46340424" start="75220" end="75238" title="International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance" label="International IDEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="75371" end="75379" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="75381" end="75387" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q714127" start="75389" end="75398" title="Yiguandao" label="Yiguandao"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="75400" end="75413" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="75419" end="75436" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="75451" end="75463" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="75541" end="75555" title="Chinese folk religion" label="Folk religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q712510" start="75570" end="75578" title="Buddhism in Taiwan" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="75603" end="75609" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q93567" start="75777" end="75783" title="Islam in Taiwan" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q183573" start="75797" end="75807" title="Hui people" label="Hui people"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="75843" end="75855" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="75889" end="75896" title="Culture of China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q707465" start="75901" end="75918" title="Culture of Taiwan" label="Taiwanese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q707133" start="75936" end="75952" title="Taiwanese people" label="Taiwanese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370598" start="76084" end="76103" title="Place of worship" label="religious buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370598" start="76133" end="76149" title="place of worship" label="place of worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="76204" end="76210" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q712510" start="76215" end="76223" title="Buddhism in Taiwan" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="76242" end="76248" title="Taoism" label="Taoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q712510" start="76267" end="76275" title="Buddhism in Taiwan" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="76289" end="76301" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q986980" start="76742" end="76767" title="Freedom of Thought Report" label="Freedom of Thought Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q18574939" start="76792" end="76817" title="Indonesian migrant worker" label="Indonesian migrant worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q323481" start="77494" end="77540" title="Programme for International Student Assessment" label="Programme for International Student Assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931244" start="78908" end="78923" title="underemployment" label="underemployment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79935" end="79947" title="cram schools#Taiwan" label="cram schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q20204729" start="80046" end="80064" title="Made in China 2025" label="Made in China 2025"/>
<link wikidata="Q190222" start="80280" end="80291" title="brain drain" label="brain drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="80316" end="80329" title="literacy rate" label="literacy rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000047" start="80386" end="80403" title="healthcare system" label="healthcare system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021512" start="80480" end="80492" title="Single-payer health care" label="single-payer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441151" start="81156" end="81171" title="fee-for-service" label="fee-for-service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250835" start="81530" end="81556" title="prospective payment system" label="prospective payment system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512929" start="81625" end="81643" title="health disparities" label="health disparities"/>
<link wikidata="Q17280566" start="82141" end="82175" title="Taiwan Centers for Disease Control" label="Taiwan Centers for Disease Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q103177" start="82194" end="82198" title="Severe acute respiratory syndrome" label="SARS"/>
<link wikidata="Q89990395" start="82563" end="82594" title="Central Epidemic Command Center" label="Central Epidemic Command Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q84081307" start="82688" end="82696" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Taiwan" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="83047" end="83074" title="Chinese culture" label="traditional Chinese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q831454" start="83097" end="83124" title="Culture of Japan" label="Japanese cultural influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="83178" end="83192" title="Western culture" label="Western values"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501943" start="83206" end="83224" title="Martial law in Taiwan" label="martial law period"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="83230" end="83240" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="83262" end="83289" title="Chinese culture" label="traditional Chinese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="83384" end="83399" title="Chinese Culture" label="Chinese Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="83414" end="83429" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Communist China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073969" start="83480" end="83508" title="Chinese Cultural Renaissance" label="Chinese Cultural Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="83585" end="83608" title="Communist Party of China" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="83620" end="83639" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="83760" end="83770" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073969" start="83840" end="83868" title="Chinese Cultural Renaissance" label="Chinese Cultural Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="83915" end="83930" title="Chinese Culture" label="Chinese Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="83968" end="83982" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q178528" start="84017" end="84036" title="Traditional Chinese" label="Traditional Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="84055" end="84067" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q707133" start="84100" end="84116" title="Taiwanese people" label="Taiwanese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501943" start="84179" end="84190" title="Martial law in Taiwan" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064441" start="84211" end="84226" title="democratization" label="democratization"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="84235" end="84267" title="Freedom of Speech" label="Freedom of Speech and Expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q700808" start="84289" end="84309" title="Taiwanese literature" label="Taiwanese literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805945" start="84314" end="84334" title="mass media in Taiwan" label="mass media in Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063288" start="84440" end="84467" title="Economist Intelligence Unit" label="Economist Intelligence Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q326174" start="84475" end="84490" title="Democracy Index" label="Democracy Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q116754464" start="84534" end="84557" title="democracy in Asia" label="democracy score in Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="84575" end="84588" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q25048766" start="84645" end="84652" title="Civicus" label="CIVICUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="85283" end="85299" title="multiculturalism" label="multiculturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914650" start="85614" end="85631" title="Identity politics" label="Identity politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q707908" start="85772" end="85779" title="Taiwanese cuisine" label="cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q956925" start="85784" end="85789" title="Music of Taiwan" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q712651" start="85852" end="85865" title="Cho-Liang Lin" label="Cho-Liang Lin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074334" start="85875" end="85887" title="Ching-Yun Hu" label="Ching-Yun Hu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038913" start="85950" end="85956" title="Wu Han (pianist)" label="Wu Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q463945" start="85982" end="85993" title="Teresa Teng" label="Teresa Teng"/>
<link wikidata="Q238819" start="85995" end="86003" title="Jay Chou" label="Jay Chou"/>
<link wikidata="Q51731" start="86023" end="86029" title="Mayday (Taiwanese band)" label="Mayday"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="86034" end="86045" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q701388" start="86051" end="86059" title="Chthonic (band)" label="Chthonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292454" start="86075" end="86085" title="Freddy Lim" label="Freddy Lim"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="86127" end="86140" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q114940" start="86157" end="86172" title="Cinema of Taiwan" label="Taiwanese films"/>
<link wikidata="Q160726" start="86247" end="86254" title="Ang Lee" label="Ang Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q273978" start="86333" end="86363" title="Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" label="Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q696905" start="86377" end="86396" title="Eat Drink Man Woman" label="Eat Drink Man Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q643263" start="86410" end="86431" title="Sense and Sensibility (film)" label="Sense and Sensibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q160618" start="86445" end="86463" title="Brokeback Mountain" label="Brokeback Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q152780" start="86477" end="86487" title="Life of Pi (film)" label="Life of Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q718524" start="86505" end="86518" title="Lust, Caution" label="Lust, Caution"/>
<link wikidata="Q698710" start="86567" end="86582" title="Tsai Ming-liang" label="Tsai Ming-liang"/>
<link wikidata="Q716700" start="86584" end="86595" title="Edward Yang" label="Edward Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q435626" start="86601" end="86616" title="Hou Hsiao-hsien" label="Hou Hsiao-hsien"/>
<link wikidata="Q703565" start="86640" end="86677" title="Golden Horse Film Festival and Awards" label="Golden Horse Film Festival and Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q540668" start="86695" end="86717" title="National Palace Museum" label="National Palace Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q229345" start="86926" end="86933" title="Karaoke" label="Karaoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191685" start="87563" end="87573" title="FamilyMart" label="FamilyMart"/>
<link wikidata="Q697926" start="87642" end="87645" title="Taiwan Railways Administration" label="TRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q259340" start="87672" end="87680" title="7-Eleven" label="7-Eleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q11326216" start="87694" end="87701" title="Hi-Life (convenience store)" label="Hi-Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q10915604" start="87960" end="87986" title="Taiwanese beef noodle soup" label="Taiwanese beef noodle soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q10899266" start="87988" end="87995" title="Gua bao" label="Gua bao"/>
<link wikidata="Q713466" start="87997" end="88003" title="Zongzi" label="Zongzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15915476" start="88005" end="88018" title="Khong bah png" label="Khong bah png"/>
<link wikidata="Q11174862" start="88020" end="88043" title="Taiwanese fried chicken" label="Taiwanese fried chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q697951" start="88045" end="88062" title="oyster vermicelli" label="oyster vermicelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q708972" start="88064" end="88072" title="Sanbeiji" label="Sanbeiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147092" start="88078" end="88088" title="Aiyu jelly" label="Aiyu jelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q715858" start="88090" end="88100" title="Bubble tea" label="Bubble tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="88182" end="88194" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q282587" start="88208" end="88231" title="Taiwanese night markets" label="Taiwanese night markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q214844" start="88291" end="88305" title="Michelin Guide" label="Michelin Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="88368" end="88376" title="Baseball" label="Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050260" start="88414" end="88428" title="national sport" label="national sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q113483325" start="88547" end="88551" title="2021 U-12 Baseball World Cup" label="U-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q130633615" start="88553" end="88557" title="2022 U-15 Baseball World Cup" label="U-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q109359340" start="88559" end="88563" title="2022 U-18 Baseball World Cup" label="U-18"/>
<link wikidata="Q108919177" start="88565" end="88569" title="2022 U-23 Baseball World Cup" label="U-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q115820305" start="88575" end="88584" title="2022 Baseball5 World Cup" label="Baseball5"/>
<link wikidata="Q713532" start="88660" end="88696" title="Chinese Taipei national baseball team" label="Taiwan&amp;#x27;s national baseball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036856" start="88732" end="88751" title="WBSC World Rankings" label="WBSC World Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053063" start="88753" end="88784" title="Professional baseball in Taiwan" label="Professional baseball in Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q717976" start="88818" end="88854" title="Chinese Professional Baseball League" label="Chinese Professional Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="89024" end="89045" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146127" start="89059" end="89087" title="Nippon Professional Baseball" label="Nippon Professional Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589001" start="89121" end="89142" title="List of Major League Baseball players from Taiwan" label="Taiwanese MLB players"/>
<link wikidata="Q706446" start="89196" end="89211" title="Chien-Ming Wang" label="Chien-Ming Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q708040" start="89216" end="89228" title="Wei-Yin Chen" label="Wei-Yin Chen"/>
<link wikidata="Q171038" start="89299" end="89307" title="softball" label="softball"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961444" start="89318" end="89368" title="Chinese Taipei women&amp;#x27;s national softball team" label="Chinese Taipei women&amp;#x27;s national softball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q104853503" start="89395" end="89411" title="Softball at the 2022 World Games" label="2022 World Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="89414" end="89424" title="Basketball" label="Basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q97576707" start="89465" end="89475" title="P. League+" label="P. League+"/>
<link wikidata="Q127278045" start="89480" end="89517" title="Taiwan Professional Basketball League" label="Taiwan Professional Basketball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4371047" start="89580" end="89597" title="semi-professional sports" label="semi-professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q717428" start="89598" end="89621" title="Super Basketball League" label="Super Basketball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="89688" end="89698" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="89703" end="89711" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q192937" start="89750" end="89758" title="korfball" label="korfball"/>
<link wikidata="Q167170" start="89904" end="89921" title="multi-sport event" label="multi-sport event"/>
<link wikidata="Q701656" start="89950" end="89966" title="2009 World Games" label="2009 World Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q709910" start="89988" end="90011" title="2009 Summer Deaflympics" label="2009 Summer Deaflympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3594231" start="90016" end="90039" title="2017 Summer Universiade" label="2017 Summer Universiade"/>
<link wikidata="Q106876501" start="90092" end="90123" title="2025 Summer World Masters Games" label="2025 Summer World Masters Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921159" start="90152" end="90187" title="International Children&amp;#x27;s Games" label="International Children&amp;#x27;s Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388747" start="90244" end="90259" title="Taipei Marathon" label="Taipei Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16929393" start="90273" end="90309" title="New Taipei City Wan Jin Shi Marathon" label="New Taipei City Wan Jin Shi Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073735" start="90323" end="90334" title="Taipei Open (badminton)" label="Taipei Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088455" start="90349" end="90372" title="U-12 Baseball World Cup" label="U-12 Baseball World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q709564" start="90386" end="90403" title="William Jones Cup" label="William Jones Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q604500" start="90419" end="90433" title="Tour de Taiwan" label="Tour de Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36389" start="90456" end="90465" title="Taekwondo" label="Taekwondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128792" start="90560" end="90572" title="combat sport" label="combat sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q262255" start="90672" end="90685" title="Taekwondo at the 2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q716524" start="90687" end="90701" title="Chen Shih-hsin" label="Chen Shih-hsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q557023" start="90706" end="90716" title="Chu Mu-yen" label="Chu Mu-yen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291" start="90985" end="90994" title="badminton" label="badminton"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="90996" end="91002" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="91004" end="91016" title="table tennis" label="table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="91022" end="91026" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q516815" start="91083" end="91095" title="Tai Tzu-ying" label="Tai Tzu-ying"/>
<link wikidata="Q799596" start="91164" end="91181" title="BWF World Ranking" label="BWF World Ranking"/>
<link wikidata="Q40504484" start="91210" end="91224" title="BWF World Tour" label="BWF World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q705179" start="91325" end="91341" title="Chuang Chih-yuan" label="Chuang Chih-yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q26190" start="91415" end="91425" title="Yani Tseng" label="Yani Tseng"/>
<link wikidata="Q15103826" start="91488" end="91507" title="Women&amp;#x27;s major golf championships" label="major championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627116" start="91539" end="91571" title="Women&amp;#x27;s World Golf Rankings" label="Women&amp;#x27;s World Golf Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q232566" start="91628" end="91640" title="Hsieh Su-wei" label="Hsieh Su-wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="91731" end="91749" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375074" start="91817" end="91827" title="calendar era" label="era system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91918" end="91940" title="Calendar date#Gregorian, year–month–day (YMD)" label="East Asian date format"/>
<link wikidata="Q134032" start="91999" end="92015" title="Chinese calendar" label="Chinese calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q194235" start="92045" end="92070" title="Lunisolar calendar" label="Lunisolar calendar system"/>
<link wikidata="Q131772" start="92130" end="92144" title="Chinese New Year" label="Lunar New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q718636" start="92150" end="92166" title="Lantern Festival" label="Lantern Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254268" start="92176" end="92196" title="Dragon Boat Festival" label="Dragon Boat Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711258" start="92215" end="92247" title="Index of Taiwan-related articles" label="Index of Taiwan-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112477" start="92250" end="92267" title="Outline of Taiwan" label="Outline of Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="92525" end="92543" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="92551" end="92578" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="92666" end="92674" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="92834" end="92855" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="92874" end="92878" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="OECD"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25735" wikidata="Q10962" url="?curid=25735" title="Rugby league">
<text>Rugby league football, commonly known as rugby league in English-speaking countries and rugby 13/XIIIin non-Anglophone Europe, is a full-contact sport played by two teams of thirteen players on a rectangular field measuring wide and long with H-shaped posts at both ends. It is one of the two major codes of rugby football, the other being rugby union. 

It originated in 1895 in Huddersfield, Yorkshire, England, as the result of a split from the Rugby Football Union (RFU) over the issue of payments to players. The rules of the game governed by the new Northern Rugby Football Union progressively changed from those of the RFU with the specific aim of producing a faster and more entertaining game to appeal to paying spectators, on whose income the new organisation and its members depended.

In rugby league, points are scored by carrying an oval ball and touching it to the ground beyond the opposing team&#x27;s goal line; this is called a &quot;try&quot;, and is the primary method of scoring, worth four points. The opposing team attempts to stop the attacking side scoring points by tackling the player carrying the ball and denying forward progress. On occasion, where a clear try scoring opportunity has been thwarted by foul play, a penalty try may be awarded without the ball being grounded over the try line. In addition to tries, points can be scored by kicking goals. Drop goals (or field goals) can be attempted from the hand at any time for a single point. Following a successful try, the scoring team gains a free kick to &quot;try at goal&quot; with a conversion worth a further two points. Penalty kicks at goal, known simply as penalties, may also be awarded for general foul play, and are also worth two points. Unlike drop goals, penalty kicks and conversions are taken from the ground, with the ball usually set in a kicking tee, and the opposing team not allowed to directly challenge the kicker.

The Super League in Europe and the National Rugby League (NRL) in Australasia are the world&#x27;s premier club competitions. Globally, rugby league is played internationally, predominantly by European, Australasian, and Pacific Island countries, and is governed by the International Rugby League. Rugby league is the national sport of Papua New Guinea and the Cook Islands and is a popular sport in countries such as England, Australia, New Zealand, France, Tonga, Fiji and Samoa.

The first Rugby League World Cup was held in France in 1954, the first World Cup of either rugby code, and has been held sporadically ever since, settling into a four-yearly cycle in the 2010s; , the holders are Australia.

A short-sided version of the sport, rugby league nines, using modified rugby league rules also exists, and is comparable to rugby sevens. Wheelchair rugby league is a mixed-gender sport using heavily modified rugby league rules for disabled and able-bodied players. Unlike wheelchair rugby which adopted its name after the invention of the sport previously called murderball and is not directly linked to rugby union, wheelchair rugby league has grown out of the parent sport, and retains key aspects of that sport such as an egg shaped ball, the forward-pass rule and conversions. While not a Paralympic sport, the sport has its own Wheelchair Rugby League World Cup. A further variation for ambulatory disabled players, physical disability rugby league, was created and had its first world cup in 2022 to coincide with the rescheduled 2021 Rugby League World Cup competitions.

== Etymology ==
Rugby league football takes its name from the bodies that split to create a new form of rugby, distinct from that run by the Rugby Football Unions, in Britain, Australia, and New Zealand between 1895 and 1908. Within the original meanings of the words, Unions were broad collective organisations with a somewhat greater emphasis on heirarchies beyond merely the clubs, whereas &#x27;Leagues&#x27; were essentially formal collections of individual clubs participating on an equal basis in competitions they devised themselves (&quot;see also the use of &#x27;Football Association&#x27; in association football, more commonly called &#x27;football&#x27; or &#x27;soccer&#x27;, and compare to the &#x27;Football League&#x27; competitions founded in that sport by its clubs&quot;).

The first of these, the Northern Rugby Football Union, was established in 1895 as a breakaway faction of England&#x27;s Rugby Football Union (RFU). Both organisations played the game under the same rules at first, although the Northern Union began to modify rules almost immediately, thus creating a new simpler game that was intended to be a faster-paced form of rugby football. Similar breakaway factions split from RFU-affiliated unions in Australia and New Zealand in 1907 and 1908, renaming themselves &quot;rugby football &quot;league&quot;s&quot; and introducing Northern Union rules. In 1922, the Northern Union also changed its name to the Rugby Football League and thus over time the sport itself became known as &quot;rugby league&quot; football.

== History ==


In 1895, a schism in Rugby football resulted in the formation of the Northern Rugby Football Union (NRFU). The success of working class northern teams led to some compensating players who otherwise would be on their job and earning income on Saturdays. This led to the RFU reacting to enforce the amateur principle of the sport, preventing &quot;broken time payments&quot; to players who had taken time off work to play rugby. Northern teams typically had more working class players (coal miners, mill workers etc.) who could not afford to play without this compensation, in contrast to affluent southern teams who had other sources of income to sustain the amateur principle. In 1895, a decree by the RFU banning the playing of rugby at grounds where entrance fees were charged led to twenty-two clubs (including Stockport, who negotiated by telephone) meeting at the George Hotel, Huddersfield, on 29 August 1895 and forming the &quot;Northern Rugby Football Union&quot;. Within fifteen years of that first meeting in Huddersfield, more than 200 RFU clubs had left to join the rugby league.

In 1897, the line-out was abolished and in 1898 professionalism introduced. In 1906, the Northern Union changed its rules, reducing teams from 15 to 13 a side and replacing the ruck formed after tackles with the play-the-ball. By this point, rule changes meant the game organised by the RFL was distinct as a sport from its union cousin.

A similar schism to that which occurred in England took place in Sydney, Australia. There, on 8 August 1907 the New South Wales Rugby Football League was founded at Bateman&#x27;s Hotel in George Street. Unlike in England, where both codes maintained their own geographic areas of dominance, in Australia rugby league went on to displace rugby union entirely as the primary football code in New South Wales and Queensland, while Australian rules football dominated the rest of Australia.

On 5 May 1954, 102,569 spectators watched the 1953–54 Challenge Cup Final replay at Odsal Stadium, Bradford, England, setting a new record for attendance at a rugby football match of either code. Also in 1954, the Rugby League World Cup, the first for either code of rugby, was formed at the instigation of the French. In 1966, the International Board introduced a rule that a team in possession was allowed three play-the-balls and on the fourth tackle a scrum was to be formed. This was increased to six tackles in 1972 and in 1983 the scrum was replaced by a handover. 1967 saw the first professional Sunday matches of rugby league played.

The first sponsors, Joshua Tetley and John Player, entered the game for the 1971–72 Northern Rugby Football League season. Television had an enormous impact on the sport of rugby league in the 1990s, when News Corporation paid for worldwide broadcasting rights. The media giant&#x27;s &quot;Super League&quot; movement created changes for the traditional administrators of the game. In Europe, it resulted in a move from Rugby League being a winter sport to a summer one, as the new Super League competition tried to expand its market. In Australasia, the Super League war resulted in long and costly legal battles and changing loyalties, causing significant damage to the code in an extremely competitive sporting market. In 1997 two competitions were run alongside each other in Australia, after which a peace deal in the form of the National Rugby League was formed. The NRL has since become recognised as the sport&#x27;s flagship competition and since that time has set record TV ratings and crowd figures.

== Rules ==
=== Laws of the game ===

The objective in rugby league is to score more points through tries, goals and field goals (also known as drop goals) than the opposition within the 80 minutes of play. If after two-halves of play, each consisting of forty minutes, the two teams are drawing, a draw may be declared, or the game may enter extra time under the golden point rule, depending on the relevant competition&#x27;s format.

The try is the most common form of scoring, and a team will usually attempt to score one by running and kicking the ball further upfield or passing from player-to-player in order to manoeuvre around the opposition&#x27;s defence. A try involves touching the ball to the ground on or beyond the defending team&#x27;s goal-line and is worth four points. A goal is worth two points and may be gained from a conversion or a penalty. A field goal, or drop goal, is only worth one point and is gained by dropping and then kicking the ball on the half volley between the uprights in open play. A field goal has a value of 2 points when kicked from beyond the 40 metre line.

Field position is crucial in rugby league, achieved by running with or kicking the ball. Passing in rugby league may only be in a backward or sideways direction. Teammates, therefore, have to remain on-side by not moving ahead of the player with the ball. The ball may be kicked ahead, but if teammates are in front of the kicker when the ball is kicked, they are deemed off-side.

Tackling is a key component of rugby league play. Only the player holding the ball may be tackled. A tackle is complete, for example, when the player is held by one or more opposing players in such a manner that he can make no further progress and cannot part with the ball, or when the player is held by one or more opposing players and the ball or the hand or arm holding the ball comes into contact with the ground. An attacking team gets a maximum of six tackles to progress up the field before possession is changed over. Once the tackle is completed, the ball-carrier must be allowed to get to his feet to &#x27;play-the-ball&#x27;. Ball control is also important in rugby league, as a fumble of the ball on the ground forces a handover, unless the ball is fumbled backwards. The ball can also be turned over by going over the sideline.

=== Comparison with rugby union ===

Rugby league and rugby union are distinct sports with many similarities and a shared origin. Both have the same fundamental rules, are played for 80 minutes and feature an oval-shaped ball and H-shaped goalposts. Both have rules that the ball cannot be passed forward, and dropping it forwards leads to a scrum. Both use tries as the central scoring method and conversion kicks, penalty goals and drop goals as additional scoring methods. However, there are differences in how many points each method is worth.

One of the main differences is the rules of possession. When the ball goes into touch, possession in rugby union is contested through a line-out, while in rugby league a scrum restarts play. The lesser focus on contesting possession means that play focuses more on powerful running, hard tackling, forward progression and the contest for field position (commonly compared to an &quot;arm wrestle&quot;); as a result play stops much less frequently in rugby league, with the ball typically in play for 50 out of the 80 minutes compared to around 35 minutes for professional rugby union. Other differences include that there are fewer players in rugby league (13 compared to 15) and different rules for tackling. Rugby union has more detailed rules than rugby league and has changed less since the 1895 schism.

Since rugby union turned professional in the mid-1990s, it has increasingly borrowed techniques, tactics and even laws from rugby league, while high-profile players and coaches from the league game have increasingly gone on to success in the union code in those countries where both codes are popular (e.g. Andy Farrell, Jason Robinson and Henry Paul). The inherent similarities between rugby league and rugby union have at times led to experimental hybrid games being played that use a mix of the two sports&#x27; rules.

=== Comparison with gridiron codes ===

Much more so than rugby union, rugby league shares significant similarities with North American gridiron codes. Although described as evolving from both rugby and association football, the basic structures of American and Canadian football are remarkably similar to rugby league through a process of parallel evolution: a try-and-goal based scoring system, a set number of plays before handover of the football, each play restarting from a set piece position and ended by a tackle. Although the Canadian Football League in particular maintained the word &#x27;rugby&#x27; in its name for many years, alluding to that shared past, the introduction of the forward pass and unlimited substitution in North American games created a fundamentally different species of game from either original rugby code. Although the historic link between the codes continues to be acknowledged, neither Canadian or American football is commonly considered a rugby code today except in the broadest sense, and are more commonly referred to collectively as gridiron codes, or simply as &#x27;football&#x27; within their respective countries.

== Positions ==
Players on the pitch are divided into forwards and backs, although the game&#x27;s rules apply to all players the same way. Each position has a designated number to identify himself from other players. These numbers help to identify which position a person is playing. The system of numbering players is different depending on which country the match is played in. In Australia and New Zealand, each player is usually given a number corresponding to their playing position on the field. However, since 1996 European teams have been able to grant players specific squad numbers, which they keep without regard to the position they play, similarly to association football.

Substitutes (generally referred to as &quot;the bench&quot;) are allowed in the sport, and are typically used when a player gets tired or injured, although they can also be used tactically. Each team is currently allowed four substitutes, and in Australia and New Zealand, these players occupy shirt numbers 14 to 22. There are no limitations on which players must occupy these interchangeable slots. Generally, twelve interchanges are allowed in any game from each team, although in the National Rugby League, this was reduced to ten prior to the 2008 season and further reduced to eight prior to the 2016 season. If a team has to interchange a player due to the blood bin rule or due to injury, and this was the result of misconduct from the opposing team, the compromised team does not have to use one of its allocated interchanges to take the player in question off the field.

=== Backs ===
The backs are generally smaller, faster and more agile than the forwards. They are often the most creative and evasive players on the field, relying on running, kicking and handling skills, as well as tactics and set plays, to break the defensive line, instead of brute force. Generally forwards play a more collision oriented game, making ground by pure strength, and tackling near the play-the-ball.

* The title of &quot;fullback&quot; (numbered 1) comes from the fullback&#x27;s defensive position where the player drops out of the defensive line to cover the rear from kicks and runners breaking the line. Therefore, fullbacks are usually good ball catchers and clinical tacklers. In attack, the fullback will typically make runs into the attack or support a runner in anticipation of a pass out of the tackle. Fullbacks can play a role in attack similar to a halfback or five-eighth and the fact that the fullback does not have to defend in the first defensive line means that a coach can keep a playmaker from the tackling responsibilities of the first line whilst allowing them to retain their attacking role.
* The &quot;wingers&quot; (numbered 2 and 5) are normally the fastest players in a team and play on the far left and right fringes of the field (the wings). Their main task is to receive passes and score tries. The wingers also drop back on the last tackle to cover the left and right sides of the field for kicks while the fullback covers the middle.
*The &quot;centres&quot; (numbered 3 and 4) are positioned one in from the wings and together complete what is known as the three-quarter line. Usually the best mixture of power and vision, their main role is to try to create attacking opportunities for their team and defend against those of the opposition. Along with the wingers, the centres score plenty of tries throughout a season. They usually have a large build and therefore can often play in the .
Usually, the stand-off/five-eighth and scrum-half/half-back are a team&#x27;s creative unit or &#x27;playmakers&#x27;. During the interactions between a team&#x27;s &#x27;key&#x27; players (five-eighth, half-back, fullback, lock forward, and hooker), the five-eighth and half-back will usually be involved in most passing moves. These two positions are commonly called the &quot;halves&quot;.
* The stand-off half, or five-eighth (numbered 6): There is not much difference between the stand-off half and the scrum half (halfback), in that both players may operate in front of the pack during &#x27;forward play&#x27; (as prime receiver [7] and shadow receiver [6], one on each side of the ruck, or both on same side of the ruck), and both players may operate in front of the backs during &#x27;back play&#x27; (as prime pivot [6] and shadow pivot [7], one on each side of the pack, or both on same side of the ruck / pack). The Five-Eighth position is named with regard to the distance that the player stands in relevance to the team.
* The halfback (numbered 7): There is not much difference between the halfback and the five-eighth, in that both players may operate in front of the pack during &#x27;forward play&#x27; (as prime receiver [7] and shadow receiver [6], one on each side of the ruck, or both on same side of the ruck). Both players may operate in front of the backs during &#x27;back play&#x27; (as prime pivot [6] and shadow pivot [7], one on each side of the ruck/pack, or both on same side of the ruck/pack). The halfback position is named with regard to halfway between the fullback and the forwards.

=== Forwards ===

The forwards&#x27; two responsibilities can be broken into &quot;normal play&quot; and &quot;scrum play&quot;. For information on a forward&#x27;s role in the scrum see rugby league scrummage. Forward positions are traditionally named after the player&#x27;s position in the scrum yet are equal with respect to &quot;normal play&quot; with the exception of the hooker. Forward positions are traditionally assigned as follows:
* The &quot;props or front-row forwards&quot; (numbered 8 and 10) are normally the largest players on field. They are positioned in the centre of the line. The prop will be an &quot;enforcer&quot;, dissuading the opposition from attacking the centre of the defensive line and, in attack, will give the team momentum by taking the ball up to the defence aggressively.
* The &quot;hooker&quot; (numbered 9) is most likely to play the role of dummy half. In defence the hooker usually defends in the middle of the line against the opposition&#x27;s props and second-rowers. The hooker will be responsible for organising the defence in the middle of the field. In attack as dummy-half this player is responsible for starting the play from every play-the-ball by either passing the ball to the right player, or, at opportune moments, running from dummy-half. It is vital that the hooker can pass very well. Traditionally, hookers &quot;hooked&quot; the ball in the scrum. Hookers also make probably more tackles than any other player on the field. The hooker is always involved in the play and needs to be very fit. They need to have a very good knowledge of the game and the players around them.
* The &quot; forwards&quot; (numbered 11 and 12) The modern day second row is very similar to a centre and is expected to be faster, more mobile and have more skills than the prop and will play amongst the three-quarters, providing strength in attack and defence when the ball is passed out to the wings. Good second-rowers combine the skills and responsibilities of props and centres in the course of the game.
* The &quot;Loose forward or Lock&quot; (numbered 13) is the only forward in the third (last) row of the scrum. They are usually among the fittest players on the field, covering the entire field on both attacking and defending duties. Typically they are big ball-runners who can occasionally slot in as a passing link or kick option; it is not uncommon for locks to have the skills of a five-eighth and to play a similar role in the team.

== Rugby league worldwide ==

Rugby league is played in over 70 nations throughout the world. Papua New Guinea is the only country to have rugby league as its national sport. Four countries – Australia, England, France, and New Zealand – have teams that play at a professional level. 45 national teams are ranked by the RLIF and a further 32 are officially recognized and unranked. The strongest rugby league nations are Australia, England, New Zealand, Samoa and Tonga.

=== World Cup ===
The Rugby League World Cup is the highest form of representative rugby league. Countries that have contested are Australia, Cook Islands, England, Fiji, France, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Lebanon, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Russia, Samoa, Scotland, South Africa, Tonga, US and Wales. The 2021 Rugby League World Cup, which was hosted by England during October and November 2022, staged the Men&#x27;s, Women&#x27;s and Wheelchair competitions together for the first time. The competition formerly featured 16 teams, but has been cut down to 10 for the upcoming 2026 Rugby League World Cup.

=== Oceania and South Pacific ===
The Asia-Pacific Rugby League Confederation&#x27;s purpose is to spread the sport of rugby league throughout their region along with other governing bodies such as the ARL and NZRL. Since rugby league was introduced to Australia in 1908, it has become the largest television sport and 3rd most attended sport in Australia. Neighbouring Papua New Guinea is one of two countries to have rugby league as its national sport (with Cook Islands). Australia&#x27;s elite club competition also features a team from Auckland, New Zealand&#x27;s biggest city. Rugby league is the dominant winter sport in the eastern Australian states of New South Wales and Queensland. The game is also among the predominant sports of Tonga and is played in other Pacific nations such as Samoa and Fiji. Researchers have found that rugby league has been able to help with improving development in the islands. In Australia, and indeed the rest of the region, the annual State of Origin series ranks among the most popular sporting events.

=== Europe ===
The Rugby League European Federation are responsible for developing rugby league in Europe.
In England, rugby league has traditionally been associated with the historic northern counties of Yorkshire, Lancashire, and Cumberland, where the game originated, especially in towns and cities along the M62 corridor. Its popularity has also increased elsewhere. , only two of the twelve Super League teams are based outside of these traditional counties: Catalans Dragons and London Broncos. One other team from outside the United Kingdom, Toulouse Olympique, competes in the British rugby league system, although not at the highest tier Super League level, but rather in the second tier Championship.

Super League average attendances are in the 8,000 to 9,500 range. The average Super League match attendance in 2014 was 8,365. In 2018 average Super League match attendance was 8,547. Ranked the eighth most popular sport in the UK overall, rugby league is the 27th most popular participation sport in England according to figures released by Sport England; the total number of rugby league participants in England aged 16 and over was 44,900 in 2017. This is a 39% drop from 10 years ago. While the sport is largely concentrated in the north of England there have been complaints about its lack of profile in the British media. On the eve of the 2017 Rugby League World Cup final where England would face Australia, English amateur rugby league coach Ben Dawson stated, &quot;we&#x27;re in the final of a World Cup. First time in more than 30 years and there&#x27;s no coverage anywhere&quot;.

France first played rugby league as late as 1934, where in the five years prior to the Second World War, the sport&#x27;s popularity increased as Frenchmen became disenchanted with the state of French rugby union in the 1930s. However, after the Allied Forces were defeated by Germany in June 1940, the Vichy regime in the south seized assets belonging to rugby league authorities and clubs and banned the sport for its association with the left-wing Popular Front government that had governed France before the war. The sport was unbanned after the Liberation of Paris in August 1944 and the collapse of the Vichy regime, although it was still actively marginalised by the French authorities until the 1990s. Despite this, the national side appeared in the finals of the 1954 and 1968 World Cups, and the country hosted the 1954 event. In 1996, a French team, Paris Saint-Germain was one of eleven teams which formed the new Super League, although the club was dissolved in 1997. In 2006, the Super League admitted the Catalans Dragons, a team from Perpignan in the southern Languedoc-Roussillon region. They have subsequently reached the 2007 Challenge Cup Final and made the playoffs of the 2008 Super League XIII season. The success of the Dragons in Super League has initiated a renaissance in French rugby league, with new-found enthusiasm for the sport in the south of the country where most of the Super XIII teams are based. In other parts of Europe, the game is played at semi-professional and amateur level.

=== North America ===
As of 2023, there is no professional rugby league in North America. From 2017 to 2020, the Toronto Wolfpack were North America&#x27;s only active professional Rugby League team, competing in the English Rugby League system. They won the 2017 Kingstone Press League 1 in their inaugural season and earned promotion to the 2018 Rugby League Championship. In 2019 The Wolfpack won promotion to the Super League, lasting only a few months before having to withdraw due to the ongoing worldwide COVID-19 pandemic. New ownership is currently trying to revive the club with matches against amateur clubs in the US and Canada. Beginning in 2022, the Ottawa Aces were scheduled to join the English league pyramid, becoming the only Canadian team in the system after the Wolfpack were denied re-entry. The club subsequently relocated to Penryn, Cornwall, and are now known as Cornwall R.L.F.C.

In 2021, the North American Rugby League announced an attempt to be North America&#x27;s professional championship, with Canadian club Toronto Wolfpack joining several USA Rugby League clubs, New York Freedom and Cleveland Rugby League to form the league&#x27;s inaugural season. Several brand new clubs from Western USA were scheduled to join in 2022 but never played. The new competition is sanctioned by Canada Rugby League, but not yet by the United States governing body. Unfortunately, while some exhibition matches were played in 2021 and 2022, NARL was defunct by 2023

=== Other countries ===

The early 21st century has seen take up the game and compete in international rugby league with the Rugby League European Federation and Asia-Pacific Rugby League Confederation expanding the game to new areas such as Chile, Canada, Ghana, Philippines, Czech Republic, Germany, The Netherlands, Sweden, Norway, Spain, Sri Lanka, Hungary, Turkey, Thailand and Brazil to name a few.

=== Domestic professional competitions ===

The two most prominent full-time professional leagues are the Australian National Rugby League and the British Super League (with teams from New Zealand and France respectively).

Other professional and semi professional leagues include Australia&#x27;s Queensland Cup (which includes a team from Papua New Guinea) and NSW Cup, the British RFL Championship and RFL League 1, the French Super XIII and Elite 2.

The Papua New Guinea National Rugby League operates as a semi-professional competition and enjoys nationwide media coverage, being the national sport of the country.

== Variants ==
Five main variant sports of rugby league exist worldwide; Touch, OzTag, League tag, Nines, and Sevens.

Touch, OzTag, and League Tag are all non-contact versions of the sport, where as Nines and Sevens are both reduced form (shorter match times and smaller teams) of the sport.

=== Touch ===

Touch (also known as touch football or touch rugby) is a variant of rugby league that is conducted under the direction of the Federation of International Touch (FIT). Though it shares similarities and history with rugby league, it is recognised as a sport in its own right due to its differences which have been developed over the sport&#x27;s lifetime.

Touch is a variation of rugby league with the tackling of opposing players replaced by a touch. As touches must be made with minimal force, touch is therefore considered a limited-contact sport. The original basic rules of touch were established in the 1960s by members of the South Sydney Junior Rugby League Club in Sydney, Australia.

=== OzTag ===

OzTag is a non-contact form of rugby league, and can be seen as a variation of British tag rugby. Cronulla Sharks and St George Dragons halfback Perry Haddock introduced the sport in Australia while coaching the 1992 St George Jersey Flegg side. Together with Chris Parkes, the two took the sport to fields across Australia. Today, it is played by over 200,000 players in organised leagues across the country.

=== League Tag ===

League Tag replaces tackling with the removal of one of two tags carried on an opponent&#x27;s hips, attached directly to specific League Tag shorts with Velcro patches, but otherwise retains almost all other rules of traditional rugby league (such as kicking). A number of additional rules are also added relating to the specific issues associated with a tag based game.

=== Nines ===

Rugby League played with nine players per team with nine minutes per half, in addition to slight rule modifications to aid the game.

=== Sevens ===

Rugby League played with seven players per team with seven minutes per half, in addition to slight rule modifications to aid the game.

== Attendances ==
=== International ===
The top five attendances for rugby league test matches (International) are:
=== Domestic ===
The top five attendances for domestic based rugby league matches are:

== See also ==

* History of rugby league
* List of rugby league terms
* Playing rugby league
* List of international rugby league teams
* List of official Rugby League organisations
* Rugby league nines
* Rugby league sevens
* Tag Rugby (OzTag) – a completely non-contact version of rugby league
* Touch football – an almost non-contact version
* League tag – A semi-contact version of Rugby League
* Comparison topics
**Comparison of rugby league and rugby union
**Comparison of American football and rugby league
**Comparison of Canadian football and rugby league
* Geography of rugby league

== Footnotes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
*

== External links ==
* 
* Official website of the International Rugby League 
* Rugby League Record Keepers&#x27; Club</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="0" end="21" title="Rugby league" label="Rugby league football"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="41" end="53" title="Rugby league" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="88" end="101" title="Rugby league" label="rugby 13/XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q987355" start="108" end="118" title="Anglophone" label="Anglophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284014" start="132" end="150" title="contact sport" label="full-contact sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378324" start="208" end="213" title="Rugby league playing field" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990339" start="289" end="304" title="Comparison of rugby league and rugby union" label="two major codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="308" end="322" title="rugby football" label="rugby football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="340" end="351" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q201812" start="380" end="392" title="Huddersfield" label="Huddersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="394" end="403" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="433" end="438" title="History of rugby league#The schism in England" label="split"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347463" start="448" end="468" title="Rugby Football Union" label="Rugby Football Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127622" start="556" end="585" title="Rugby Football League" label="Northern Rugby Football Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q262090" start="852" end="856" title="Rugby League ball" label="ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q578508" start="953" end="956" title="Try (rugby)" label="try"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1093" end="1101" title="Tackle (football move)#Rugby league" label="tackling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298409" start="1385" end="1394" title="Drop goal" label="Drop goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938377" start="1843" end="1854" title="kicking tee" label="kicking tee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142995" start="1929" end="1941" title="Super League" label="Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140630" start="1960" end="1981" title="National Rugby League" label="National Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624317" start="2084" end="2099" title="List of international rugby league teams" label="internationally"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="2118" end="2124" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q45256" start="2128" end="2139" title="Australasia" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19617380" start="2146" end="2160" title="Pacific Island" label="Pacific Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308450" start="2195" end="2221" title="International Rugby League" label="International Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050260" start="2243" end="2257" title="national sport" label="national sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378300" start="2261" end="2277" title="Rugby league in Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="2286" end="2298" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452879" start="2343" end="2350" title="Rugby league in England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452881" start="2352" end="2361" title="Rugby league in Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378298" start="2363" end="2374" title="Rugby league in New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452882" start="2376" end="2382" title="Rugby league in France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378310" start="2384" end="2389" title="Rugby league in Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378287" start="2391" end="2395" title="Rugby league in Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378303" start="2400" end="2405" title="Rugby league in Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639293" start="2418" end="2440" title="Rugby League World Cup" label="Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589757" start="2620" end="2629" title="Australia national rugby league team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452878" start="2668" end="2686" title="rugby league nines" label="rugby league nines"/>
<link wikidata="Q270102" start="2756" end="2768" title="rugby sevens" label="rugby sevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452885" start="2770" end="2793" title="Wheelchair rugby league" label="Wheelchair rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q844443" start="2905" end="2921" title="wheelchair rugby" label="wheelchair rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q39072320" start="3266" end="3299" title="Wheelchair Rugby League World Cup" label="Wheelchair Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q60746165" start="3354" end="3386" title="physical disability rugby league" label="physical disability rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q115824913" start="3418" end="3427" title="2021 Physical Disability Rugby League World Cup" label="world cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q115908060" start="3469" end="3496" title="2021 Rugby League World Cup" label="2021 Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="4086" end="4106" title="The Football Association" label="Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="4116" end="4136" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="4189" end="4195" title="soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="4228" end="4243" title="English Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127622" start="4331" end="4360" title="Rugby Football League" label="Northern Rugby Football Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347463" start="4427" end="4447" title="Rugby Football Union" label="Rugby Football Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127622" start="4956" end="4977" title="Rugby Football League" label="Rugby Football League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5093" end="5099" title="History of rugby league#The schism in England" label="schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127622" start="5151" end="5180" title="Rugby Football League" label="Northern Rugby Football Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="5204" end="5217" title="working class" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540757" start="5951" end="5977" title="George Hotel, Huddersfield" label="George Hotel, Huddersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414420" start="6189" end="6197" title="line-out (rugby union)" label="line-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369650" start="6224" end="6239" title="Professional sports" label="professionalism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6353" end="6357" title="Playing rugby union#Ruck" label="ruck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6388" end="6401" title="Rugby league gameplay#Play-the-ball" label="play-the-ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="6558" end="6565" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="6580" end="6586" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339014" start="6627" end="6664" title="New South Wales Rugby Football League" label="New South Wales Rugby Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="6906" end="6921" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="6926" end="6936" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q50776" start="6944" end="6969" title="Australian rules football" label="Australian rules football"/>
<link wikidata="Q48768570" start="7050" end="7057" title="1954 Challenge Cup" label="1953–54"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059994" start="7058" end="7071" title="Challenge Cup" label="Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115714" start="7088" end="7101" title="Odsal Stadium" label="Odsal Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905" start="7103" end="7111" title="Bradford" label="Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308450" start="7336" end="7355" title="Rugby League International Federation" label="International Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q611749" start="7460" end="7465" title="Scrum (rugby)" label="scrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591553" start="7668" end="7681" title="Tetley&amp;#x27;s Brewery" label="Joshua Tetley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17405939" start="7686" end="7697" title="John Player" label="John Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017458" start="7724" end="7769" title="1971–72 Northern Rugby Football League season" label="1971–72 Northern Rugby Football League season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119021" start="8204" end="8220" title="Super League war" label="Super League war"/>
<link wikidata="Q578508" start="8761" end="8766" title="Try (rugby)" label="tries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8768" end="8773" title="Goal (sport)#Rugby football" label="goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298409" start="8778" end="8789" title="Drop goal (rugby)" label="field goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164849" start="8949" end="8956" title="Tie (draw)" label="drawing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580037" start="9025" end="9037" title="golden point" label="golden point"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9502" end="9512" title="Try (rugby)#conversion" label="conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q788517" start="9518" end="9525" title="Penalty (rugby)" label="penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q14955134" start="9638" end="9649" title="Drop kick" label="half volley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174840" start="10766" end="10779" title="play-the-ball" label="play-the-ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="11046" end="11057" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q578508" start="11350" end="11355" title="Try (rugby)" label="tries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11390" end="11406" title="Try (rugby)#Conversions" label="conversion kicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298409" start="11426" end="11436" title="Drop goal (rugby)" label="drop goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828574" start="11621" end="11626" title="Touch (rugby)" label="touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414420" start="11677" end="11685" title="Line-out (rugby union)" label="line-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545990" start="12242" end="12250" title="tackle (football move)" label="tackling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849107" start="12658" end="12670" title="Andy Farrell" label="Andy Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q586437" start="12672" end="12686" title="Jason Robinson (rugby)" label="Jason Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132998" start="12691" end="12701" title="Henry Paul" label="Henry Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q384918" start="12801" end="12813" title="hybrid sports" label="hybrid games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546270" start="13010" end="13018" title="Gridiron football" label="gridiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="13077" end="13097" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032175" start="13409" end="13433" title="Canadian Football League" label="Canadian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433685" start="13568" end="13580" title="forward pass" label="forward pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q784121" start="13585" end="13607" title="unlimited substitution" label="unlimited substitution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14090" end="14098" title="Rugby league positions#Forwards" label="forwards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14103" end="14108" title="Rugby league positions#Backs" label="backs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="14701" end="14721" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="14853" end="14858" title="Fatigue (medical)" label="tired"/>
<link wikidata="Q12421818" start="14862" end="14869" title="Injury" label="injured"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927890" start="15388" end="15397" title="Blood replacement" label="blood bin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508224" start="16044" end="16052" title="Fullback (rugby league)" label="fullback"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16750" end="16757" title="Rugby league positions#Wingers" label="wingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105663" start="17101" end="17108" title="Center (rugby)" label="centres"/>
<link wikidata="Q11311945" start="17966" end="17977" title="five-eighth" label="five-eighth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105663" start="18068" end="18076" title="Scrum-half (rugby league)" label="halfback"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105663" start="18589" end="18597" title="Scrum-half (rugby league)" label="halfback"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19356" end="19378" title="scrum (rugby)#Rugby league" label="rugby league scrummage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105663" start="19625" end="19652" title="Prop forward" label="props or front-row forwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898043" start="19992" end="19998" title="Hooker (rugby league)" label="hooker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20053" end="20063" title="Rugby league positions#dummy half" label="dummy half"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105663" start="21229" end="21250" title="Lock (rugby league)" label="Loose forward or Lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11311945" start="21604" end="21615" title="five-eighth" label="five-eighth"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="21751" end="21767" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050260" start="21816" end="21830" title="national sport" label="national sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589757" start="22078" end="22087" title="Australia national rugby league team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589698" start="22089" end="22096" title="England national rugby league team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590290" start="22098" end="22109" title="New Zealand national rugby league team" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590539" start="22111" end="22116" title="Samoa national rugby league team" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590551" start="22121" end="22126" title="Tonga national rugby league team" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589757" start="22260" end="22269" title="Australia national rugby league team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q731343" start="22271" end="22283" title="Cook Islands national rugby league team" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589698" start="22285" end="22292" title="England national rugby league team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590518" start="22294" end="22298" title="Fiji national rugby league team" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590161" start="22300" end="22306" title="France national rugby league team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589812" start="22308" end="22315" title="Ireland national rugby league team" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q844843" start="22317" end="22322" title="Italy national rugby league team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590246" start="22324" end="22331" title="Jamaica national rugby league team" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590699" start="22333" end="22340" title="Lebanon national rugby league team" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590290" start="22342" end="22353" title="New Zealand national rugby league team" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590308" start="22355" end="22371" title="Papua New Guinea national rugby league team" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q426131" start="22373" end="22379" title="Russia national rugby league team" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590539" start="22381" end="22386" title="Samoa national rugby league team" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589862" start="22388" end="22396" title="Scotland national rugby league team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589628" start="22398" end="22410" title="South Africa national rugby league team" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590551" start="22412" end="22417" title="Tonga national rugby league team" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590565" start="22419" end="22421" title="United States national rugby league team" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403733" start="22426" end="22431" title="Wales national rugby league team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589698" start="22486" end="22493" title="England national rugby league team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q20804884" start="22539" end="22549" title="2021 Men&amp;#x27;s Rugby League World Cup" label="Men&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q65943362" start="22551" end="22563" title="2021 Women&amp;#x27;s Rugby League World Cup" label="Women&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q85737960" start="22568" end="22578" title="2021 Wheelchair Rugby League World Cup" label="Wheelchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q121609765" start="22710" end="22737" title="2026 Rugby League World Cup" label="2026 Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806260" start="22778" end="22817" title="Asia-Pacific Rugby League Confederation" label="Asia-Pacific Rugby League Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824626" start="22942" end="22945" title="Australian Rugby League Commission" label="ARL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339086" start="22950" end="22954" title="New Zealand Rugby League" label="NZRL"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="22993" end="23002" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378300" start="23110" end="23126" title="Rugby league in Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050260" start="23179" end="23193" title="national sport" label="national sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378315" start="23200" end="23212" title="Rugby league in the Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="23281" end="23289" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="23402" end="23417" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="23422" end="23432" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378310" start="23483" end="23488" title="Rugby league in Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="23536" end="23541" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="23546" end="23550" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="23630" end="23641" title="Sustainable development" label="development"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942390" start="23718" end="23740" title="State of Origin series" label="State of Origin series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174842" start="23807" end="23839" title="Rugby League European Federation" label="Rugby League European Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="23887" end="23893" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="23993" end="24002" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="24004" end="24014" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23360" start="24020" end="24030" title="Cumberland" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881035" start="24100" end="24112" title="M62 motorway" label="M62 corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q862384" start="24252" end="24268" title="Catalans Dragons" label="Catalans Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q863469" start="24273" end="24287" title="London Broncos" label="London Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532920" start="24337" end="24355" title="Toulouse Olympique" label="Toulouse Olympique"/>
<link wikidata="Q34080141" start="24373" end="24400" title="British rugby league system" label="British rugby league system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2955893" start="24485" end="24497" title="RFL Championship" label="Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24695" end="24730" title="Sport in the United Kingdom#Popularity" label="eighth most popular sport in the UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q843265" start="24842" end="24855" title="Sport England" label="Sport England"/>
<link wikidata="Q47508304" start="25146" end="25179" title="2017 Rugby League World Cup final" label="2017 Rugby League World Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="25482" end="25498" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="25698" end="25710" title="Vichy regime" label="Vichy regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422284" start="25846" end="25859" title="Popular Front (France)" label="Popular Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q696835" start="25945" end="25964" title="Liberation of Paris" label="Liberation of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365292" start="26256" end="26275" title="Paris Saint-Germain Rugby League" label="Paris Saint-Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005" start="26471" end="26491" title="Languedoc-Roussillon" label="Languedoc-Roussillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608186" start="26535" end="26559" title="2007 Challenge Cup Final" label="2007 Challenge Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642538" start="26594" end="26611" title="Super League XIII" label="Super League XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361930" start="26801" end="26811" title="Super XIII" label="Super XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q24185260" start="27028" end="27044" title="Toronto Wolfpack" label="Toronto Wolfpack"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="27050" end="27063" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="27427" end="27444" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q109381507" start="27579" end="27590" title="Ottawa Aces" label="Ottawa Aces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025788" start="27764" end="27780" title="Penryn, Cornwall" label="Penryn, Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q106639702" start="27835" end="27862" title="North American Rugby League" label="North American Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865830" start="27990" end="28006" title="USA Rugby League" label="USA Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q74122287" start="28014" end="28030" title="New York Freedom (rugby league)" label="New York Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652184" start="28035" end="28057" title="Cleveland Rugby League" label="Cleveland Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029422" start="28229" end="28248" title="Canada Rugby League" label="Canada Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174842" start="28525" end="28557" title="Rugby League European Federation" label="Rugby League European Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806260" start="28562" end="28601" title="Asia-Pacific Rugby League Confederation" label="Asia-Pacific Rugby League Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="28642" end="28647" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="28649" end="28655" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="28657" end="28662" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="28664" end="28675" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="28677" end="28691" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="28693" end="28700" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="28702" end="28717" title="Netherlands" label="The Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="28719" end="28725" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="28727" end="28733" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="28735" end="28740" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="28742" end="28751" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="28753" end="28760" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="28762" end="28768" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="28770" end="28778" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="28783" end="28789" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140630" start="28923" end="28944" title="National Rugby League" label="National Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142995" start="28961" end="28973" title="Super League" label="Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414041" start="29104" end="29118" title="Queensland Cup" label="Queensland Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="29147" end="29163" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q870460" start="29169" end="29176" title="NSW Cup" label="NSW Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2955893" start="29190" end="29206" title="RFL Championship" label="RFL Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070107" start="29211" end="29223" title="RFL League 1" label="RFL League 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361930" start="29236" end="29246" title="Super XIII" label="Super XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2951290" start="29251" end="29258" title="Elite 2 (rugby league)" label="Elite 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362950" start="29265" end="29303" title="PNGNRL" label="Papua New Guinea National Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q113947417" start="29501" end="29506" title="Touch (sport)" label="Touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q511918" start="29508" end="29513" title="Tag rugby" label="OzTag"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509136" start="29515" end="29525" title="League tag" label="League tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452878" start="29527" end="29532" title="Rugby league nines" label="Nines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452876" start="29538" end="29544" title="Rugby league sevens" label="Sevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826582" start="29863" end="29896" title="Federation of International Touch" label="Federation of International Touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="29951" end="29963" title="Rugby football" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545990" start="30138" end="30146" title="Tackle (football move)" label="tackling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30264" end="30279" title="Contact sport#Limited-contact" label="limited-contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325289" start="30369" end="30406" title="South Sydney Rabbitohs" label="South Sydney Junior Rugby League Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="30410" end="30427" title="Sydney" label="Sydney, Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20090845" start="30590" end="30603" title="Perry Haddock" label="Perry Haddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184860" start="30672" end="30684" title="Jersey Flegg Cup" label="Jersey Flegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868663" start="31772" end="31795" title="History of rugby league" label="History of rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237408" start="31798" end="31824" title="List of rugby league terms" label="List of rugby league terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174840" start="31827" end="31847" title="Playing rugby league" label="Playing rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624317" start="31850" end="31890" title="List of international rugby league teams" label="List of international rugby league teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004043" start="31893" end="31936" title="List of official Rugby League organisations" label="List of official Rugby League organisations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452878" start="31939" end="31957" title="Rugby league nines" label="Rugby league nines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452876" start="31960" end="31979" title="Rugby league sevens" label="Rugby league sevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q511918" start="31982" end="31991" title="Tag Rugby" label="Tag Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q113947417" start="32053" end="32067" title="Touch football (rugby league)" label="Touch football"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509136" start="32102" end="32112" title="League tag" label="League tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990339" start="32176" end="32218" title="Comparison of rugby league and rugby union" label="Comparison of rugby league and rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155683" start="32221" end="32269" title="Comparison of American football and rugby league" label="Comparison of American football and rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155707" start="32272" end="32320" title="Comparison of Canadian football and rugby league" label="Comparison of Canadian football and rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378277" start="32323" end="32348" title="Geography of rugby league" label="Geography of rugby league"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25736" wikidata="Q159354" url="?curid=25736" title="Rowing (sport)">
<text>Rowing, often called crew in the United States, is the sport of racing boats using oars. It differs from paddling sports in that rowing oars are attached to the boat using rowlocks, while paddles are not connected to the boat. Rowing is divided into two disciplines: sculling and sweep rowing. In sculling, each rower holds two oars, one in each hand, while in sweep rowing each rower holds one oar with both hands. There are several boat classes in which athletes may compete, ranging from single sculls, occupied by one person, to shells with eight rowers and a coxswain, called eights. There are a wide variety of course types and formats of racing, but most elite and championship level racing is conducted on calm water courses long with several lanes marked using buoys.

Modern rowing as a competitive sport can be traced to the early 17th century when professional watermen held races (regattas) on the River Thames in London, England. Often prizes were offered by the London Guilds and Livery Companies. Amateur competition began towards the end of the 18th century with the arrival of &quot;boat clubs&quot; at British public schools. Similarly, clubs were formed at colleges within Oxford and Cambridge on the programme for the 1896 games, racing did not take place due to bad weather. Male rowers have competed since the 1900 Summer Olympics. Women&#x27;s rowing was added to the Olympic programme in 1976. Today, there are fourteen boat classes which race at the Olympics. 
In addition, the sport&#x27;s governing body, the World Rowing Federation, holds the annual World Rowing Championships with twenty-two boat classes.

Across six continents, 150 countries now have rowing federations that participate in the sport. Major domestic competitions take place in dominant rowing nations and include The Boat Race and Henley Royal Regatta in the United Kingdom, the Australian Rowing Championships in Australia, the Harvard–Yale Regatta and Head of the Charles Regatta in the United States, and the Royal Canadian Henley Regatta in Canada. Many other competitions often exist for racing between clubs, schools, and universities in each nation.

==History==

An Egyptian funerary inscription of 1430 BC records that the warrior Amenhotep (Amenophis) II was also renowned for his feats of oarsmanship, though there is some disagreement among scholars over whether there were rowing contests in ancient Egypt. In the Aeneid, Virgil mentions rowing forming part of the funeral games arranged by Aeneas in honour of his father. In the 13th century, Venetian festivals called &quot;regata&quot; included boat races among others.

The first known &quot;modern&quot; rowing races began from competition among the professional watermen in the United Kingdom that provided ferry and taxi service on the River Thames in London. Prizes for wager races were often offered by the London Guilds and Livery Companies or wealthy owners of riverside houses.
The oldest surviving such race, Doggett&#x27;s Coat and Badge was first contested in 1715 and is still held annually from London Bridge to Chelsea. During the 19th century these races were to become numerous and popular, attracting large crowds. Prize matches amongst professionals similarly became popular on other rivers throughout Great Britain in the 19th century, notably on the Tyne. In America, the earliest known race dates back to 1756 in New York, when a pettiauger defeated a Cape Cod whaleboat in a race.

Amateur competition in England began towards the end of the 18th century the age before technology. Documentary evidence from this period is sparse, but it is known that the Monarch Boat Club of Eton College and the Isis Club of Westminster School were both in existence in the 1790s. The Star Club and Arrow Club in London for gentlemen amateurs were also in existence before 1800. At the University of Oxford bumping races were first organised in 1815 when Brasenose College and Jesus College boat clubs had the first annual race while at Cambridge the first recorded races were in 1827. Brasenose beat Jesus to win Oxford University&#x27;s first Head of the River; the two clubs claim to be the oldest established boat clubs in the world. The Boat Race between Oxford University and Cambridge University first took place in 1829, and was the second intercollegiate sporting event (following the first Varsity Cricket Match by 2 years). The interest in the first Boat Race and subsequent matches led the town of Henley-on-Thames to begin hosting an annual regatta in 1839.

Founded in 1818, Leander Club is the world&#x27;s oldest public rowing club. The second oldest club which still exists is the Der Hamburger und Germania Ruder Club which was founded 1836 and marked the beginning of rowing as an organized sport in Germany. During the 19th century, as in England, wager matches in North America between professionals became very popular attracting vast crowds. Narragansett Boat Club was founded in 1838 exclusively for rowing. During an 1837 parade in Providence, R.I, a group of boatmen were pulling a longboat on wheels, which carried the oldest living survivor of the 1772 Gaspee Raid. They boasted to the crowd that they were the fastest rowing crew on the Bay. A group of Providence locals took issue with this and challenged them to race, which the Providence group summarily won. The six-man core of that group went on in 1838 to found NBC. Detroit Boat Club was founded in 1839 and is the second oldest continuously operated rowing club in the U.S. In 1843, the first American college rowing club was formed at Yale University. The Harvard–Yale Regatta is the oldest intercollegiate sporting event in the United States, having been contested every year since 1852 (excepting interruptions for wars and the COVID-19 pandemic).
The Schuylkill Navy is an association of amateur rowing clubs of Philadelphia. Founded in 1858, it is the oldest amateur athletic governing body in the United States. The member clubs are all on the Schuylkill River where it flows through Fairmount Park in Philadelphia, mostly on the historic Boathouse Row. The success of the Schuylkill Navy and similar organizations contributed heavily to the extinction of professional rowing and the sport&#x27;s current status as an amateur sport. At its founding, it had nine clubs; today, there are 12. At least 23 other clubs have belonged to the Navy at various times. Many of the clubs have a rich history, and have produced a large number of Olympians and world-class competitors.

The sport&#x27;s governing body, Fédération Internationale des Sociétés d&#x27;Aviron, was founded in 1892, and is the oldest international sports federation in the Olympic movement.

FISA first organized a European Rowing Championships in 1893. An annual World Rowing Championships was introduced in 1962. Rowing has also been conducted at the Olympic Games since 1900 (cancelled at the first modern Games in 1896 due to bad weather).

===History of women&#x27;s rowing===
Women row in all boat classes, from single scull to coxed eights, across the same age ranges and standards as men, from junior amateur through university-level to elite athlete. Typically men and women compete in separate crews although mixed crews and mixed team events also take place. Coaching for women is similar to that for men. The world&#x27;s first women&#x27;s rowing team was formed in 1896 at the Furnivall Sculling Club in London. The club, with signature colors a very distinct myrtle and gold, began as a women&#x27;s club, but eventually allowed the admittance of men in 1901.

The first international women&#x27;s races were the 1954 European Rowing Championships. The introduction of women&#x27;s rowing at the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal increased the growth of women&#x27;s rowing because it created the incentive for national rowing federations to support women&#x27;s events. Rowing at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London included six events for women compared with eight for men. In the US, rowing is an NCAA sport for women but not for men; though it is one of the country&#x27;s oldest collegiate sports, the difference is in large part due to the requirements of Title IX.

At the international level, women&#x27;s rowing traditionally has been dominated by Eastern European countries, such as Romania, Russia, and Bulgaria, although other countries such as Germany, Canada, the Netherlands, Great Britain and New Zealand often field competitive teams. The United States also has had very competitive crews, and in recent years these crews have become even more competitive given the surge in women&#x27;s collegiate rowing.
Now there is usually the same number of girls and boys in a group.

==Technique==
While rowing, the athlete sits in the boat facing toward the stern and uses the oars (also interchangeably referred to as &quot;blades&quot;), which are held in place by oarlocks (also referred to as &quot;gates&quot;), to propel the boat forward (towards the bow). Rowing is distinguished from paddling in that the oar is attached to the boat using an oarlock or a rowing gate, where in paddling there is no oarlock or attachment of the paddle to the boat.
The rowing stroke may be characterized by two fundamental reference points: the &quot;catch&quot;, which is placement of the oar spoon in the water, and the &quot;extraction&quot;, also known as the &quot;finish&quot; or &quot;release&quot;, when the rower removes the oar spoon from the water.

After the oar is placed in the water at the catch, the rower applies pressure to the oar levering the boat forward which is called the &quot;drive&quot; phase of the stroke. Once the rower extracts the oar from the water, the &quot;recovery&quot; phase begins, setting up the rower&#x27;s body for the next stroke.

At the catch, the rower places the oar in the water and applies pressure to the oar by pushing the seat toward the bow of the boat by extending the legs, thus pushing the boat through the water. The point of placement of the spoon in the water is a relatively fixed point about which the oar serves as a lever to propel the boat. As the rower&#x27;s legs approach full extension, the rower pivots the torso toward the bow of the boat and then finally pulls the arms towards his or her chest. The hands meet the chest right above the diaphragm.

At the end of the stroke, with the oar spoon still in the water, the hands drop slightly to unload the oar so that spring energy stored in the bend of the oar gets transferred to the boat which eases removing the oar from the water and minimizes energy wasted on lifting water above the surface (splashing).

The recovery phase follows the drive. The recovery starts with the extraction and involves coordinating the body movements with the goal to move the oar back to the catch position. In extraction, the rower pushes down on the oar handle to quickly lift the spoon out of the water and rapidly rotates the oar so that the spoon is parallel to the water. This process is sometimes referred to as &quot;feathering the blade&quot;. Simultaneously, the rower pushes the oar handle away from the chest. The spoon should emerge from the water perpendicular or &quot;square&quot; and be feathered immediately once clear of the water. After feathering and extending the arms, the rower pivots the body forward. Once the hands are past the knees, the rower compresses the legs which moves the seat towards the stern of the boat. The leg compression occurs relatively slowly compared to the rest of the stroke, which affords the rower a moment to recover, and allows the boat to glide through the water. The gliding of the boat through the water during recovery is often called &quot;run&quot;.

A controlled slide is necessary to maintain momentum and achieve optimal boat run. However, various teaching methods disagree about the optimal relation in timing between drive and recovery. Near the end of the recovery, the rower squares the oar spoon into perpendicular orientation with respect to the water and begins another stroke.

=== Technique exercises ===
Rowing technique drills are essential components of a rower&#x27;s training routine, focusing on specific aspects of the rowing stroke to refine skills and enhance overall performance. These structured exercises, whether performed individually (on the erg), in groups, or whole boat provide a targeted approach to improving coordination, body positioning, and teamwork.

==== Forward pick ====
The forward pick drill, often used as a standard warm-up for rowing crews in groups of 4 or 6, focuses on isolating different components of the recovery and drive sequence. Starting with arms-only strokes and gradually incorporating the back, ½ slide, and full slide, rowers gain a nuanced understanding of the interplay between these elements. The drill aims to enhance body preparation, providing rowers with a tactile sense of how each phase should seamlessly flow into the next.

==== Reverse pick (Korzeniowski drill) ====
The reverse pick drill, executed in groups of 4 or 6, isolates different aspects of the drive sequence. With the boat ‘’checked-down’’ (the boat has no speed), rowers initiate the drill with leg-only strokes, gradually adding the back and arms. The emphasis is on maintaining proper body position and sitting tall throughout the exercise. This drill aids in isolating and understanding the distinct elements of the drive sequence and their interconnectedness.

==== Cut-the-cake ====
The cut-the-cake drill typically involves the entire boat. Rowers execute the drill collectively, starting with a normal stroke and transitioning into the subsequent recovery. During this process, the entire crew pivots forward with their bodies, swings back to the finish (without letting the oars drop in the water), then swings forward again to reach the catch position. The swinging motion, referred to as &quot;cutting the cake,&quot; involves coordinated movements by all rowers, creating a unified and synchronized exercise aimed at improving boat balance, swing, and recovery timing.

==== Quarter or half slide rowing ====
Designed for the entire crew or smaller groups, this drill involves rowing using only a quarter or half of the slide at a high rating with a full press. It sharpens quick catches and emphasizes coordination during the recovery phase.

==== Square-Wide-6 ====
The Square-Wide-6 drill, conducted in groups of 6 or 4, requires rowers to take a wide grip on the oar handle, emphasizing a specific body position during the recovery. This encourages proper body positioning and enhances body flexibility

==== Feet-out rowing ====
Feet-out rowing, performed either collectively by all rowers or in smaller groups, involves the removal of feet from the shoes and placement of feet on top of the shoes. This drill helps rowers maintain continuous pressure on the footboard, especially during oar release. Despite challenges like early leg finishing or excessive layback, feet-out rowing reinforces improved leg connection and more reasonable layback, translating on-the-water skills to the erg for a more efficient rowing experience.

==== Eyes-closed rowing ====
In the eyes-closed rowing drill, performed by the whole boat, rowers execute the rowing motion with closed eyes and heightened auditory awareness. Rowers row with eyes closed, relying solely on their sense of touch and careful listening to the boat motion and the coxswain. This drill is designed to enhance rowers&#x27; ability to feel the subtle movements of the boat and synchronize seamlessly with their teammates. By eliminating the visual element, rowers focus on developing a heightened sense of touch and teamwork, fostering a deeper understanding of the rowing experience. This drill enhances the overall coordination and sensitivity to the dynamics of the boat, contributing to improved synchronization and a more nuanced rowing performance.

==Boat classes==
Broadly, there are two ways to row, sometimes called disciplines:
* In sweep rowing, each rower has one oar, held with both hands. There are usually an even number of rowers – two, four or eight. Each rower&#x27;s oar will extend to their &quot;port&quot; or &quot;starboard&quot;. In the United Kingdom, the port side is referred to as stroke side and the starboard side as bow side; this applies even if the stroke oarsman is rowing on the bow side and/or the bow oarsman on the stroke side.
* In sculling each rower has two oars (or &quot;sculls&quot;), one in each hand. Sculling is usually done without a coxswain in quads, doubles or singles. The oar in the sculler&#x27;s right hand extends to port and the oar in the left hand extends to starboard.

Within each discipline, there are several boat classes. A single regatta (series of races) will often feature races for many boat classes. They are classified using:

* Number of rowers: in all forms of modern competition the number is 1, 2, 4, or 8.
* Whether there is a coxswain (also referred to as cox). Coxless sweep boats are sometimes called &quot;straight&quot;, while sculling boats are assumed to be coxless unless stated otherwise.

Although sweep and sculling boats are generally identical to each other (except having different riggers), they are referred to using different names:

Sweep boat classes:
Sculling boat classes:
==Equipment==
===Racing shell===


Racing boats (often called &quot;shells&quot;) are long, narrow, and broadly semi-circular in cross-section in order to reduce drag in the water. There is some trade off between boat speed and stability in choice of hull shape. They usually have a fin towards the rear, to help prevent roll and yaw and to increase the effectiveness of the rudder.

Originally made from wood, shells are now almost always made from a composite material (usually a double skin of carbon-fiber reinforced plastic with a sandwich of honeycomb material) for strength and weight advantages. World Rowing rules specify minimum weights for each class of boat so that no individual team will gain a great advantage from the use of expensive materials or technology.

Smaller sculling boats are usually steered by the scullers pulling harder on one side or the other while larger boats often have a rudder, controlled by the coxswain, if present, or by one of the crew using a cable attached to one of the shoes.

With the smaller boats, specialist versions of the shells for sculling can be made lighter. The riggers in sculling apply the forces symmetrically to each side of the boat, whereas in sweep oared racing these forces are staggered alternately along the boat. The sweep oared boat has to be stiffer to handle these unmatched forces, so consequently requires more bracing and is usually heavier – a pair (2-) is usually a more robust boat than a double scull (2x) for example, and being heavier is also slower when used as a double scull. In theory, this could also apply to the 4x and 8x, but most rowing clubs cannot afford to have a dedicated large hull which might be rarely used and instead generally opt for versatility in their fleet by using stronger shells which can be rigged for either sweep rowing or sculling. The symmetrical forces also make sculling more efficient than sweep rowing: the double scull is faster than the coxless pair, and the quadruple scull is faster than the coxless four.

Many adjustments can be made to the equipment to accommodate the physiques of the crew. Collectively these adjustments are known as the boat&#x27;s rigging.

===Oar===
Oars, sometimes referred to as blades, are used to propel the boat. They are long (sculling: 250–300 cm; sweep oar: 340–360 cm) poles with one flat end about 50 cm long and 25 cm wide, called the spoon. Classic blades were made out of wood, but modern blades are made from more expensive and durable synthetic material, the most common being carbon fiber.

An &#x27;oar&#x27; is often referred to as a &quot;blade&quot; in the case of sweep oar rowing and as a &quot;scull&quot; in the case of sculling. A sculling oar is shorter and has a smaller spoon area than the equivalent sweep oar. The combined spoon area of a pair of sculls is however greater than that of a single sweep oar, so the oarsman when sculling is working against more water than when rowing sweep-oared. They are able to do this because the body action in sculling is more anatomically efficient (due to the symmetry).

The &quot;spoon&quot; of oars is normally painted with the colours of the club to which they belong. This greatly simplifies identification of boats at a distance. As many sports teams have logos printed on their jerseys, rowing clubs have specifically painted blades that each team is associated with.

===Training equipment===

Indoor rowing (on indoor rower, or rowing tank) is a way to train technique and strength by going through the same motions as rowing, with resistance(usually a large tank of water). Indoor rowing is helpful when there are no rowable bodies of water near by, or weather conditions don&#x27;t permit rowing.

A rowing tank is an indoor facility which attempts to mimic the conditions rowers face on open water. Rowing tanks are used primarily for off-season rowing, muscle-specific conditioning and technique training, or simply when bad weather prevents open-water training.
Ergometer rowing machines (colloquially &quot;ergs&quot; or &quot;ergo&quot;) simulate the rowing action and provide a means of training on land when waterborne training is restricted, and of measuring rowing fitness. Ergometers do not simulate the lateral balance challenges, the exact resistance of water, or the exact motions of true rowing including the sweep of the oar handles. For that reason ergometer scores are generally not used as the sole selection criterion for crews (colloquially &quot;ergs don&#x27;t float&quot;), and technique training is limited to the basic body position and movements. However, this action can still allow a workout comparable to those experienced on the water. Indoor rowing has become popular as a sport in its own right with numerous indoor competitions (and the annual World Championship CRASH-B Sprints in Boston) during the winter off-season.

==Race formats==
There are several formats for rowing races, often called &quot;regattas&quot;. The two most common are side by side and head races.

===Side by side===

Most races that are held in the spring and summer feature side-by-side, or sprint racing; all the boats start at the same time from a stationary position, and the winner is the boat that crosses the finish line first. The number of boats in a race typically varies between two (which is sometimes referred to as a &quot;dual race&quot;) to eight, but any number of boats can start together if the course is wide enough.
The standard length races for the Olympics and the World Rowing Championships is long. In the United States, some scholastic (high school) races are , while many youth races are the standard 2 kilometres. &quot;Masters&quot; rowers (rowers older than 27) often race 1,000m. However the race distance can and does vary from &quot;dashes&quot; or sprints, which may be long, to longer dual races like the Boat Race.

Two traditional non-standard distance shell races are the annual Boat Race between Oxford and Cambridge and the Harvard-Yale Boat Race which cover courses of approximately . The Henley Royal Regatta is also raced upon a non-standard distance at 2,112 meters (1 mile, 550 yards).

In general, multi-boat competitions are organized in a series of rounds, with the fastest boats in each heat qualifying for the next round. The losing boats from each heat may be given a second chance to qualify through a repechage. The World Rowing Championships offers multi-lane racing in heats, finals and repechages. At Henley Royal Regatta two crews compete side by side in each round, in a straightforward knock-out format, with no repechages.

===Head races===
Head races are time trial / processional races that take place from autumn (fall) to early spring (depending on local conditions). Boats begin with a rolling start at intervals of 10 – 20 seconds, and are timed over a set distance. Head courses usually vary in length from to , though there are longer races such as the Boston Rowing Marathon and shorter such as Pairs Head.

The oldest, and arguably most famous, head race is the Head of the River Race, founded by Steve Fairbairn in 1926 which takes place each March on the river Thames in London, United Kingdom. Head racing was exported to the United States in the 1950s, and the Head of the Charles Regatta held each October on the Charles River in Boston, Massachusetts, United States is now the largest rowing event in the world.

These processional races are known as &quot;Head Races&quot;, because, as with bumps racing, the fastest crew is awarded the title &quot;Head of the River&quot; (as in &quot;head of the class&quot;). It was not deemed feasible to run bumps racing on the Tideway, so a timed format was adopted and soon caught on.

Time trials are sometimes used to determine who competes in an event where there is a limited number of entries, for example, the qualifying races for Henley Royal Regatta, and &quot;rowing on&quot; and &quot;getting on&quot; for the Oxford and Cambridge Bumps races respectively.

===Other race formats===
A bumps race is a multi-day race beginning with crews lined up along the river at set intervals. They start simultaneously and all pursue the boat ahead while avoiding being bumped by a boat from behind. If a crew overtakes or makes physical contact with the crew ahead, a &quot;bump&quot; is awarded. As a result, damage to boats and equipment is common during bumps racing. To avoid damage the cox of the crew being bumped may concede the bump before contact is actually made. The next day, the bumping crew will start ahead of any crews that have been bumped. The positions at the end of the last race are used to set the positions on the first day of the races the next year. Oxford and Cambridge Universities hold bumps races for their respective colleges twice a year, and there are also &quot;Town Bumps&quot; races in both cities, open to non-university crews. Oxford&#x27;s races are organised by City of Oxford Rowing Club and Cambridge&#x27;s are organised by the Cambridgeshire Rowing Association.

The stake format was often used in early American races. Competitors line up at the start, race to a stake, moored boat, or buoy some distance away, and return. The 180° turn requires mastery of steering. These races are popular with spectators because one may watch both the start and finish. Usually only two boats would race at once to avoid collision. The Green Mountain Head Regatta continues to use the stake format, but it is run as a head race with an interval start. A similar type of racing is found in UK and Irish coastal rowing, where a number of boats race out to a given point from the coast and then return fighting rough water all the way. In Irish coastal rowing the boats are in individual lanes with the races consisting of up to 3 turns to make the race distance 2.3 km.

==Boat positions==
Rowers in multi-rower boats are numbered sequentially from the bow aft. The number-one rower is called the bowman, or just &#x27;bow&#x27;, whilst the rower closest to the stern is called the &#x27;strokeman&#x27; or just &#x27;stroke&#x27;. There are some exceptions to this – some UK coastal rowers, and in France, Spain, and Italy rowers number from stern to bow.

In addition to this, certain crew members have other titles and roles. In an 8+ the stern pair are responsible for setting the stroke rate and rhythm for the rest of the boat to follow. The middle four (sometimes called the &quot;engine room&quot; or &quot;power house&quot;) are usually the less technical, but more powerful rowers in the crew, whilst the bow pair are the more technical and generally regarded as the pair to set up the balance of the boat. They also have most influence on the line the boat steers.

===Coxswain===
The coxswain (or simply the cox) is the member who steers the boat using rudder strings, and coordinates the power and rhythm of the rowers, by communicating to the crew, often through a device called a cox box and speakers. The cox usually sits in the stern of the boat facing the rowers but in bowloaders, usually seen in the coxed four and coxed pair types of boat, the coxswain lies in the bow. The cox is usually the smallest and lightest out of all the crew.

It is an advantage for the coxswain to be light as this requires less effort for the crew to propel the boat. In many competitive events there is a minimum weight, under World Rowing rules, set for the coxswain to prevent unfair advantage. If a coxswain is under the minimum weight allowance (underweight), they may have to carry weights in the boat such as sandbags.

==Athlete categories==

=== Age ===
At the elite level, the World Rowing Federation recognizes an under 19 category for athletes who are age 18 or less by the end of the calendar year for a given event. The World Rowing Junior Championships is the world championship event for this category. Athletes under 23 years of age by the end of the calendar year may compete in the under 23 category, and the World Rowing U23 Championships is held for these athletes. World Rowing uses the term &quot;Senior&quot; for events open to any age.

Under World Rowing rules, athletes may compete in &quot;Masters&quot; categories when they reach age 27. World Rowing holds the World Rowing Masters Regatta for these athletes, at which there are several age subcategories.

=== Weight ===
Lightweight boat classes are restricted by the rowers&#x27; weight. According to the World Rowing Federation, this weight category was introduced &quot;to encourage more universality in the sport especially among nations with less statuesque people&quot;. The first lightweight events were held at the World Championships in 1974 for men and 1985 for women. Lightweight rowing was added to the Olympics in 1996. As of 2021, the only Olympic lightweight boat classes are the men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s double sculls. Starting with the 2028 Olympic games, lightweight rowing will no longer have any events in the Olympics.

The World Rowing Federation lightweight standards are:

* Men: Crew average – no rower over 
* Women: Crew average – no rower over 

At the collegiate level in the United States, the lightweight weight requirements can be different depending on competitive season. For fall regattas (typically head races), the lightweight cutoff for men is 165 lb and 135 lb for women. In the spring season (typically sprint races), the lightweight cutoff for men is 160 lb, with a boat average of 155 lb for the crew; for women, the lightweight cutoff is 130 lb.

For juniors in the United States, the lightweight cutoff for men is 150 lb; for women, it is 130 lb. In the fall the weight limits are increased for women, with the cutoff being 135 lb.

=== Pararowing ===

Adaptive rowing is a special category of races for those with physical disabilities. Under World Rowing rules there are 5 boat classes for adaptive rowers; mixed (2 men and 2 women plus cox) LTA (Legs, Trunk, Arms), mixed intellectual disability (2 men and 2 women plus cox) LTA (Legs, Trunk, Arms), mixed (1 man and 1 woman) TA (Trunk and Arms), and men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s AS (Arms and Shoulders). Events are held at the World Rowing Championships and were also held at the 2008 Summer Paralympics.

==Governing bodies==

The World Rowing Federation, known as FISA until recently, is the sport&#x27;s international governing body. World Rowing runs the World Rowing Championships, as well as several other international elite competitions including the World Rowing Cup and World Rowing Junior Championships. World Rowing also sponsors rowing at the Olympics.

World Rowing has over 155 national member federations who govern the sport in their respective nations.

== International competitions ==

The Olympic Games are held every four years, where only select boat classes are raced (14 in total):

* Men: quad scull, double scull, single scull, eight, coxless four, and coxless pair
* Lightweight Men: double scull (discontinued after 2024 games)
* Women: quad scull, double scull, single scull, eight, coxless four, and coxless pair
* Lightweight Women: double scull (discontinued after 2024 games)
* Coastal rowing (from 2028)
At the end of each year, the World Rowing Federation holds the World Rowing Championships with events in 22 different boat classes. Athletes generally consider the Olympic classes to be premier events. In 2017 FISA (now the World Rowing Federation) voted to adopt a new Olympic programme for 2020, whereby the lightweight men&#x27;s coxless four event was replaced by the women&#x27;s heavyweight coxless four. This was done to ensure that rowing had a gender equal Olympic programme. During Olympic years only non-Olympic boats compete at the World Championships.

==Fitness and health==

Rowing is one of the few bearing sports that exercises all the major muscle groups, including quads, biceps, triceps, lats, glutes and abdominal muscles. The sport also improves cardiovascular endurance and muscular strength. High-performance rowers tend to be tall and muscular: although extra weight does increase the drag on the boat, the larger athletes&#x27; increased power tends to compensate. The increased power is achieved through the increased leverage on the oar provided by the longer limbs of the athlete. In multi-person boats (2,4, or 8), the lightest person typically rows in the bow seat at the front of the boat.

Rowing is a low-impact sport with movement only in defined ranges, so that twist and sprain injuries are rare. However, the repetitive rowing action can put strain on knee joints, the spine and the tendons of the forearm, and inflammation of these are the most common rowing injuries. If one rows with poor technique, especially rowing with a curved rather than straight back, other injuries may surface, including back pains and wrist injuries. Blisters occur for almost all rowers, especially in the beginning of one&#x27;s rowing career, as every stroke puts pressure on the hands, though rowing frequently tends to harden hands and generate protective calluses. Holding the oars too tightly or making adjustments to technique may cause recurring or new blisters, as it is common to feather the blade. Another common injury is getting &quot;track bites&quot;, thin cuts on the back of one&#x27;s calf or thigh caused by contact with the seat tracks at either end of the stroke.

==See also==

* Glossary of rowing terms
* Rowing at the Summer Olympics
* The Championship Course
* World Sculling Championship (Professional)

;International Rowing Federation events
* Rowing World Cup
* World Rowing Championships
* World Rowing Junior Championships
;College/university rowing
* College rowing (United States)
* Harvard–Yale Regatta
* The Boat Race
* The Great Race (rowing) (New Zealand)
* University rowing (UK)
* U.S. intercollegiate rowing champions
* Varsity (rowing regatta) (Netherlands)
==References==

===Notes===
===Footnotes===
==Further reading==
*Paintings of Thomas Eakins, a group of rowing scenes, first and most famous is Max Schmitt in a Single Scull (1871)
*Brown, Daniel James (2013). The Boys in the Boat: Nine Americans and Their Epic Quest for Gold at the 1936 Berlin Olympics. Penguin Books. 

==External links==

* World Rowing – website of the World Rowing Federation
* River &amp; Rowing Museum – Rowing Museum in Henley on Thames
* How Rowing Really Works
* The Physics of Rowing
* The maximum speed of rowing boats</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q159354" start="0" end="6" title="Rowing (sport)" label="Rowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q159354" start="21" end="25" title="Rowing (sport)" label="crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="26" end="46" title="American English" label="in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q349" start="55" end="60" title="sport" label="sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q878123" start="64" end="70" title="racing" label="racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q14898998" start="83" end="87" title="Oar (sport rowing)" label="oars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546758" start="105" end="113" title="paddling" label="paddling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424332" start="172" end="180" title="Rowlock" label="rowlocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q21369006" start="267" end="275" title="sculling" label="sculling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7655118" start="280" end="292" title="sweep rowing" label="sweep rowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307021" start="491" end="503" title="single scull" label="single scull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690874" start="564" end="572" title="coxswain (rowing)" label="coxswain"/>
<link wikidata="Q81050" start="581" end="586" title="eight (rowing)" label="eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974366" start="873" end="881" title="watermen" label="watermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344830" start="894" end="901" title="regatta" label="regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="911" end="923" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="927" end="933" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139056" start="995" end="1011" title="Livery Companies" label="Livery Companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991269" start="1013" end="1020" title="Amateurism in sport" label="Amateur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972829" start="1129" end="1143" title="Public school (United Kingdom)" label="public schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581649" start="1193" end="1199" title="Colleges of the University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055028" start="1204" end="1213" title="Colleges of the University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8088" start="1333" end="1353" title="1900 Summer Olympics" label="1900 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8444" start="1413" end="1417" title="1976 Summer Olympics" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q684885" start="1537" end="1560" title="World Rowing Federation" label="World Rowing Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413606" start="1579" end="1605" title="World Rowing Championships" label="World Rowing Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q887604" start="1811" end="1824" title="The Boat Race" label="The Boat Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543109" start="1829" end="1849" title="Henley Royal Regatta" label="Henley Royal Regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971486" start="1877" end="1908" title="Australian Rowing Championships" label="Australian Rowing Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676669" start="1927" end="1947" title="Harvard–Yale Regatta" label="Harvard–Yale Regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q775342" start="1952" end="1979" title="Head of the Charles Regatta" label="Head of the Charles Regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373894" start="2010" end="2039" title="Royal Canadian Henley Regatta" label="Royal Canadian Henley Regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q158052" start="2238" end="2247" title="Amenhotep II" label="Amenhotep"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="2425" end="2431" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="2433" end="2439" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="2502" end="2508" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="2555" end="2563" title="Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974366" start="2729" end="2737" title="watermen" label="watermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2745" end="2759" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="2804" end="2816" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2820" end="2826" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="2884" end="2890" title="Guilds" label="Guilds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139056" start="2895" end="2911" title="Livery Companies" label="Livery Companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288350" start="2983" end="3012" title="Doggett&amp;#x27;s Coat and Badge" label="Doggett&amp;#x27;s Coat and Badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q130206" start="3073" end="3086" title="London Bridge" label="London Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q743535" start="3090" end="3097" title="Chelsea, London" label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q216373" start="3335" end="3339" title="River Tyne" label="Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="3664" end="3676" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341516" start="3698" end="3716" title="Westminster School" label="Westminster School"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="3859" end="3879" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957760" start="3928" end="3945" title="Brasenose College Boat Club" label="Brasenose College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177727" start="3950" end="3963" title="Jesus College Boat Club (Oxford)" label="Jesus College"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="4010" end="4019" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q887604" start="4211" end="4224" title="The Boat Race" label="The Boat Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q990253" start="4483" end="4499" title="Henley-on-Thames" label="Henley-on-Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543109" start="4520" end="4534" title="Henley Royal Regatta" label="annual regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351629" start="4562" end="4574" title="Leander Club" label="Leander Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194100" start="4671" end="4708" title="Der Hamburger und Germania Ruder Club" label="Der Hamburger und Germania Ruder Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495317" start="5154" end="5165" title="Gaspee affair" label="Gaspee Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="5597" end="5612" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676669" start="5618" end="5638" title="Harvard–Yale Regatta" label="Harvard–Yale Regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="5792" end="5809" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433104" start="5816" end="5831" title="Schuylkill Navy" label="Schuylkill Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="5877" end="5889" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5964" end="5977" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q605122" start="6011" end="6027" title="Schuylkill River" label="Schuylkill River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739335" start="6051" end="6065" title="Fairmount Park" label="Fairmount Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907541" start="6106" end="6119" title="Boathouse Row" label="Boathouse Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q684885" start="6573" end="6625" title="Fédération Internationale des Sociétés d&amp;#x27;Aviron" label="Fédération Internationale des Sociétés d&amp;#x27;Aviron"/>
<link wikidata="Q80767" start="6747" end="6776" title="European Rowing Championships" label="European Rowing Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413606" start="6796" end="6822" title="World Rowing Championships" label="World Rowing Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="6885" end="6898" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8088" start="6905" end="6909" title="1900 Summer Olympics" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q8080" start="6950" end="6954" title="1896 Summer Olympics" label="1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509690" start="7423" end="7446" title="Furnivall Sculling Club" label="Furnivall Sculling Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q80767" start="7665" end="7694" title="European Rowing Championships" label="European Rowing Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q650159" start="7729" end="7763" title="rowing at the 1976 Summer Olympics" label="rowing at the 1976 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q223773" start="7917" end="7951" title="Rowing at the 2012 Summer Olympics" label="Rowing at the 2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133007" start="8207" end="8215" title="Title IX" label="Title IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146905" start="8650" end="8667" title="College rowing (United States)" label="collegiate rowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q273062" start="8812" end="8817" title="stern" label="stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003749" start="8831" end="8835" title="oars" label="oars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424332" start="8921" end="8928" title="oarlock" label="oarlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q301897" start="9011" end="9014" title="Bow (ship)" label="bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546758" start="9046" end="9054" title="paddling" label="paddling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424332" start="9104" end="9111" title="oarlock" label="oarlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542861" start="12376" end="12379" title="Indoor rower" label="erg"/>
<link wikidata="Q14898998" start="14520" end="14523" title="Oar (sport rowing)" label="oar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15482" end="15490" title="#Coxswain" label="coxswain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7655118" start="16059" end="16071" title="sweep rowing" label="sweep rowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089489" start="16233" end="16237" title="port (nautical)" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089489" start="16253" end="16262" title="starboard" label="starboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624284" start="16325" end="16336" title="stroke (rowing)" label="stroke side"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950607" start="16363" end="16371" title="bow (rowing)" label="bow side"/>
<link wikidata="Q21369006" start="16487" end="16495" title="sculling" label="sculling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690874" start="16598" end="16606" title="coxswain (rowing)" label="coxswain"/>
<link wikidata="Q507520" start="16610" end="16614" title="quad scull" label="quad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243495" start="16617" end="16623" title="double scull" label="double"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307021" start="16628" end="16635" title="single scull" label="singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690874" start="17018" end="17026" title="coxswain (rowing)" label="coxswain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562991" start="17287" end="17294" title="outrigger" label="riggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q606305" start="17420" end="17431" title="Racing shell" label="Racing boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="17790" end="17794" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="17837" end="17855" title="composite material" label="composite material"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="17882" end="17913" title="carbon-fiber reinforced plastic" label="carbon-fiber reinforced plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q209760" start="18293" end="18299" title="rudder" label="rudder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931512" start="19560" end="19567" title="Boat rigging (sport rowing)" label="rigging"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="19815" end="19819" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5856" start="19880" end="19889" title="Synthetic fiber" label="synthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="19922" end="19934" title="carbon fiber" label="carbon fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542861" start="20819" end="20831" title="indoor rower" label="indoor rower"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999987" start="20836" end="20847" title="rowing tank" label="rowing tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542861" start="21375" end="21384" title="Indoor rower" label="Ergometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013829" start="22206" end="22221" title="CRASH-B Sprints" label="CRASH-B Sprints"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344830" start="22344" end="22352" title="regattas" label="regattas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689461" start="22401" end="22410" title="head race" label="head race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413606" start="22905" end="22931" title="World Rowing Championships" label="World Rowing Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q887604" start="23257" end="23266" title="The Boat Race" label="Boat Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q887604" start="23334" end="23343" title="Boat Race" label="Boat Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="23352" end="23358" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="23363" end="23372" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676669" start="23381" end="23403" title="Harvard-Yale Boat Race" label="Harvard-Yale Boat Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543109" start="23447" end="23467" title="Henley Royal Regatta" label="Henley Royal Regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423755" start="23771" end="23780" title="repechage" label="repechage"/>
<link wikidata="Q864897" start="23962" end="23978" title="Single-elimination tournament" label="knock-out format"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689461" start="24018" end="24027" title="Head race" label="Head race"/>
<link wikidata="Q185948" start="24033" end="24043" title="time trial" label="time trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="24185" end="24193" title="interval (time)" label="interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948069" start="24338" end="24360" title="Boston Rowing Marathon" label="Boston Rowing Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24381" end="24391" title="Pairs Head" label="Pairs Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998921" start="24449" end="24471" title="Head of the River Race" label="Head of the River Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q15043735" start="24484" end="24499" title="Steve Fairbairn" label="Steve Fairbairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="24550" end="24556" title="Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="24560" end="24566" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q775342" start="24652" end="24679" title="Head of the Charles" label="Head of the Charles Regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q794927" start="24705" end="24718" title="Charles River" label="Charles River"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="24722" end="24728" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="24730" end="24743" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997351" start="25375" end="25385" title="Bumps race" label="Bumps race"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997351" start="25429" end="25439" title="bumps race" label="bumps race"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025667" start="26402" end="26435" title="Cambridgeshire Rowing Association" label="Cambridgeshire Rowing Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138340" start="26964" end="26978" title="Coastal and offshore rowing" label="coastal rowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950607" start="27357" end="27363" title="bow (position)" label="bowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624284" start="27448" end="27457" title="strokeman" label="strokeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690874" start="28156" end="28164" title="Coxswain (rowing)" label="coxswain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179918" start="28355" end="28362" title="cox box" label="cox box"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657293" start="28448" end="28457" title="bowloader" label="bowloader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992528" start="28480" end="28490" title="coxed four" label="coxed four"/>
<link wikidata="Q232557" start="28495" end="28505" title="coxed pair" label="coxed pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139189" start="29194" end="29227" title="World Rowing Junior Championships" label="World Rowing Junior Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344963" start="29235" end="29253" title="world championship" label="world championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2953911" start="29388" end="29418" title="World Rowing U23 Championships" label="World Rowing U23 Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q349" start="29578" end="29585" title="Senior sport" label="Masters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29650" end="29678" title="World Rowing Masters Regatta" label="World Rowing Masters Regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531472" start="29761" end="29785" title="Lightweight rowing" label="Lightweight boat classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192856" start="30086" end="30090" title="1974 World Rowing Championships" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347496" start="30103" end="30107" title="1985 World Rowing Championships" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="30167" end="30171" title="1996 Summer Olympics" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146905" start="30524" end="30561" title="College rowing in the United States" label="collegiate level in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q216864" start="31620" end="31643" title="2008 Summer Paralympics" label="2008 Summer Paralympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q684885" start="31672" end="31695" title="World Rowing Federation" label="World Rowing Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413606" start="31799" end="31825" title="World Rowing Championships" label="World Rowing Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974959" start="31899" end="31915" title="World Rowing Cup" label="World Rowing Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139189" start="31920" end="31953" title="World Rowing Junior Championships" label="World Rowing Junior Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q720609" start="31982" end="32004" title="rowing at the Summer Olympics" label="rowing at the Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="" start="32033" end="32060" title=":Category:National members of World Rowing" label="national member federations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="32150" end="32163" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q507520" start="32255" end="32265" title="quad scull" label="quad scull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243495" start="32267" end="32279" title="double scull" label="double scull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307021" start="32281" end="32293" title="single scull" label="single scull"/>
<link wikidata="Q81050" start="32295" end="32300" title="Eight (rowing)" label="eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q81032" start="32302" end="32314" title="coxless four" label="coxless four"/>
<link wikidata="Q232563" start="32320" end="32332" title="coxless pair" label="coxless pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243495" start="32352" end="32364" title="double scull" label="double scull"/>
<link wikidata="Q507520" start="32406" end="32416" title="quad scull" label="quad scull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243495" start="32418" end="32430" title="double scull" label="double scull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307021" start="32432" end="32444" title="single scull" label="single scull"/>
<link wikidata="Q81050" start="32446" end="32451" title="Eight (rowing)" label="eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q81032" start="32453" end="32465" title="coxless four" label="coxless four"/>
<link wikidata="Q232563" start="32471" end="32483" title="coxless pair" label="coxless pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243495" start="32505" end="32517" title="double scull" label="double scull"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138340" start="32552" end="32566" title="Coastal and offshore rowing" label="Coastal rowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q684885" start="32608" end="32631" title="World Rowing Federation" label="World Rowing Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q219067" start="33214" end="33222" title="exercise" label="exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q504536" start="33263" end="33268" title="Quadriceps femoris muscle" label="quads"/>
<link wikidata="Q201363" start="33270" end="33276" title="biceps" label="biceps"/>
<link wikidata="Q83379" start="33278" end="33285" title="triceps" label="triceps"/>
<link wikidata="Q283673" start="33287" end="33291" title="Latissimus dorsi muscle" label="lats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478147" start="33293" end="33299" title="Gluteal muscles" label="glutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9597" start="33304" end="33313" title="human abdomen" label="abdominal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="33347" end="33361" title="cardiovascular" label="cardiovascular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785966" start="33376" end="33393" title="muscular strength" label="muscular strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q37425" start="33969" end="33979" title="knee joint" label="knee joint"/>
<link wikidata="Q482853" start="33986" end="33991" title="human vertebral column" label="spine"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="34028" end="34040" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571859" start="34800" end="34824" title="Glossary of rowing terms" label="Glossary of rowing terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q720609" start="34827" end="34856" title="Rowing at the Summer Olympics" label="Rowing at the Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722059" start="34859" end="34882" title="The Championship Course" label="The Championship Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036159" start="34885" end="34927" title="World Sculling Championship (Professional)" label="World Sculling Championship (Professional)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974959" start="34971" end="34987" title="Rowing World Cup" label="Rowing World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413606" start="34990" end="35016" title="World Rowing Championships" label="World Rowing Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139189" start="35019" end="35052" title="World Rowing Junior Championships" label="World Rowing Junior Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146905" start="35082" end="35112" title="College rowing (United States)" label="College rowing (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676669" start="35115" end="35135" title="Harvard–Yale Regatta" label="Harvard–Yale Regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q887604" start="35138" end="35151" title="The Boat Race" label="The Boat Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737900" start="35154" end="35177" title="The Great Race (rowing)" label="The Great Race (rowing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896791" start="35194" end="35216" title="University rowing (UK)" label="University rowing (UK)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35219" end="35256" title="Intercollegiate sports team champions#Rowing" label="U.S. intercollegiate rowing champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809323" start="35259" end="35283" title="Varsity (rowing regatta)" label="Varsity (rowing regatta)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35363" end="35438" title="Thomas Eakins#Early career" label="Paintings of Thomas Eakins, a group of rowing scenes, first and most famous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913390" start="35442" end="35471" title="Max Schmitt in a Single Scull" label="Max Schmitt in a Single Scull"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182698" start="35480" end="35499" title="Daniel James Brown" label="Brown, Daniel James"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845485" start="35508" end="35602" title="The Boys in the Boat" label="The Boys in the Boat: Nine Americans and Their Epic Quest for Gold at the 1936 Berlin Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336200" start="35604" end="35617" title="Penguin Books" label="Penguin Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q684885" start="35673" end="35696" title="World Rowing Federation" label="World Rowing Federation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25737" wikidata="Q681338" url="?curid=25737" title="RuneQuest">
<text>RuneQuest (commonly abbreviated as RQ) is a fantasy tabletop role-playing game originally designed by Steve Perrin, Ray Turney, Steve Henderson, and Warren James, and set in Greg Stafford&#x27;s mythical world of Glorantha. It was first published in 1978 by The Chaosium. Beginning in 1984, publication passed between a number of companies, including Avalon Hill, Mongoose Publishing, and The Design Mechanism, before finally returning to Chaosium in 2016. &quot;RuneQuest&quot; is notable for its system, designed around percentile dice and an early implementation of skill rules, which became the basis for numerous other games. There have been several editions of the game.

==History==
In 1975, game designer Greg Stafford released the fantasy board game &quot;White Bear and Red Moon&quot; (later renamed &quot;Dragon Pass&quot;), produced and marketed by The Chaosium, a publishing company set up by Stafford specifically for the release of the game. In 1978, The Chaosium published the first edition of &quot;RuneQuest&quot;, a role-playing game set in the world of Glorantha which Stafford had created for &quot;White Bear and Red Moon&quot;.

A second edition, with various minor revisions, was released in 1979. &quot;RuneQuest&quot; quickly established itself as the second most popular fantasy role-playing game after &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;. In the four years before the second edition was superseded, Chaosium published over twenty supplements to support it. The second edition and its supplements were republished as part of the 2015 &quot;RuneQuest Classic&quot; Kickstarter.

In order to increase distribution and marketing of the game, Chaosium made a deal with Avalon Hill, who published the third edition in 1984. Under the agreement, Avalon Hill took ownership of trademark for &quot;RuneQuest&quot;, while all Glorantha-related content required approval by Chaosium, who also retained the copyright of the rules text. As such, the default setting for the third edition was the &quot;Dark Ages of fantasy Europe&quot;, but it also included a booklet allowing play in Glorantha. A range of supplements were produced for this edition; generic fantasy was left unbranded, but others were marked as Earth, Glorantha, or Gateway (alternative fantasy) to differentiate them. The third edition was not well-received — RPG historian Stu Horvath called it &quot;an ill-fated third edition of the game that never made the kind of money on which both companies were banking.&quot;

A proposed fourth edition developed by Avalon Hill, titled &quot;RuneQuest: Adventures in Glorantha&quot;, was intended to return the tight &quot;RuneQuest&quot;/Glorantha relationship, but it was shelved mid-project in 1994 after Stafford refused permission, unhappy with Avalon Hill&#x27;s stewardship of the third edition. In response, Avalon Hill, as owners of the trademark, began development of a mechanically unrelated game originally titled &quot;RuneQuest: Slayers&quot;. However, when Avalon Hill was acquired by Hasbro in 1998, the project was canceled despite being near completion. The copyrights to the rules reverted to the authors, who released it for free as &quot;RuneSlayers&quot;.

In 1998, following the financial failure of the collectible card game &quot;Mythos&quot;, Stafford, along with fellow shareholder Sandy Petersen, left the management of Chaosium (though they remained shareholders in the company). Stafford had formed a subsidiary company, Issaries, Inc., to manage the Glorantha property and took ownership of that company with him. He partnered with Robin D. Laws to publish an all-new game system set in Glorantha called &quot;Hero Wars&quot; in 2000. It was later renamed &quot;HeroQuest&quot; in 2003 after the rights to that name, along with the &quot;RuneQuest&quot; trademark, were acquired from Hasbro by Issaries.

Mongoose Publishing released a new edition of &quot;RuneQuest&quot; in August 2006 under a license from Issaries. This required that Mongoose recreate much of the function of prior editions without reusing the prior texts (the copyrights of which were retained by Chaosium). The new rules were developed by a team led by Mongoose co-founder Matthew Sprange, and were released under the Open Game License. The official setting takes place during the Second Age of Glorantha (previous editions covered the Third Age).

In January 2010, Mongoose published a much-revised edition written by Pete Nash and Lawrence Whitaker called &quot;RuneQuest II&quot;, simply known as &quot;MRQ2&quot; by fans. In May 2011, Mongoose Publishing announced that they had parted company with Issaries, and announced the rebranding of RuneQuest II as &quot;Legend&quot;. &quot;Legend&quot; was released in late 2011 under the Open Gaming License. Mongoose titles for &quot;RuneQuest II&quot; were re-released as &quot;Legend&quot;-compatible books.

In July 2011, The Design Mechanism, a company formed by Nash and Whitaker, announced that they had entered a licensing agreement with Issaries and would be producing a 6th edition of &quot;RuneQuest&quot;. Released in July 2012, it was largely an expansion of Mongoose&#x27;s &quot;RuneQuest II&quot; and aimed at providing rules that could be adapted to many fantasy or historical settings, and did not contain any specifically Gloranthan content (though it did use the Gloranthan runes).

In 2013, Stafford sold Issaries outright, and with it the Glorantha setting and &quot;RuneQuest&quot; and &quot;HeroQuest&quot; trademarks, to Moon Design Publications, which had published the second edition of &quot;HeroQuest&quot; under license in 2009. Moon Design maintained the Design Mechanism&#x27;s &quot;RuneQuest&quot; license.

In June 2015, following a series of financial issues at Chaosium, Stafford and Petersen retook control of the company. They in turn arranged a merger with Moon Design, which saw the Moon Design management team take over Chaosium. In 2015 they successfully raised funds through Kickstarter to produce a hardcover reprint of the second edition and PDFs of its supplements as &quot;RuneQuest Classic&quot;.

In 2016, it was announced that The Design Mechanism had parted ways with Moon Design and that &quot;RuneQuest 6th edition&quot; would continue to be published under the name &quot;Mythras&quot;. Shortly thereafter a new edition, &quot;RuneQuest: Roleplaying in Glorantha&quot;, was announced in 2017. It is based heavily on the Chaosium second edition, drawing upon ideas from later editions. The new edition of the game, officially referred to as &quot;RQG&quot; for short, was previewed on Free RPG Day 2017 with the release of a quickstart module. The PDF of the full rules was released in May 2018, with the printed book following later that year. Since then there have been a steady stream of products released for &quot;RQG&quot;, including a Bestiary, books of adventures and reference material.

==System==
&quot;RuneQuest&quot; has developed in many different ways over its 40-year history. This section focuses on the current edition &quot;RuneQuest Glorantha&quot; (RQG).

===Character creation===
As with most RPGs, players begin by making an adventurer. Starting by creating a family history, adventurers are then developed through a number of dice rolls to represent physical, mental and spiritual characteristics.

&quot;RuneQuest&quot; adventurers gain power as they are used in play, but not to the degree that they do in other fantasy RPGs. It is still possible for a weak adventurer to slay a strong one through luck, tactics, or careful planning.

=== Task resolution ===
Tasks are resolved using three basic systems, simple, opposed, or resistance rolls. All three use a roll-under percentile system to determine success of actions. Bonuses can increase or decrease the target number. Success or failure is further subdivided into categories, derived from the target number:
* Critical success (1/20 of target number)
* Special success (1/5 of target number)
* Success (target number or less)
* Failure (above the target number and specifically 96-100)
* Fumble (1/20 of target number and specifically 100).

For example, if a character has climbing target of 35% and his player rolls 25 on a D100, the character has succeeded. If they had rolled 01, that would be a critical success, rolling 06, a special success, and 85, a failure.

====Combat====
The game&#x27;s combat system was designed in an attempt to recreate live-action combat. Perrin was familiar with mock medieval combat through the Society for Creative Anachronism. 

In RQG, as in most previous editions, a combat round is divided into Strike Ranks, which provide an initiative system based on the character&#x27;s dexterity, size and weapon. These are assessed sequentially. An attacking character will roll their skill, and if successful the defender has the option of parrying or dodging the attack.

The &quot;RuneQuest&quot; combat system has a subsystem for &quot;hit location&quot;. Successful attacks are normally allocated randomly (or can be aimed) to a part of the target&#x27;s body. In &quot;RuneQuest&quot;, a hit against a character&#x27;s leg, weapon arm, or head has specific effects on the game&#x27;s mechanics and narrative. This was an innovative part of the game&#x27;s combat system and helped to separate it from the more abstracted, hit-point-based combat of competitors such as &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;.

=== Advancement ===
Rules for skill advancement also use percentile dice. In a departure from the level-based advancement of &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;, &quot;RuneQuest&quot; allows characters to improve their abilities directly; the player needs to roll higher than the character&#x27;s skill rating. For the climber example used earlier, the player would need to roll greater than 35 on a D100 in order to advance the character&#x27;s skill. Thus, the better the adventurer is at a skill the more difficult it is to improve.

===Magic===
Adventurers in &quot;RuneQuest&quot; are not divided into those who do use magic and those who do not. At the time of the game&#x27;s release, this was an unorthodox mechanic. 

Although all adventurers have access to magic, for practical game balance purposes, an adventurer&#x27;s magical strength is proportional to his or her connection to the divine or natural skill at sorcery. One of the innovations of RQG is that characters all have connections to the various runes of Glorantha, and these are used in the casting of magic. For instance, to cast an Ignite spell, creating a fire, the player would need to roll under his fire rune affinity.

The exact divisions of magic vary from edition to edition; RQG addresses spirit magic, rune magic, and sorcery. Other forms, such as dragon magic, exist but are not normally available to adventurers.

===Other rules===
The &quot;RuneQuest&quot; bestiary contains a large selection of fantasy monsters and their physical stats. As well as traditional fantasy staples (dwarves, trolls, undead, lycanthropes, etc.), the book contains original creatures such as goat-headed creatures called broo, and the headless three armed giants called maidstone archers. Some of its traditional fantasy creatures differed notably from the versions from other games (or fantasy or traditional sources); for example, elves are humanoid plant life. Unlike other fantasy RPGs of the time, &quot;RuneQuest&quot; encouraged the use of monsters as adventurers.

==Setting==

The setting included for the current, and all but one of the previous editions has been the world of Glorantha. The well-developed background of the setting offers a breadth of material for players and game masters to draw from. At a time when many RPG settings were cobbled together, &quot;RuneQuest&quot; offered players a vibrant living world, giving them a much more developed fictional world with established geography, history, and religion.

===The Dragon Pass area===
This region of Glorantha is the default setting for &quot;RuneQuest&quot; adventures. Set on the northern continent, it consists of five homelands each with their own distinctive cultures: Sartar, Prax, Old Tarsh, Lunar Tarsh and the Grazelands. The whole area is extended upland, with several passes through the surrounding mountains, each leading to different regions. This, together with its regional history, has led to a &quot;melting pot&quot; of cultures, with unusually-high variety and concentration of non-human species, particularly for a largely-rural setting. This combination of geography and culture creates the backdrop of the Hero Wars, the original setting for the &quot;Dragon Pass&quot; board game that &quot;RuneQuest&quot; was created for.

===Cults and religion===
A key element of &quot;RuneQuest&#x27;s&quot; flavor is an adventurer&#x27;s membership of religious societies. Referred to as cults, these usually have three levels of membership. Lay members are informal members with no insight in to the true nature of the cult. Initiates are directly connected to a god or greater power of the cult. They received magic in return. Rune levels are priestly, martial leaders or shaman, working for the god&#x27;s ideals and goals.

The basic rules describe 21 cults, whose availability is related to an adventurer&#x27;s rune affinities, homeland, and occupation.

==Supplements==
All editions of RuneQuest have had supplements published for them.
==Reception==
In the September–October 1978 edition of &quot;The Space Gamer&quot; (Issue No. 19), Dana Holm commented that &quot;Since this game contains a logical system, almost anything can be added to the matrix it presents. A gem of a game. You won&#x27;t be disappointed.&quot;

In the February–March 1979 edition of &quot;White Dwarf&quot; (Issue 11), Jim Donohoe thought the rulebook was &quot;116 pages of well thought-out and comprehensive rules,&quot; but he found the character generation system &quot;quite complex.&quot; He advised new referees to use the monster loot tables with caution, since the treasure was randomly generated, which meant &quot;the amount of treasure a monster can have can vary wildly using these tables, and a weak monster can have a fortune while a tough one is impoverished. This is one area of the rules which could use some revision.&quot; He concluded by giving the game an excellent rating of 9 out of 10, saying, &quot;These are a set of rules which I can recommend as a good alternative to &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;. Using the &quot;Runequest&quot; rules, a campaign can be set up simply and quickly with little effort to the referee.&quot;

In the March 1980 edition of &quot;Ares&quot; (Issue #1), Greg Costikyan commented that &quot;&quot;RuneQuest&quot; is the most playable and elegant fantasy role-playing designed to date. Its only drawback is that it does not cover enough ground for a full-scale role-playing campaign, and is, perhaps, a bit simpler than experienced frp&#x27;ers would desire.&quot; He concluded by giving it a slightly better than average rating of 7 out of 9.

In the July 1980 issue of &quot;Ares&quot;, Eric Goldberg reviewed the second edition and commented &quot;When &quot;RQ&quot; came out, it was well-organized by the FRP standards of that time. The rules are not painful to read, and a second edition, in which the charts are easier to find, has helped matters considerably. The drawbacks of the game are that the foundation of the game (combat) has play problems and that the individual systems do not mesh together as nicely as one would hope. Among the strengths are its freshness of design concepts, the elimination of the odious &#x27;level&#x27; progressions for characters, and the detailed background.&quot;

In the 1980 book &quot;The Complete Book of Wargames&quot;, game designer Jon Freeman liked the rulebook, calling it &quot;coherent, understandable, and full of examples to illustrate.&quot; However, Freeman major issue with &quot;the cumbersome combat system, which is more realistic than most but rather tedious.&quot; He also noted that the world of Glorantha was quite dense and hard to comprehend for new players. And if enterprising gamemasters wished to borrow the best parts of the setting for use in other role-playing systems, Freeman thought this would be very difficult: &quot;the systems are too well integrated ... To a great extent this means the game must be adopted entirely or not at all.&quot; Freeman concluded by giving this game an Overall Evaluation of &quot;Good to Very Good&quot;

In the July 1981 edition of &quot;The Space Gamer&quot; (Issue No. 35), Forrest Johnson reviewed the 1980 boxed edition of &quot;RuneQuest&quot;, and commented &quot;An experienced gamer, who probably bought the rules separately [...] has no need of this edition. However, it might be of use to a newcomer.&quot;

In the April 1985 edition of &quot;White Dwarf&quot; (Issue 64), Oliver Dickinson reviewed the third edition produced by Avalon Hill, and found &quot;Everything is well laid out and clearly expressed.&quot; The major difference he found with previous editions of rules was that most items &quot;cost a great deal more [...] Acquiring good armour, magic items, etc is going to be more of a struggle and so, I feel, more satisfying. I hope this will bring the days of the overmighty PC/NPC to an end; but the difficulties may be precisely what put some players off.&quot; Dickinson concluded by giving the new edition an excellent rating of 9 out of 10, saying, &quot;the revised rules deserve a proper trial; they are well thought out and explained, though quite complex, and I suspect will in many cases be welcomed with the words, &#x27;That makes better sense!&#x27;&quot;

Oliver Dickinson reviewed &quot;RuneQuest 3&quot; for &quot;White Dwarf&quot; #75, and stated that &quot;Personally, I take very seriously Greg Stafford&#x27;s comment that &quot;RQ3&quot; reflects his conception of Glorantha &quot;better&quot;, and I welcome most of the changes and innovations, particularly Fatigue Points.&quot;

In the March 1987 edition of &quot;White Dwarf&quot; (Issue 87), Peter Green reviewed a new hardcover version of the third edition, and generally liked it, although he did find &quot;a few irritations&quot;, notably that reference was made to sections of the 1st- or 2nd-edition rules that no longer existed. He concluded by warning that &quot;beginners should perhaps leave it until they are familiar with a more introductory system [...] Experienced players of other games will find much in &quot;Runequest&quot; to recommend it [...] it is superb value and well worth getting even if you never intend to play it.&quot;

In the August 1987 edition of &quot;White Dwarf&quot; (Issue 92), Paul Cockburn reviewed &quot;Advanced Runequest&quot;, a streamlined version of the 3rd edition rules, and liked what he saw. He concluded, &quot;It&#x27;s a very good package [...] a very powerful roleplaying game, in a very accessible form.&quot;

&quot;The Games Machine&quot; reviewed &quot;RuneQuest Fantasy Roleplaying Game&quot; and stated that &quot;this is an ideal purchase for any GM who is looking for a realistic, sophisticated and playable system of rules for a fantasy campaign.&quot;

In a 1996 reader poll conducted by &quot;Arcane&quot; magazine to determine the 50 most popular roleplaying games of all time, &quot;RuneQuest&quot; was ranked 5th. Editor Paul Pettengale commented: &quot;&quot;RuneQuest&quot; manages to establish itself as a cut above the rest because of its intricate and highly original campaign setting. [...] This is a world that combines high-fantasy heroism with the gritty realities of cross-humanoid racism and the problems of day-to-day living. The cults of the world, which play an intrinsic part of every adventurer&#x27;s life, add to the mysticism of the game, and give it a level of depth which other fantasy systems can be but envious of.&quot;

&quot;RuneQuest&quot; was chosen for inclusion in the 2007 book &quot;Hobby Games: The 100 Best&quot;. Jennell Jaquays commented, &quot;After &quot;RuneQuest&quot; and Glorantha, detailed fantasy worlds would become the norm, not the exception. Dragon Pass paved the way for TSR&#x27;s Faerûn, better known as the Forgotten Realms, and Krynn, setting for the &quot;Dragonlance&quot; saga. But few would ever achieve the elegant but approachable rules complexity of the original &quot;RuneQuest&quot; or instill a fervent loyalty in fans that would span decades.&quot;

In a review of the 6th edition of &quot;RuneQuest&quot; in &quot;Black Gate&quot;, John ONeill said &quot;The interior art is terrific throughout, and the writing is crisp and clear. Like all the best role playing books, &quot;RuneQuest Sixth Edition&quot; is fascinating to flip through even if you&#x27;re not a fantasy gamer.&quot;

In his 2023 book &quot;Monsters, Aliens, and Holes in the Ground&quot;, RPG historian Stu Horvath noted that unlike other major RPGs of the time, characters did not gain more hit points as they progressed, fueling a need to avoid often deadly combat. &quot;Players uninterested in losing limbs learn to solve problems without swinging swords. In turn, this desire to find non-violent solutions places increasing importance on the details of the setting, so as to give players the material they need to overcome adversity through conversation or clever scheming.&quot;

==Legacy==
Chaosium reused the rules system developed in &quot;RuneQuest&quot; to form the basis of several other games. In 1980 the core of the &quot;RuneQuest&quot; system was published in a simplified form edited by Greg Stafford and Lynn Willis as &quot;Basic Role-Playing (BRP)&quot;. &quot;BRP&quot; is a generic role-playing game system, derived from the two first &quot;RuneQuest&quot; editions. It was used for many Chaosium role-playing games that followed &quot;RuneQuest&quot;, including:

* &quot;Stormbringer&quot; (1981)
* &quot;Call of Cthulhu&quot; (1981)
* &quot;Worlds of Wonder&quot; (1982)
* &quot;Superworld&quot; (1983)
* &quot;ElfQuest&quot; (1984)
* &quot;Ringworld&quot; (1984)
* &quot;Pendragon&quot; (1985)
* &quot;Hawkmoon&quot; (1985)
* &quot;Nephilim&quot; (1992)

The science-fiction roleplaying game &quot;Other Suns&quot;, published by Fantasy Games Unlimited in 1983, used the &quot;Basic Role-Playing&quot; system as well.

Minor modifications of the &quot;BRP&quot; rules were introduced in every one of those games, to suit the flavor of each game&#x27;s universe. &quot;Pendragon&quot; used a 1-20 scale and 1d20 roll instead of a percentile scale and 1d100. &quot;Prince Valiant: The Story-Telling Game&quot; (1989), which used coin tosses instead of dice rolls, is the only Chaosium-published role-playing game that does not use any variant of the &quot;BRP&quot; system.

In 2004, Chaosium released a print-on-demand version of the 3rd edition &quot;RuneQuest&quot; rules with the trademarks removed under the titles &quot;Basic Roleplaying Players Book&quot;, &quot;Basic Roleplaying Magic Book&quot;, and &quot;Basic Roleplaying Creatures Book&quot;. That same year, Chaosium began preparing a new edition of &quot;Basic Roleplaying&quot;, which was released in 2008 as a single, comprehensive 400 page book, incorporating material from many of their previous &quot;BRP&quot; system games. The book offers many optional rules, as well as genre-specific advice for fantasy, horror, and science-fiction, but contains no setting-specific material.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q681338" start="35" end="37" title="RuneQuest" label="RQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643932" start="52" end="78" title="tabletop role-playing game" label="tabletop role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499056" start="102" end="114" title="Steve Perrin" label="Steve Perrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60785123" start="116" end="126" title="Ray Turney" label="Ray Turney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612817" start="128" end="143" title="Steve Henderson (game designer)" label="Steve Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246520" start="174" end="187" title="Greg Stafford (game designer)" label="Greg Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q679598" start="213" end="222" title="Glorantha" label="Glorantha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062574" start="258" end="270" title="Chaosium" label="The Chaosium"/>
<link wikidata="Q790101" start="351" end="362" title="Avalon Hill" label="Avalon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575373" start="364" end="383" title="Mongoose Publishing" label="Mongoose Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="389" end="409" title="The Design Mechanism" label="The Design Mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843874" start="522" end="537" title="percentile dice" label="percentile dice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369904" start="569" end="574" title="skill (role-playing games)" label="skill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246520" start="713" end="726" title="Greg Stafford (game designer)" label="Greg Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966833" start="765" end="788" title="White Bear and Red Moon" label="White Bear and Red Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062574" start="861" end="873" title="Chaosium" label="The Chaosium"/>
<link wikidata="Q679598" start="1073" end="1082" title="Glorantha" label="Glorantha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="1336" end="1358" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q66084809" start="1445" end="1468" title="List of RuneQuest supplements" label="over twenty supplements"/>
<link wikidata="Q790101" start="1691" end="1702" title="Avalon Hill" label="Avalon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q501476" start="3026" end="3032" title="Hasbro" label="Hasbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379796" start="3185" end="3196" title="RuneSlayers" label="RuneSlayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16387234" start="3281" end="3287" title="Mythos (card game)" label="Mythos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703640" start="3335" end="3349" title="Sandy Petersen" label="Sandy Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155702" start="3477" end="3491" title="Issaries, Inc." label="Issaries, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q3012102" start="3589" end="3602" title="Robin D. Laws" label="Robin D. Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476922" start="3719" end="3728" title="HeroQuest (role-playing game)" label="HeroQuest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575373" start="3862" end="3881" title="Mongoose Publishing" label="Mongoose Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q19664700" start="4203" end="4218" title="Matthew Sprange" label="Matthew Sprange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752744" start="4248" end="4265" title="Open Game License" label="Open Game License"/>
<link wikidata="Q19519595" start="4449" end="4458" title="Pete Nash (game designer)" label="Pete Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q19538985" start="4463" end="4480" title="Lawrence Whitaker (game designer)" label="Lawrence Whitaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245270" start="5524" end="5548" title="Moon Design Publications" label="Moon Design Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q34755" start="5997" end="6008" title="Kickstarter" label="Kickstarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500022" start="6617" end="6629" title="Free RPG Day" label="Free RPG Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414697" start="8544" end="8576" title="Society for Creative Anachronism" label="Society for Creative Anachronism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4197737" start="10241" end="10253" title="game balance" label="game balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q679598" start="11605" end="11614" title="Glorantha" label="Glorantha"/>
<link wikidata="Q559618" start="11885" end="11900" title="fictional world" label="fictional world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118748" start="13512" end="13527" title="The Space Gamer" label="The Space Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q682202" start="13780" end="13791" title="White Dwarf (magazine)" label="White Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="14494" end="14516" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789074" start="14684" end="14688" title="Ares (magazine)" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699601" start="14707" end="14721" title="Greg Costikyan" label="Greg Costikyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18686386" start="15140" end="15153" title="Eric Goldberg (game designer)" label="Eric Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q18393393" start="15784" end="15813" title="The Complete Book of Wargames" label="The Complete Book of Wargames"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270735" start="15835" end="15846" title="Jon Freeman (game designer)" label="Jon Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q930701" start="16200" end="16211" title="gamemasters" label="gamemasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118748" start="16602" end="16617" title="The Space Gamer" label="The Space Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q682202" start="17818" end="17829" title="White Dwarf (magazine)" label="White Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319364" start="19036" end="19053" title="The Games Machine" label="The Games Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117080" start="20080" end="20095" title="Jennell Jaquays" label="Jennell Jaquays"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666226" start="20611" end="20621" title="Black Gate (magazine)" label="Black Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372657" start="21688" end="21699" title="Lynn Willis" label="Lynn Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633765" start="21709" end="21727" title="Basic Role-Playing" label="Basic Role-Playing"/>
<link wikidata="Q336377" start="21762" end="21794" title="generic role-playing game system" label="generic role-playing game system"/>
<link wikidata="Q682309" start="21961" end="21973" title="Stormbringer (role-playing game)" label="Stormbringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027121" start="21995" end="22010" title="Call of Cthulhu (role-playing game)" label="Call of Cthulhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036746" start="22032" end="22048" title="Worlds of Wonder (game)" label="Worlds of Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3978067" start="22070" end="22080" title="Superworld" label="Superworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050832" start="22102" end="22110" title="Elfquest (role-playing game)" label="ElfQuest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335034" start="22132" end="22141" title="Ringworld (role-playing game)" label="Ringworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q680553" start="22163" end="22172" title="Pendragon (role-playing game)" label="Pendragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348765" start="22194" end="22202" title="Hawkmoon (role-playing game)" label="Hawkmoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338278" start="22224" end="22232" title="Nephilim (role-playing game)" label="Nephilim"/>
<link wikidata="Q18358627" start="22290" end="22300" title="Other Suns" label="Other Suns"/>
<link wikidata="Q499271" start="22321" end="22344" title="Fantasy Games Unlimited" label="Fantasy Games Unlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q680553" start="22560" end="22569" title="Pendragon (role-playing game)" label="Pendragon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22655" end="22693" title="Prince Valiant: The Story-Telling Game" label="Prince Valiant: The Story-Telling Game"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25739" wikidata="Q467454" url="?curid=25739" title="Rich Text Format">
<text>The Rich Text Format (often abbreviated RTF) is a proprietary document file format with published specification developed by Microsoft Corporation from 1987 until 2008 for cross-platform document interchange with Microsoft products. Prior to 2008, Microsoft published updated specifications for RTF with major revisions of Microsoft Word and Office versions.

Most word processors are able to read and write some versions of RTF. There are several different revisions of RTF specification; portability of files will depend on what version of RTF is being used.

RTF should not be confused with enriched text or its predecessor Rich Text, or with IBM&#x27;s RFT-DCA (Revisable Format Text-Document Content Architecture), as these are different specifications.

==History==
Richard Brodie, Charles Simonyi, and David Luebbert, members of the Microsoft Word development team, developed the original RTF in the middle to late 1980s. The first RTF reader and writer shipped in 1987 as part of Microsoft Word 3.0 for Macintosh, which implemented the RTF version 1.0 specification. All subsequent releases of Microsoft Word for Macintosh, as well as all Windows versions, can read and write in RTF format.

Microsoft maintains RTF. The final version was 1.9.1 in 2008, which implemented features of Office 2007. Microsoft has discontinued enhancements to the RTF specification, so features new to Word 2010 or a later version will not save properly to RTF. Microsoft anticipates no further updates to RTF, but has stated willingness to consider editorial and other non-substantive modifications of the RTF Specification during an associated ISO/IEC 29500 balloting period.

RTF files were used to produce Windows Help files, though these have since been superseded by Microsoft Compiled HTML Help files.

== Code syntax ==
It is programmed using groups, a backslash, a control word and a delimiter. Groups are contained within curly braces ({}) and indicate which attributes should be applied to certain text.

The backslash (\) introduces a control word, which is a specifically programmed command for RTF. Control words can have certain states in which they are active. These states are represented by numbers. For example,

; : indicates that the Bold text is off
; : indicates that the Bold text is on
; : indicates that the Italic text is off
; : indicates that the Italic text is on
; : indicates that the Underline text is off
; : indicates that the Underline text is on
; : indicates that the Subscript text is off
; : indicates that the Subscript text is on
; : indicates that the Superscript text is off
; : indicates that the Superscript text is on

A delimiter is one of three things:

# A space
# A digit or hyphen (e.g. -23, 23, 275)
# A character other than a digit or letter (e.g. \, /, }) 

As an example, the following RTF code

 {\rtf1\ansi{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss Helvetica;}\f0\pard
 This is some {\b bold} text.\par

would be rendered as follows:
This is some bold text.

==Character encoding==

A standard RTF file can only consist of 7-bit ASCII characters, but can use escape sequences to encode other characters. The two character escapes are code page escapes and, starting with RTF 1.5, Unicode escapes. In a code page escape, two hexadecimal digits following a backslash and typewriter apostrophe denote a character taken from a Windows code page. For example, if the code page is set to Windows-1256, the sequence codice_1 will encode the Arabic letter &quot;bāʼ&quot; ب. It is also possible to specify a &quot;Character Set&quot; in the preamble of the RTF document and associate it to a header. For example, the preamble has the text codice_2, then, in the body of the document, the text codice_3 will represent the code point codice_4 from the Character Set 128 (which corresponds to the Shift-JIS code page), which encodes &quot;金&quot;.

For a Unicode escape, the control word codice_5 is used, followed by a 16-bit signed integer which corresponds to the Unicode UTF-16 code unit number. For the benefit of programs without Unicode support, this must be followed by the nearest representation of this character in the specified code page. For example, codice_6 would give the Arabic letter &quot;bāʼ&quot; ب, but indicates that older programs which do not support Unicode should render it as a question mark instead.

The control word codice_7 can be used to indicate that subsequent Unicode escape sequences within the current group do not specify the substitution character.

Until RTF specification version 1.5 release in 1997, RTF only handled 7-bit characters directly and 8-bit characters encoded as hexadecimal (using codice_8). Since RTF 1.5, however, RTF control words generally accept signed 16-bit numbers as arguments. Unicode values greater than 32767 must be expressed as negative numbers. If a Unicode character is outside BMP, it is encoded with a surrogate pair. Support for Unicode was made due to text handling changes in Microsoft Word – Microsoft Word 97 is a partially Unicode-enabled application and it handles text using the 16-bit Unicode character encoding scheme. Microsoft Word 2000 and later versions are Unicode-enabled applications that handle text using the 16-bit Unicode character encoding scheme.

Because RTF files are usually 7-bit ASCII plain text, they can be easily transmitted between PC-based operating systems. Converters that communicate with Microsoft Word for MS Windows or Macintosh generally expect data transfer as 8-bit characters and binary data which can contain any 8-bit values.

==Human readability==
RTF is a data format for saving and sharing documents, not a markup language; it is not intended for intuitive and easy typing. Nonetheless, unlike many word processing formats, RTF code can be human-readable. When an RTF file containing mostly Latin characters without diacritics is viewed as a plain text file, the underlying ASCII text is readable, provided that the author has kept formatting concise.

When RTF was released, most word processors used binary file formats; Microsoft Word, for example, used the .DOC file format. RTF was unique in its simple formatting control which allowed non-RTF aware programs like Microsoft Notepad to open and provide readable files. Today, most word processors have moved to XML-based file formats (Word has switched to the .docx file format). Regardless, these files contain large amounts of formatting code, so are often ten or more times larger than the corresponding plain text.

To be standard-compliant RTF, non-ASCII characters must be escaped. Thus, even with concise formatting, text that uses certain dashes and quotation marks is less legible. Latin languages with many diacritics are particularly difficult to read in RTF, as they result in substitutions like \&#x27;f1 for ñ and \&#x27;e9 for é. Non-Latin scripts are illegible in RTF — \u21563, for example, is used for 吻. From the beginning, RTF has also supported Microsoft OLE embedded objects and Macintosh Edition Manager subscriber objects, which are not human-readable.

==Common uses and interoperability==
Most word processing software support either RTF format importing and exporting for some RTF specification or direct editing, which makes it a &quot;common&quot; format between otherwise incompatible word processing software and operating systems. Most applications that read RTF files silently ignore unknown RTF control words. These factors contribute to its interoperability, though it is still dependent on the specific RTF version in use. There are several consciously designed or accidentally born RTF dialects.

RTF is the internal markup language used by Microsoft Word. Since 1987, RTF files have been able to be transferred back and forth between many old and new computer systems (and now over the Internet), despite differences between operating systems and their versions. This makes it a useful format for basic formatted text documents such as instruction manuals, résumés, letters, and modest information documents. These documents, at minimum, support bold, italic and underline text formatting. Also typically supported are left-, center- and right-aligned text, font specification and document margins.

Font and margin defaults, style presets and other functions vary according to program defaults. There may also be incompatibilities between different RTF versions, e.g. between RTF 1.0 1987 and later specifications, or between RTF 1.0–1.4 and RTF 1.5+ in use of Unicode characters. And though RTF supports metadata like title and author, not all implementations support this. Nevertheless, the RTF format is consistent enough to be considered highly portable and acceptable for cross-platform use.

===Objects===
Microsoft Object Linking and Embedding (OLE) objects and Macintosh Edition Manager subscriber objects allow embedding of other files inside the RTF, such as tables or charts from spreadsheet application. However, since these objects are not widely supported in programs for viewing or editing RTF files, they also limit RTF&#x27;s interoperability. If software that understands a particular OLE object is not available, the object is displayed using a picture of the object which is embedded along with it.

===Pictures===
RTF supports inclusion of JPEG, PNG, Enhanced Metafile (EMF), Windows Metafile (WMF), Apple PICT, Windows device-dependent bitmap, Windows device-independent bitmap and OS/2 Metafile picture types in hexadecimal (the default) or binary format in a RTF file. Not all of these picture types are supported in all RTF readers, however. When a RTF document is opened in software that does not support the picture type of an inserted picture, the picture is not displayed. RTF writers usually either convert an inserted picture in an unsupported picture type to one in a supported picture type, or do not include picture at all.

For better compatibility with Microsoft products, some RTF writers include the same picture in two different picture types in one RTF file: one supported picture type to display, and one uncompressed WMF copy of the original picture to improve compatibility with some Microsoft applications like Wordpad.

This method increases the RTF file size dramatically. The RTF specification does not require this method, and several implementations do not include the WMF copy (e.g. Abiword or Ted).

For Microsoft Word, it is also possible to set a specific registry value (&quot;ExportPictureWithMetafile=0&quot;) to prevent Word from saving the WMF copy.

===Fonts===
RTF supports embedding of fonts used in the document, but this feature is not widely supported in software implementations.

RTF also supports generic font family names used for font substitution: &quot;roman&quot; (serif), &quot;Swiss&quot; (sans-serif), &quot;modern&quot; (monospace), &quot;script&quot;, &quot;decorative&quot; and &quot;technical&quot;. This feature is not widely supported either.

===Annotations===
Since RTF 1.0, the RTF specification has supported document annotations/comments. The RTF 1.7 specification defined some new features for annotations, including the date stamp (there was previously only &quot;time stamp&quot;) and parents of annotations. When a RTF document with annotations is opened in an application that does not support RTF annotations, the annotations are not shown. Similarly, when a document with annotations is saved as RTF in an application that does not support RTF annotations, the annotations are not preserved in the RTF file. Some implementations, like Abiword (since version 2.8) and IBM Lotus Symphony (up to version 1.3), may hide annotations by default or require some user action to display them.

The RTF specification also supports footnotes, which are widely supported in RTF implementations (e.g. in OpenOffice.org, Abiword, KWord, Ted, but not in Wordpad). Endnotes are implemented as a variation on footnotes, so applications that support footnotes but not endnotes will render an endnote as a footnote.

Microsoft products do not support comments within footers, footnotes or headers. Similarly, Microsoft products do not support footnotes in headers, footers, or comments. Inserting a comment or a footnote in one of these disallowed contexts may result in a corrupted document.

===Drawing objects===
The RTF 1.2 specification defined use of drawing objects, known as shapes, such as rectangles, ellipses, lines, arrows and polygons. The RTF 1.5 specification introduced many new control words for drawing objects.

However, many RTF implementations, such as Apache OpenOffice, do not support drawing objects (though they are supported in LibreOffice 4.0 on) or Abiword. Applications which do not support RTF drawing objects do not display or save the shapes. Some implementations will also not display any text inside drawing objects.

===Security concerns===
Unlike Microsoft Word&#x27;s DOC format, as well as the newer Office Open XML and OpenDocument formats, RTF does not support macros. For this reason, RTF was often recommended over those formats when the spread of computer viruses through macros was a concern. However, having the .RTF extension does not guarantee a safe file, since Microsoft Word will open standard DOC files renamed with an RTF extension and run any contained macros as usual. Manual examination of a file in a plain text editor such as Notepad, or use of the codice_9 command in a UNIX-like systems, is required to determine whether or not a suspect file is really RTF. Enabling Word&#x27;s &quot;Confirm file format conversion on open&quot; option can also assist by warning a document being opened is in a format that does not match the format implied by the file&#x27;s extension, and giving the option to abort opening that file. One exploit attacking a vulnerability was patched in Microsoft Word in April 2015.

Since 2014 there have been malware RTF files embedding OpenXML exploits.

==Implementations==
Each RTF implementation usually implements only some versions or subsets of the RTF specification. Many of the available RTF converters cannot understand all new features in the latest RTF specifications.

The WordPad editor in Microsoft Windows creates RTF files by default. It once defaulted to the Microsoft Word 6.0 file format, but write support for Word documents (.doc) was dropped in a security update. Read support was also dropped in Windows 7. WordPad does not support some RTF features, such as headers and footers. However, WordPad can read and save many RTF features that it cannot create, including tables, strikeout, superscript, subscript, &quot;extra&quot; colors, text background colors, numbered lists, right or left indent, quasi-hypertext and URL linking, and various line spacings. RTF is also the data format for &quot;rich text controls&quot; in MS Windows APIs.

The default text editor for macOS, TextEdit, can also view, edit and save RTF files as well as RTFD files, and uses the format as its default. As of July 2009, TextEdit has limited ability to edit RTF document margins. Much older Mac word processing application programs such as MacWrite and WriteNow had the same RTF abilities as TextEdit has.

The following free and open-source word processors attempt to work with Microsoft&#x27;s RTF file format, see the criticism paragraph below. AbiWord, Apache OpenOffice, Bean, Calligra, Collabora Online and LibreOffice.

Scrivener uses individual RTF files for all the text files that make up a given &quot;project&quot;.

SIL International&#x27;s freeware application for developing and publishing dictionaries uses RTF as its most common form of document output. RTF files produced by Toolbox are designed to be used in Microsoft Word, but can also be used by other RTF-aware word processors.

RTF can be used on some ebook readers because of its interoperability, simplicity and low CPU processing requirements.

===Libraries and converters===

The open-source script rtf2xml can partially convert RTF to XML.

GNU UnRTF is an open-source program to convert RTF into HTML, LaTeX, troff macros and other formats. pyth is a Python library to create and convert documents in RTF, XHTML and PDF format. Ruby RTF is a project to create Rich Text content via Ruby. RaTFink is a library of Tcl routines, free software, to generate RTF output, and a Cost script to convert SGML to RTF. RTF::Writer is a Perl module for generating RTF documents. PHPRtfLite is an API enabling developers to create RTF documents with PHP. Pandoc is an open source document converter with multiple output formats, including RTF. RTFGen is a project to create RTF documents via pure PHP. rtf.js is a JavaScript based library to render RTF documents in HTML.

The macOS command line tool textutil can convert files between rtf, rtfd, text, doc, docx, wordml, odt and webarchive formats. The editor Ted can also convert RTF files to HTML and PS format.

==Criticism==

The Rich Text Format was the standard file format for text-based documents in applications developed for Microsoft Windows. Microsoft did not initially make the RTF specification publicly available, making it difficult for competitors to develop document conversion features in their applications. Because Microsoft&#x27;s developers had access to the specification, Microsoft&#x27;s applications had better compatibility with the format. Also, each time Microsoft changed the RTF specification, Microsoft&#x27;s own applications had a lead in time-to-market, because competitors had to redevelop their applications after studying the newer version of the format.

Novell alleged that Microsoft&#x27;s practices were anticompetitive in its 2004 antitrust complaint against Microsoft.

==See also==
*Rich Text Format Directory (&quot;.rtfd&quot; file type)
*Enriched text format
*List of document markup languages
*Comparison of document markup languages
*Revisable-Form Text (RFT), part of IBM&#x27;s Document Content Architecture (DCA)
*TNEF, Transport Neutral Encapsulation Format, the Microsoft Outlook default message format

==References==
==External links==
* RTF 1.9.1 specification, March 2008, from Microsoft
* RTF 1.9.1 specification, March 2008, via earlier download from Microsoft and Internet Archive
* RTF 1.8 specification, April 2004, from ysagnier.free.fr
* RTF 1.6 specification, May 1999, from Microsoft
* RTF 1.5 specification, April 1997, from biblioscape.com
* RTF 1.0, 1.2, 1.3, 1.5 and 1.7 specifications, from the RTF Tools open-source project
* RTF 1.0 specification, June 1992, from the latex2rtf open-source project
* &quot;RTF Pocket Guide&quot;, book homepage
* RTF Character Set to Code Page, last edited June 2017</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q467454" start="4" end="20" title="Rich Text Format" label="Rich Text Format"/>
<link wikidata="Q467454" start="40" end="43" title="Rich Text Format" label="RTF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720536" start="50" end="61" title="Proprietary format" label="proprietary"/>
<link wikidata="Q336705" start="62" end="82" title="document file format" label="document file format"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="125" end="146" title="Microsoft Corporation" label="Microsoft Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q174666" start="172" end="186" title="cross-platform" label="cross-platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q11261" start="323" end="337" title="Microsoft Word" label="Microsoft Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q11255" start="342" end="348" title="Microsoft Office" label="Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q54277" start="365" end="379" title="word processor" label="word processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379518" start="594" end="607" title="enriched text" label="enriched text"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287626" start="657" end="664" title="RFT-DCA" label="RFT-DCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274693" start="772" end="786" title="Richard Brodie (programmer)" label="Richard Brodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q49819" start="788" end="803" title="Charles Simonyi" label="Charles Simonyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11261" start="840" end="854" title="Microsoft Word" label="Microsoft Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="1011" end="1020" title="classic Mac OS" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q644542" start="1292" end="1303" title="Office 2007" label="Office 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q279979" start="1634" end="1647" title="ISO/IEC 29500" label="ISO/IEC 29500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144005" start="1698" end="1710" title="Windows Help" label="Windows Help"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023647" start="1761" end="1789" title="Microsoft Compiled HTML Help" label="Microsoft Compiled HTML Help"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="3052" end="3057" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366300" start="3082" end="3097" title="escape sequence" label="escape sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q184766" start="3157" end="3166" title="code page" label="code page"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="3203" end="3210" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q82828" start="3247" end="3258" title="hexadecimal" label="hexadecimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q436048" start="3292" end="3313" title="typewriter apostrophe" label="typewriter apostrophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q825466" start="3405" end="3417" title="Windows-1256" label="Windows-1256"/>
<link wikidata="Q286345" start="3809" end="3818" title="Shift-JIS" label="Shift-JIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853148" start="4854" end="4865" title="Unicode plane" label="outside BMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q740701" start="5073" end="5113" title="UTF-16" label="16-bit Unicode character encoding scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145976" start="5299" end="5309" title="plain text" label="plain text"/>
<link wikidata="Q37045" start="5641" end="5656" title="markup language" label="markup language"/>
<link wikidata="Q372222" start="5774" end="5788" title="human-readable" label="human-readable"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="5850" end="5859" title="diacritic" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q686498" start="6095" end="6099" title="Doc (computing)" label=".DOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q274098" start="6203" end="6220" title="Microsoft Notepad" label="Microsoft Notepad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079133" start="6348" end="6353" title=".docx" label=".docx"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="6705" end="6714" title="diacritic" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q476" start="6810" end="6811" title="ñ" label="ñ"/>
<link wikidata="Q9995" start="6830" end="6831" title="é" label="é"/>
<link wikidata="Q53764732" start="6908" end="6909" title="CJK characters" label="吻"/>
<link wikidata="Q848314" start="6964" end="6967" title="Object Linking and Embedding" label="OLE"/>
<link wikidata="Q749647" start="7464" end="7480" title="interoperability" label="interoperability"/>
<link wikidata="Q174666" start="8704" end="8718" title="cross-platform" label="cross-platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072083" start="9324" end="9340" title="Windows Metafile" label="Windows Metafile"/>
<link wikidata="Q29482" start="10182" end="10189" title="Wordpad" label="Wordpad"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003146" start="10561" end="10579" title="font embedding" label="embedding of fonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502674" start="10726" end="10743" title="font substitution" label="font substitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q243449" start="10764" end="10769" title="serif" label="serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q864011" start="10791" end="10801" title="sans-serif" label="sans-serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570349" start="10824" end="10833" title="monospaced font" label="monospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858086" start="12575" end="12592" title="Apache OpenOffice" label="Apache OpenOffice"/>
<link wikidata="Q10135" start="12655" end="12666" title="LibreOffice" label="LibreOffice"/>
<link wikidata="Q279979" start="12939" end="12954" title="Office Open XML" label="Office Open XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q184473" start="12959" end="12971" title="OpenDocument" label="OpenDocument"/>
<link wikidata="Q629579" start="13002" end="13007" title="Macro (computer science)" label="macro"/>
<link wikidata="Q274098" start="13384" end="13391" title="Notepad (Windows)" label="Notepad"/>
<link wikidata="Q181820" start="13407" end="13423" title="file (command)" label="codice_9 command"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="13429" end="13433" title="UNIX" label="UNIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q279979" start="13921" end="13928" title="OpenXML" label="OpenXML"/>
<link wikidata="Q29482" start="14170" end="14177" title="WordPad" label="WordPad"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="14877" end="14882" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q519774" start="14884" end="14892" title="TextEdit" label="TextEdit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430428" start="14944" end="14948" title="Rich Text Format Directory" label="RTFD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430257" start="15128" end="15136" title="MacWrite" label="MacWrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038394" start="15141" end="15149" title="WriteNow" label="WriteNow"/>
<link wikidata="Q136775" start="15336" end="15343" title="AbiWord" label="AbiWord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858086" start="15345" end="15362" title="Apache OpenOffice" label="Apache OpenOffice"/>
<link wikidata="Q585523" start="15364" end="15368" title="Bean (word processor)" label="Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q864680" start="15370" end="15378" title="Calligra" label="Calligra"/>
<link wikidata="Q30585118" start="15380" end="15396" title="Collabora Online" label="Collabora Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q10135" start="15401" end="15412" title="LibreOffice" label="LibreOffice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476481" start="15415" end="15424" title="Scrivener (software)" label="Scrivener"/>
<link wikidata="Q14793" start="15517" end="15534" title="SIL International" label="SIL International"/>
<link wikidata="Q11261" start="15716" end="15730" title="Microsoft Word" label="Microsoft Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="16119" end="16125" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q161053" start="16250" end="16254" title="Ruby (programming language)" label="Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="16392" end="16396" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="16504" end="16507" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049294" start="16509" end="16515" title="Pandoc" label="Pandoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="16651" end="16654" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="16668" end="16678" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q223407" start="17600" end="17606" title="Novell" label="Novell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430428" start="17734" end="17760" title="Rich Text Format Directory" label="Rich Text Format Directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379518" start="17792" end="17805" title="Enriched text" label="Enriched text"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867281" start="17814" end="17847" title="List of document markup languages" label="List of document markup languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155868" start="17849" end="17888" title="Comparison of document markup languages" label="Comparison of document markup languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287626" start="17890" end="17909" title="Revisable-Form Text" label="Revisable-Form Text"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601331" start="17973" end="17977" title="TNEF" label="TNEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q80911" start="18023" end="18040" title="Microsoft Outlook" label="Microsoft Outlook"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25740" wikidata="Q165557" url="?curid=25740" title="Robert E. Lee">
<text>Robert Edward Lee (January 19, 1807 – October 12, 1870) was a Confederate general during the American Civil War, who was appointed the overall commander of the Confederate States Army toward the end of the war. He led the Army of Northern Virginia, the Confederacy&#x27;s most powerful army, from 1862 until its surrender in 1865, earning a reputation as a skilled tactician.

A son of Revolutionary War officer Henry &quot;Light Horse Harry&quot; Lee III, Lee was a top graduate of the United States Military Academy and an exceptional officer and military engineer in the United States Army for 32 years. He served across the United States, distinguished himself extensively during the Mexican–American War, and was Superintendent of the United States Military Academy. He married Mary Anna Custis, great-granddaughter of George Washington&#x27;s wife Martha. While he opposed slavery from a philosophical perspective, he supported its legality and held hundreds of slaves. When Virginia declared its secession from the Union in 1861, Lee chose to follow his home state, despite his desire for the country to remain intact and an offer of a senior Union command. During the first year of the Civil War, he served in minor combat operations and as a senior military adviser to Confederate President Jefferson Davis.

Lee took command of the Army of Northern Virginia in June 1862 during the Peninsula Campaign following the wounding of Joseph E. Johnston. He succeeded in driving the Union Army of the Potomac under George B. McClellan away from the Confederate capital of Richmond during the Seven Days Battles, but he was unable to destroy McClellan&#x27;s army. Lee then overcame Union forces under John Pope at the Second Battle of Bull Run in August. His invasion of Maryland that September ended with the inconclusive Battle of Antietam, after which he retreated to Virginia. Lee won two major victories at Fredericksburg and Chancellorsville before launching a second invasion of the North in the summer of 1863, where he was decisively defeated at the Battle of Gettysburg by the Army of the Potomac under George Meade. He led his army in the minor and inconclusive Bristoe Campaign that fall before General Ulysses S. Grant took command of Union armies in the spring of 1864. Grant engaged Lee&#x27;s army in bloody but inconclusive battles at the Wilderness and Spotsylvania before the lengthy Siege of Petersburg, which was followed in April 1865 by the capture of Richmond and the destruction of most of Lee&#x27;s army, which he finally surrendered to Grant at Appomattox Court House.

In 1865, Lee became president of Washington College, now Washington and Lee University, in Lexington, Virginia; as president of the college, he supported reconciliation between the North and South. Lee accepted the termination of slavery provided for by the Thirteenth Amendment, but opposed racial equality for African Americans. After his death in 1870, Lee became a cultural icon in the South and is largely hailed as one of the Civil War&#x27;s greatest generals. As commander of the Army of Northern Virginia, he fought most of his battles against armies of significantly larger size, and managed to win many of them. Lee built up a collection of talented subordinates, most notably James Longstreet, Stonewall Jackson, and J. E. B. Stuart, who along with Lee were critical to the Confederacy&#x27;s battlefield success. In spite of his successes, his two major strategic offensives into Union territory both ended in failure. Lee&#x27;s aggressive and risky tactics, especially at Gettysburg, which resulted in high casualties at a time when the Confederacy had a shortage of manpower, have come under criticism. His legacy, and his views on race and slavery, have been the subject of continuing debate and historical controversy.

==Early life and education==

Lee was born at Stratford Hall Plantation in Westmoreland County, Virginia, to Henry Lee III and Anne Hill Carter Lee on January 19, 1807. His ancestor, Richard Lee I, emigrated from Shropshire, England, to Virginia in 1639.

Lee&#x27;s father suffered severe financial reverses from failed investments and was put in debtors&#x27; prison. Soon after his release the following year, the family moved to the city of Alexandria which at the time was still part of the District of Columbia, which retroceded back to Virginia in 1847, both because there were then high quality local schools there, and because several members of Anne&#x27;s extended family lived nearby. In 1811, the family, including the newly born sixth child, Mildred, moved to a house on Oronoco Street.

In 1812 Lee&#x27;s father moved permanently to the West Indies. Lee attended Eastern View, a school for young gentlemen, in Fauquier County, Virginia, and then at the Alexandria Academy, free for local boys, where he showed an aptitude for mathematics. Although brought up to be a practicing Christian, he was not confirmed in the Episcopal Church until age 46.

Anne Lee&#x27;s family was often supported by a relative, William Henry Fitzhugh, who owned the Oronoco Street house and allowed the Lees to stay at his country home Ravensworth. Fitzhugh wrote to United States Secretary of War, John C. Calhoun, urging that Robert be given an appointment to the United States Military Academy at West Point. Fitzhugh had young Robert deliver the letter. Lee entered West Point in the summer of 1825. At the time, the focus of the curriculum was engineering; the head of the United States Army Corps of Engineers supervised the school and the superintendent was an engineering officer. Cadets were not permitted leave until they finished two years of study and were rarely allowed off the academy grounds. Lee graduated second in his class behind Charles Mason (who resigned from the Army a year after graduation). Lee did not incur any demerits during his four-year course of study, a distinction shared by only five of his 45 classmates. In June 1829, Lee was commissioned a brevet second lieutenant in the Corps of Engineers. After graduation, while awaiting assignment, he returned to Virginia to find his mother on her deathbed; she died at Ravensworth on July 26, 1829.

==Military engineer career==

On August 11, 1829, Brigadier General Charles Gratiot ordered Lee to Cockspur Island, Georgia. The plan was to build a fort on the marshy island which would command the outlet of the Savannah River. Lee was involved in the early stages of construction as the island was being drained and built up. In 1831, it became apparent that the existing plan to build what became known as Fort Pulaski would have to be revamped, and Lee was transferred to Fort Monroe at the tip of the Virginia Peninsula (today in Hampton, Virginia).

While home in the summer of 1829, Lee had apparently courted Mary Custis whom he had known as a child. Lee obtained permission to write to her before leaving for Georgia, though Mary Custis warned Lee to be &quot;discreet&quot; in his writing, as her mother read her letters, especially from men. Custis refused Lee the first time he asked to marry her; her father did not believe the son of the disgraced Light-Horse Harry Lee was a suitable man for his daughter. She accepted him with her father&#x27;s consent in September 1830, while he was on summer leave, and the two were wed on June 30, 1831.

Lee&#x27;s duties at Fort Monroe were varied, typical for a junior officer, and ranged from budgeting to designing buildings. Although Mary Lee accompanied her husband to Hampton Roads, she spent about a third of her time at Arlington, though the couple&#x27;s first son, Custis Lee was born at Fort Monroe. Although the two were by all accounts devoted to each other, they were different in character: Robert Lee was tidy and punctual, qualities his wife lacked. Mary Lee also had trouble switching from being a rich man&#x27;s daughter to having to manage a household with only one or two enslaved people. Beginning in 1832, Robert Lee had a close but platonic relationship with Harriett Talcott, wife of his fellow officer Andrew Talcott.

Life at Fort Monroe was marked by conflicts between artillery and engineering officers. Eventually, the War Department transferred all engineering officers away from Fort Monroe, except Lee, who was ordered to take up residence on the artificial island of Rip Raps across the river from Fort Monroe, where Fort Wool would eventually rise, and continue work to improve the island. Lee duly moved there, then discharged all workers and informed the War Department he could not maintain laborers without the facilities of the fort.
In 1834, Lee was transferred to Washington as General Gratiot&#x27;s assistant. Lee had hoped to rent a house in Washington for his family, but was not able to find one; the family lived at Arlington, though Lieutenant Lee rented a room at a Washington boarding house for when the roads were impassable. In mid-1835, Lee was assigned to assist Andrew Talcott in surveying the southern border of Michigan. While on that expedition, he responded to a letter from an ill Mary Lee, which had requested he come to Arlington, &quot;But why do you urge my &quot;immediate&quot; return, &amp; tempt one in the &quot;strongest&quot; manner[?]... I rather require to be strengthened &amp; encouraged to the &quot;full&quot; performance of what I am called on to execute.&quot; Lee completed the assignment and returned to his post in Washington, finding his wife ill at Ravensworth. Mary Lee, who had recently given birth to their second child, remained bedridden for several months. In October 1836, Lee was promoted to first lieutenant.

Lee served as an assistant in the chief engineer&#x27;s office in Washington, D.C. from 1834 to 1837, but spent the summer of 1835 helping to lay out the state line between Ohio and Michigan, in the company of Lt. Washington Hood. As a first lieutenant of engineers in 1837, he supervised the engineering work for St. Louis harbor and for the upper Mississippi and Missouri rivers. Among his projects was the mapping of the Des Moines Rapids on the Mississippi above Keokuk, Iowa, where the Mississippi&#x27;s mean depth of was the upper limit of steamboat traffic on the river. His work there earned him a promotion to captain. Around 1842, Captain Robert E. Lee arrived as Fort Hamilton&#x27;s post engineer.

==Marriage and family==

While Lee was stationed at Fort Monroe, he married Mary Anna Randolph Custis (1807–1873), great-granddaughter of Martha Washington by her first husband Daniel Parke Custis, and step-great-granddaughter of George Washington, the first president of the United States. Mary was the only surviving child of George Washington Parke Custis, George Washington&#x27;s stepgrandson, and Mary Lee Fitzhugh Custis, daughter of William Fitzhugh and Ann Bolling Randolph. Robert and Mary married on June 30, 1831, at Arlington House, her parents&#x27; house just across the Potomac from Washington. The 3rd U.S. Artillery served as honor guard at the marriage. They eventually had seven children, three boys and four girls:

# George Washington Custis Lee (Custis, &quot;Boo&quot;); 1832–1913; served as major general in the Confederate Army and aide-de-camp to President Jefferson Davis, captured during the Battle of Sailor&#x27;s Creek; unmarried
# Mary Custis Lee (Mary, &quot;Daughter&quot;); 1835–1918; unmarried
# William Henry Fitzhugh Lee (&quot;Rooney&quot;); 1837–1891; served as major general in the Confederate Army (cavalry); married twice; surviving children by second marriage
# Anne Carter Lee (Annie); June 18, 1839 – October 20, 1862; died of typhoid fever, unmarried
# Eleanor Agnes Lee (Agnes); 1841 – October 15, 1873; died of tuberculosis, unmarried
# Robert Edward Lee, Jr. (Rob); 1843–1914; served in the Confederate Army, first as a private in the Rockbridge Artillery, later as a Captain on the staff of his brother Rooney; married twice; surviving children by second marriage
# Mildred Childe Lee (Milly, &quot;Precious Life&quot;); 1846–1905; unmarried

All the children survived him except for Annie, who died in 1862. They are all buried with their parents in the crypt of the University Chapel at Washington and Lee University in Lexington, Virginia.

Lee was a great-great-great-grandson of William Randolph and a great-great-grandson of Richard Bland. Fitzhugh Lee (1835–1905), a Confederate general and later a United States Army general in the Spanish–American War, was Lee&#x27;s nephew. Lee was a second cousin of Helen Keller&#x27;s grandmother, and was a distant relative of Admiral Willis Augustus Lee.

On May 1, 1864, General Lee was present at the baptism of General A. P. Hill&#x27;s daughter, Lucy Lee Hill, to serve as her godfather. This is referenced in the painting &quot;Tender is the Heart&quot; by Mort Künstler. He was also the godfather of actress and writer Odette Tyler, the daughter of Brigadier General William Whedbee Kirkland.

==Mexican–American War==
Lee distinguished himself in the Mexican–American War (1846–1848). He was one of Winfield Scott&#x27;s chief aides in the march from Veracruz to Mexico City. He was instrumental in several American victories through his personal reconnaissance as a staff officer; he found routes of attack that the Mexicans had not defended because they thought the terrain was impassable.

He was promoted to brevet major after the Battle of Cerro Gordo on April 18, 1847. He also fought at Contreras, Churubusco, and Chapultepec and was wounded at the last. By the end of the war, he had received additional brevet promotions to lieutenant colonel and colonel, but his permanent rank was still captain of engineers, and he would remain a captain until his transfer to the cavalry in 1855.

For the first time, Robert E. Lee and Ulysses S. Grant met and worked with each other during the Mexican–American War. Close observations of their commanders constituted a learning process for both Lee and Grant. The Mexican–American War concluded on February 2, 1848.

After the Mexican War, Lee spent three years at Fort Carroll in Baltimore harbor. During this time, his service was interrupted by other duties, among them surveying and updating maps in Florida. Cuban revolutionary Narciso López intended to forcibly liberate Cuba from Spanish rule. In 1849, searching for a leader for his filibuster expedition, he approached Jefferson Davis, then a United States senator. Davis declined and suggested Lee, who also declined. Both decided it was inconsistent with their duties.

==Early 1850s: West Point and Texas==
The 1850s were a difficult time for Lee, with his long absences from home, the increasing disability of his wife, troubles in taking over the management of a large slave plantation, and his often morbid concern with his personal failures.

In 1852, Lee was appointed Superintendent of the Military Academy at West Point. He was reluctant to enter what he called a &quot;snake pit&quot;, but the War Department insisted and he obeyed. His wife occasionally came to visit. During his three years at West Point, Brevet Colonel Robert E. Lee improved the buildings and courses and spent much time with the cadets. Lee&#x27;s oldest son, George Washington Custis Lee, attended West Point during his tenure. Custis Lee graduated in 1854, first in his class.

Lee was enormously relieved to receive a long-awaited promotion as second-in-command of the 2nd Cavalry Regiment in Texas in 1855. It meant leaving the Engineering Corps and its sequence of staff jobs for the combat command he truly wanted. He served under Colonel Albert Sidney Johnston at Camp Cooper, Texas; their mission was to protect settlers from attacks by the Apache and the Comanche.

==Late 1850s: Arlington plantation and the Custis slaves==

In 1857, his father-in-law George Washington Parke Custis died, creating a serious crisis when Lee took on the burden of executing the will. Custis&#x27;s estate encompassed vast landholdings and hundreds of slaves but also massive debts; the will required people formerly enslaved by Custis &quot;to be emancipated by my executors in such manner as to my executors may seem most expedient and proper, the said emancipation to be accomplished in not exceeding five years from the time of my decease&quot;. The estate was in disarray, and the plantations had been poorly managed and were losing money.
Lee tried to hire an overseer to handle the plantation in his absence, writing to his cousin, &quot;I wish to get an energetic honest farmer, who while he will be considerate &amp; kind to the negroes, will be firm &amp; make them do their duty.&quot; But Lee failed to find a man for the job, and had to take a two-year leave of absence from the army to run the plantation himself.

Lee&#x27;s more strict expectations and harsher punishments of the slaves on Arlington plantation nearly led to a revolt, since many of the enslaved people had been given to understand that they were to be made free as soon as Custis died, and protested angrily at the delay. In May 1858, Lee wrote to his son Rooney, &quot;I have had some trouble with some of the people. Reuben, Parks &amp; Edward, in the beginning of the previous week, rebelled against my authority—refused to obey my orders, &amp; said they were as free as I was, etc., etc.—I succeeded in capturing them &amp; lodging them in jail. They resisted till overpowered &amp; called upon the other people to rescue them.&quot; Less than two months after they were sent to the Alexandria jail, Lee decided to remove these three men and three female house slaves from Arlington, and sent them under lock and key to the slave-trader William Overton Winston in Richmond, who was instructed to keep them in jail until he could find &quot;good &amp; responsible&quot; enslavers to work them until the end of the five-year period.

By 1860, only one family of slaves was left intact on the estate. Some of the families had been together since their time at Mount Vernon.

===The Norris case===
In 1859, three slaves at Arlington—Wesley Norris, his sister Mary, and a cousin of theirs—fled for the North, but were captured a few miles from the Pennsylvania border and forced to return to the plantation. On June 24, 1859, the anti-slavery newspaper &quot;New York Daily Tribune&quot; published two anonymous letters (dated June 19 and June 21), each claiming to have heard that Lee had the Norrises whipped, and that the overseer refused to whip the woman but that Lee took the whip and flogged her personally. Lee privately wrote to his son Custis that &quot;The N. Y. Tribune has attacked me for my treatment of your grandfather&#x27;s slaves, but I shall not reply. He has left me an unpleasant legacy.&quot;

Wesley Norris himself spoke out about the incident after the war, in an 1866 interview printed in an abolitionist newspaper, the &quot;National Anti-Slavery Standard&quot;. Norris said that after they had been captured, and forced to return to Arlington, Lee told them that &quot;he would teach us a lesson we would not soon forget&quot;. According to Norris, Lee had the overseer tie the three of them firmly to posts, and ordered them whipped: 50 lashes for the men and 20 for Mary Norris. Norris claimed that Lee encouraged the whipping, and that when the overseer refused to do it, called in the county constable to do it instead. Unlike the anonymous letter writers, he does not state that Lee himself whipped any of the enslaved people. According to Norris, Lee &quot;frequently enjoined [Constable] Williams to &#x27;lay it on well&#x27;, an injunction which he did not fail to heed; not satisfied with simply lacerating our naked flesh, Gen. Lee then ordered the overseer to thoroughly wash our backs with brine, which was done.&quot;

The Norris men were then sent by Lee&#x27;s agent to work on the railroads in Virginia and Alabama. According to the interview, Norris was sent to Richmond in January 1863 &quot;from which place I finally made my escape through the rebel lines to freedom&quot;. But Federal authorities reported that Norris came within their lines on September 5, 1863, and that he &quot;left Richmond ..with a pass from General Custis Lee.&quot; Lee freed the people enslaved by Custis, including Wesley Norris, after the end of the five-year period in the winter of 1862, filing the deed of manumission on December 29, 1862.

Biographers of Lee have differed over the credibility of the account of the punishment as described in the letters in the &quot;Tribune&quot; and in Norris&#x27;s personal account. They broadly agree that Lee sought to recapture a group of slaves who had escaped, and that, after recapturing them, he hired them out off of the Arlington plantation as a punishment; however, they disagree over the likelihood that Lee flogged them, and over the charge that he personally whipped Mary Norris. In 1934, Douglas S. Freeman described the incident as &quot;Lee&#x27;s first experience with the extravagance of irresponsible antislavery agitators&quot; and asserted that &quot;There is no evidence, direct or indirect, that Lee ever had them or any other Negroes flogged. The usage at Arlington and elsewhere in Virginia among people of Lee&#x27;s station forbade such a thing.&quot;

In 2000, Michael Fellman, in &quot;The Making of Robert E. Lee&quot;, found the claims that Lee had personally whipped Mary Norris &quot;extremely unlikely&quot;, but found it not at all unlikely that Lee had ordered the runaways whipped: &quot;corporal punishment (for which Lee substituted the euphemism &quot;firmness&quot;) was [believed to be] an intrinsic and necessary part of slave discipline. Although it was supposed to be applied only in a calm and rational manner, overtly physical domination of slaves, unchecked by law, was always brutal and potentially savage.&quot;

Lee biographer Elizabeth Brown Pryor concluded in 2008 that &quot;the facts are verifiable&quot;, based on &quot;the consistency of the five extant descriptions of the episode (the only element that is not repeatedly corroborated is the allegation that Lee gave the beatings himself), as well as the existence of an account book that indicates the constable received compensation from Lee on the date that this event occurred&quot;.

In 2014, Michael Korda wrote that &quot;Although these letters are dismissed by most of Lee&#x27;s biographers as exaggerated, or simply as unfounded abolitionist propaganda, it is hard to ignore them [...] It seems incongruously out of character for Lee to have whipped a slave woman himself, particularly one stripped to the waist, and that charge may have been a flourish added by the two correspondents; it was not repeated by Wesley Norris when his account of the incident was published in 1866 [...] [A]lthough it seems unlikely that he would have done any of the whipping himself, he may not have flinched from observing it to make sure his orders were carried out exactly.&quot;

===Lee&#x27;s views on race and slavery===
Several historians have noted what they consider the contradictory nature of Lee&#x27;s beliefs and actions concerning race and slavery. While Lee protested he had sympathetic feelings for blacks, they were subordinate to his own racial identity. While Lee held slavery to be an evil institution, he also saw some benefit to blacks held in slavery. While Lee helped assist individual slaves reach freedom in Liberia, and provided for their emancipation in his own will, he believed slaves should be eventually freed in a general way only at some unspecified future date as a part of God&#x27;s purpose. Slavery for Lee was a moral and religious issue, and not one that would yield to political solutions. Emancipation would sooner come from Christian impulse among slave masters before &quot;storms and tempests of fiery controversy&quot; such as was occurring in &quot;Bleeding Kansas&quot;. Countering Southerners who argued for slavery as a positive good, Lee in his well-known analysis of slavery from an 1856 letter (&quot;see below&quot;) called it a moral and political evil. While both Lee and his wife were disgusted with slavery, they also defended it against abolitionist demands for immediate emancipation for all enslaved.

Lee argued that slavery was bad for white people, claiming that he found slavery bothersome and time-consuming as an everyday institution to run. In an 1856 letter to his wife, he maintained that slavery was a great evil, but primarily due to adverse impact that it had on white people:

Before leaving to serve in Mexico, Lee had written a will providing for the manumission of the slaves he owned, &quot;a woman and her children inherited from his mother and apparently leased to his father-in-law and later sold to him&quot;. Lee&#x27;s father-in-law, G. W. Parke Custis, was a member of the American Colonization Society, which was formed to gradually end slavery by establishing a free republic in Liberia for African-Americans, and Lee assisted several formerly enslaved people to emigrate there. Also, according to historian Richard B. McCaslin, Lee was a gradual emancipationist, denouncing extremist proposals for the immediate abolition of slavery. Lee rejected what he called evilly motivated political passion, fearing a civil and servile war from precipitous emancipation.

Historian Elizabeth Brown Pryor offered an alternative interpretation of Lee&#x27;s voluntary manumission of slaves in his will, and assisting slaves to a life of freedom in Liberia, seeing Lee as conforming to a &quot;primacy of slave law&quot;. She wrote that Lee&#x27;s private views on race and slavery,
: &quot;which today seem startling, were entirely unremarkable in Lee&#x27;s world. No visionary, Lee nearly always tried to conform to accepted opinions. His assessment of black inferiority, of the necessity of racial stratification, the primacy of slave law, and even a divine sanction for it all, was in keeping with the prevailing views of other moderate slaveholders and a good many prominent Northerners.&quot;

In 1857, George Custis died, leaving Robert Lee as the executor of his estate, which included nearly 200 slaves. In his will, Custis said the enslaved people were to be freed within five years of his death. On taking on the role of administrator for the Parke Custis will, Lee used a provision to retain them in slavery to produce income for the estate to retire debt. Lee did not welcome the role of planter while administering the Custis properties at Romancoke, another nearby the Pamunkey River and Arlington; he rented the estate&#x27;s mill. While all the estates prospered under his administration, Lee was unhappy at direct participation in slavery as a hated institution.

Even before what Michael Fellman called a &quot;sorry involvement in actual slave management&quot;, Lee judged the experience of white mastery to be a greater moral evil to the white man than blacks suffering under the &quot;painful discipline&quot; of slavery which introduced Christianity, literacy and a work ethic to the &quot;heathen African&quot;. Columbia University historian Eric Foner notes that:
: Lee &quot;was not a pro-slavery ideologue. But I think equally important is that, unlike some white southerners, he never spoke out against slavery&quot;
By the time of Lee&#x27;s career in the U.S. Army, the officers of West Point stood aloof from political-party and sectional strife on such issues as slavery, as a matter of principle, and Lee adhered to the precedent. He considered it his patriotic duty to be apolitical while in active Army service, and Lee did not speak out publicly on the subject of slavery prior to the Civil War. Before the outbreak of the War, in 1860, Lee voted for Southern Democratic nominee and incumbent Vice President John C. Breckinridge, who was the pro-slavery candidate in the 1860 presidential election and had supported the Lecompton Constitution for Kansas, rather than Constitutional Union Party nominee John Bell, the Southern Unionist candidate who won Virginia and voted against the admission of Kansas under the Lecompton Constitution as the United States Senator from Tennessee.

Lee himself enslaved a small number of people in his lifetime and considered himself a paternalistic master. There are various historical and newspaper hearsay accounts of Lee&#x27;s personally whipping a slave, but they are not direct eyewitness accounts. He was definitely involved in administering the day-to-day operations of a plantation and was involved in the recapture of runaway slaves. One historian noted that Lee separated families of enslaved people, something that prominent enslaving families in Virginia such as Washington and Custis did not do. On December 29, 1862, the last day he was allowed to legally retain them, Lee finally freed all the enslaved people his wife had inherited from George Custis (in accordance with the Custis will). Before this, Lee had petitioned the courts to keep people enslaved by Custis longer than the five years allotted in Custis&#x27; will, since the estate was still in debt, but the courts rejected his appeals. In 1866, one of the people formerly enslaved by Lee, Wesley Norris, charged that Lee personally beat him and other slaves harshly after they had tried to run away from Arlington. Lee never publicly responded to this charge, but privately told a friend &quot;There is not a word of truth in it ... No servant, soldier, or citizen, that was ever employed by me can with truth charge me with bad treatment.&quot;

Foner writes that &quot;Lee&#x27;s code of gentlemanly conduct did not seem to apply to blacks&quot; during the War. He did not stop his soldiers from kidnapping free black farmers and selling them into slavery. Princeton University historian James M. McPherson noted that Lee initially rejected a prisoner exchange between the Confederacy and the Union when the Union demanded that black Union soldiers be included. Lee did not accept the swap until a few months before the Confederacy&#x27;s surrender. He also called the Emancipation Proclamation &quot;a savage and brutal policy...which leaves us no alternative but success or degradation worse than death&quot;.

As the war dragged on and Lee&#x27;s losses mounted, he eventually advocated enlisting enslaved people in the Confederate army in exchange for freedom. However, he came to this position with great reluctance. In an 1865 letter to his friend Andrew Hunter, he wrote: &quot;Considering the relation of master and slave, controlled by humane laws and influenced by Christianity and an enlightened public sentiment, as the best that can exist between the white and black races while intermingled as at present in this country, I would deprecate any sudden disturbance of that relation unless it be necessary to avert a greater calamity to both. I should therefore prefer to rely upon our white population to preserve the ratio between our forces and those of the enemy, which experience has shown to be safe. But in view of the preparations of our enemies, it is our duty to provide for continued war and not for a battle or a campaign, and I fear that we cannot accomplish this without overtaxing the capacity of our white population.&quot;

After the War, Lee told a congressional committee that blacks were &quot;not disposed to work&quot; and did not possess the intellectual capacity to vote and participate in politics. Lee also said to the committee that he hoped that Virginia could &quot;get rid of them&quot;, referring to blacks. While not politically active, Lee defended Lincoln&#x27;s successor Andrew Johnson&#x27;s approach to Reconstruction, which according to Foner, &quot;abandoned the former slaves to the mercy of governments controlled by their former owners&quot;. According to Foner, &quot;A word from Lee might have encouraged white Southerners to accord blacks equal rights and inhibited the violence against the freed people that swept the region during Reconstruction, but he chose to remain silent.&quot; Lee was also urged to condemn the white-supremacy organization Ku Klux Klan, but opted to remain silent.

In the generation following the war, Lee, though he died just a few years later, became a central figure in the Lost Cause interpretation of the war. The argument that Lee had always opposed slavery, and freed the people enslaved by his wife, helped maintain his stature as a symbol of Southern honor and national reconciliation.

==Harpers Ferry and return to Texas, 1859–1861==
Both Harpers Ferry and the secession of Texas were monumental events leading up to the Civil War. Robert E. Lee was at both events. Lee initially remained loyal to the Union after Texas seceded.

===Harpers Ferry===
John Brown led a band of 21 abolitionists who seized the federal arsenal at Harpers Ferry, Virginia, in October 1859, hoping to incite a slave rebellion. President James Buchanan gave Lee command of detachments of militia, soldiers, and United States Marines, to suppress the uprising and arrest its leaders. By the time Lee arrived that night, the militia on the site had surrounded Brown and his hostages. At dawn, Brown refused the demand for surrender. Lee attacked, and Brown and his followers were captured after three minutes of fighting. Lee&#x27;s summary report of the episode shows Lee believed it &quot;was the attempt of a fanatic or madman&quot;. Lee said Brown achieved &quot;temporary success&quot; by creating panic and confusion and by &quot;magnifying&quot; the number of participants involved in the raid.

===Texas===
In 1860, Lt. Col. Robert E. Lee relieved Major Heintzelman at Fort Brown, and the Mexican authorities offered to restrain &quot;their citizens from making predatory descents upon the territory and people of Texas ... this was the last active operation of the Cortina War&quot;. Rip Ford, a Texas Ranger at the time, described Lee as &quot;dignified without hauteur, grand without pride ... he evinced an imperturbable self-possession, and a complete control of his passions ... possessing the capacity to accomplish great ends and the gift of controlling and leading men&quot;.

When Texas seceded from the Union in February 1861, General David E. Twiggs surrendered all the American forces (about 4,000 men, including Lee, and commander of the Department of Texas) to the Texans. Twiggs immediately resigned from the U.S. Army and was made a Confederate general. Lee went back to Washington and was appointed Colonel of the First Regiment of Cavalry in March 1861. Lee&#x27;s colonelcy was signed by the new president, Abraham Lincoln. Three weeks after his promotion, Colonel Lee was offered a senior command (with the rank of Major General) in the expanding Army to fight the Southern States that had left the Union. Fort Mason, Texas, was Lee&#x27;s last command with the United States Army.

==Civil War==
===Resignation from United States Army===

Unlike many Southerners who expected a glorious war, Lee correctly predicted it as protracted and devastating. He privately opposed the new Confederate States of America in letters in early 1861, denouncing secession as &quot;nothing but revolution&quot; and an unconstitutional betrayal of the efforts of the Founding Fathers. Writing to George Washington Custis in January, Lee stated:
Despite opposing secession, Lee said in January that &quot;we can with a clear conscience separate&quot; if all peaceful means failed. He agreed with secessionists in most areas, rejecting the Northern abolitionists&#x27; criticisms and their prevention of the expansion of slavery to the new western territories, and fear of the North&#x27;s larger population. Lee supported the Crittenden Compromise, which would have constitutionally protected slavery.

Lee&#x27;s objection to secession was ultimately outweighed by a sense of personal honor, reservations about the legitimacy of a strife-ridden &quot;Union that can only be maintained by swords and bayonets&quot;, and his duty to defend his native Virginia if attacked. He was asked while leaving Texas by a lieutenant if he intended to fight for the Confederacy or the Union, to which Lee replied, &quot;I shall never bear arms against the Union, but it may be necessary for me to carry a musket in the defense of my native state, Virginia, in which case I shall not prove recreant to my duty&quot;.

Although Virginia had the most slaves of any state, it was more similar to Maryland, which stayed in the Union, than to the Deep South; a convention voted against secession in early 1861. Winfield Scott, commanding general of the Union Army and Lee&#x27;s mentor, told Lincoln he wanted him for a top command, telling Secretary of War Simon Cameron that he had &quot;entire confidence&quot; in Lee. Lee accepted a promotion to colonel of the 1st Cavalry Regiment on March 28, again swearing an oath to the United States. Meanwhile, Lee ignored an offer of command from the Confederacy. After Lincoln&#x27;s call for troops to put down the rebellion, a second Virginia convention in Richmond voted to secede on April 17, and a May 23 referendum would likely ratify the decision. That night Lee dined with brother Smith and cousin Phillips, naval officers. Because of Lee&#x27;s indecision, Phillips went to the War Department the next morning to warn that the Union might lose his cousin if the government did not act quickly.

In Washington that day, Lee was offered by presidential advisor Francis P. Blair a role as major general to command the defense of the national capital. He replied:
Lee immediately went to Scott, who tried to persuade him that Union forces would be large enough to prevent the South from fighting, so he would not have to oppose his state; Lee disagreed. When Lee asked if he could go home and not fight, the fellow Virginian said that the army did not need equivocal soldiers and that if he wanted to resign, he should do so before receiving official orders. Scott told him that Lee had made &quot;the greatest mistake of your life&quot;.

Lee agreed that to avoid dishonor he had to resign before receiving unwanted orders. While historians have usually called his decision inevitable (&quot;the answer he was born to make&quot;, wrote Douglas Southall Freeman; another called it a &quot;no-brainer&quot;) given the ties to family and state, an 1871 letter from his eldest daughter, Mary Custis Lee, to a biographer described Lee as &quot;worn and harassed&quot; yet calm as he deliberated alone in his office. People on the street noticed Lee&#x27;s grim face as he tried to decide over the next two days, and he later said that he kept the resignation letter for a day before sending it on April 20. Two days later the Richmond convention invited Lee to the city. It elected him as commander of Virginia state forces before his arrival on April 23, and almost immediately gave him George Washington&#x27;s sword as symbol of his appointment; whether he was told of a decision he did not want without time to decide, or did want the excitement and opportunity of command, is unclear.

A cousin on Scott&#x27;s staff told the family that Lee&#x27;s decision so upset Scott that he collapsed on a sofa and mourned as if he had lost a son, and asked not to hear Lee&#x27;s name. When Lee told family his decision, he said &quot;I suppose you will all think I have done very wrong&quot;, as the others were mostly pro-Union; only Mary Custis was a secessionist, and her mother especially wanted to choose the Union, but told her husband that she would support whatever he decided. Many younger men like nephew Fitzhugh wanted to support the Confederacy, but Lee&#x27;s three sons joined the Confederate military only after their father&#x27;s decision.

Most family members, like brother Smith, also reluctantly chose the South, but Smith&#x27;s wife and Anne, Lee&#x27;s sister, still supported the Union; Anne&#x27;s son joined the Union Army, and no one in his family ever spoke to Lee again. Many cousins fought for the Confederacy, but Phillips and John Fitzgerald told Lee in person that they would uphold their oaths; John H. Upshur stayed with the Union military despite much family pressure; Roger Jones stayed in the Union army after Lee refused to advise him on what to do; and two of Philip Fendall&#x27;s sons fought for the Union. Forty percent of Virginian officers stayed with the North.

===Early role===
At the outbreak of war, Lee was appointed to command all of Virginia&#x27;s forces, which then encompassed the Provisional Army of Virginia and the Virginia State Navy. He was appointed a Major General by the Virginia Governor, but upon the formation of the Confederate States Army, he was named one of its first five full generals. Lee did not wear the insignia of a Confederate general, but only the three stars of a Confederate colonel, equivalent to his last U.S. Army rank. He did not intend to wear a general&#x27;s insignia until the Civil War had been won and he could be promoted, in peacetime, to general in the Confederate Army.

Lee&#x27;s first field assignment was commanding Confederate forces in western Virginia, where he was defeated at the Battle of Cheat Mountain and was widely blamed for Confederate setbacks. He was then sent to organize the coastal defenses along the Carolina and Georgia seaboard, appointed commander, &quot;Department of South Carolina, Georgia and Florida&quot; on November 5, 1861. Between then and the fall of Fort Pulaski, April 11, 1862, he put in place a defense of Savannah that proved successful in blocking Federal advance on Savannah. Confederate fort and naval gunnery dictated nighttime movement and construction by the besiegers. Federal preparations required four months. In those four months, Lee developed a defense in depth. Behind Fort Pulaski on the Savannah River, Fort Jackson was improved, and two additional batteries covered river approaches. In the face of the Union superiority in naval, artillery and infantry deployment, Lee was able to block any Federal advance on Savannah, and at the same time, well-trained Georgia troops were released in time to meet McClellan&#x27;s Peninsula Campaign. The city of Savannah would not fall until Sherman&#x27;s approach from the interior at the end of 1864.

At first, the press spoke to the disappointment of losing Fort Pulaski. Surprised by the effectiveness of large caliber Parrott Rifles in their first deployment, it was widely speculated that only betrayal could have brought overnight surrender to a Third System Fort. Lee was said to have failed to get effective support in the Savannah River from the three sidewheeler gunboats of the Georgia Navy. Although again blamed by the press for Confederate reverses, he was appointed military adviser to Confederate President Jefferson Davis, the former U.S. Secretary of War. While in Richmond, Lee was ridiculed as the &#x27;King of Spades&#x27; for his excessive digging of trenches around the capitol. These trenches would later play a pivotal role in battles near the end of the war.

===Army of Northern Virginia commander (June 1862 – June 1863)===
In the spring of 1862, during the Peninsula Campaign, the Union Army of the Potomac under General George B. McClellan advanced on Richmond from Fort Monroe. Progressing up the Peninsula, McClellan forced Gen. Joseph E. Johnston and the Army of Virginia to retreat to a point just north and east of the Confederate capital.

Johnston was wounded at the Battle of Seven Pines, on June 1, 1862, giving Lee his first opportunity to lead an army in the field – the force he renamed the Army of &quot;Northern&quot; Virginia, signalling confidence that the Union army could be driven away from Richmond. Early in the war, Lee had been called &quot;Granny Lee&quot; for his allegedly timid style of command. Confederate newspaper editorials objected to him replacing Johnston, opining that Lee would be passive, waiting for Union attack. This seemed true, initially; for the first three weeks of June, Lee did not show aggression, instead strengthening Richmond&#x27;s defenses.

However, on June 25, he surprised the Army of the Potomac and launched a rapid series of bold attacks: the Seven Days Battles. Despite superior Union numbers and some clumsy tactical performances by his subordinates, Lee&#x27;s attacks derailed McClellan&#x27;s plans and drove back most of his forces. Confederate casualties were heavy, but an unnerved McClellan, famed for his caution, retreated to the lower James River, and abandoned the Peninsula completely in August. This success changed Confederate morale and the public&#x27;s regard for Lee. After the Seven Days Battles, and until the end of the war, his men called him &quot;Marse Robert&quot;, a term of respect and affection.

The setback, and the resulting drop in Union morale, impelled Lincoln to adopt a new policy of relentless, committed warfare. After the Seven Days, Lincoln decided he had to move to emancipate most Confederate slaves by executive order, as a military act, using his authority as commander-in-chief. To make this possible, he needed a Union victory.

Wheeling to the north, Lee marched rapidly towards Washington, D.C. and defeated another Union army under Gen. John Pope at the Second Battle of Bull Run in late August. He eliminated Pope before reinforcements from McClellan arrived, knocking out an entire field command before another could arrive to support it. In less than 90 days, Lee had run McClellan off the Peninsula, defeated Pope, and moved the battle lines north, from north of Richmond to south of Washington.

Lee chose to take the battle off southern ground and invaded Maryland and Pennsylvania, hoping to collect supplies in Union territory, and possibly win a victory that would sway the upcoming Union elections in favor of ending the war. This was sent amiss when McClellan&#x27;s men found a lost Confederate dispatch, Special Order 191, revealing Lee&#x27;s plans and movements. McClellan always exaggerated Lee&#x27;s numerical strength, but now he knew the Confederate army was divided and could be destroyed in detail. Still, in a characteristic manner, McClellan moved slowly; he failed to realize a spy had informed Lee that he possessed the plans. Lee quickly concentrated his forces west of Antietam Creek, near Sharpsburg, Maryland, where McClellan attacked on September 17. The Battle of Antietam was the single bloodiest day of the war, with both sides suffering enormous losses. Lee&#x27;s army barely withstood the Union assaults, and retreated to Virginia the next day. The narrow Confederate defeat gave President Abraham Lincoln the opportunity to issue his Emancipation Proclamation, which put the Confederacy on the diplomatic and moral defensive.

Disappointed by McClellan&#x27;s failure to destroy Lee&#x27;s army, Lincoln named Ambrose Burnside the commander of the Army of the Potomac. Burnside ordered an attack across the Rappahannock River at Fredericksburg, Virginia. Delays in bridging the river allowed Lee&#x27;s army ample time to organize strong defenses, and the Union frontal assault on December 13, 1862, was a disaster. There were 12,600 Union casualties to 5,000 Confederate, making the engagement one of the most one-sided battles in the Civil War. After this victory, Lee reportedly said, &quot;It is well that war is so terrible, else we should grow too fond of it.&quot; At Fredericksburg, according to historian Michael Fellman, Lee had completely entered into the &quot;spirit of war, where destructiveness took on its own beauty&quot;.

The bitter Union defeat at Fredericksburg prompted President Lincoln to appoint Joseph Hooker as the next commander of the Army of the Potomac. In May 1863, Hooker maneuvered to attack Lee&#x27;s army by crossing the Rapahannock further upriver and positioning himself at the Chancellorsville crossroads. Doing this could give him an opportunity to strike Lee in the rear, but the Confederate General barely managed to pivot his forces in time to face an attack. Hooker&#x27;s command was nearly twice the size of Lee&#x27;s but he nonetheless was beaten after Lee performed a daring movement that broke all terms of conventional warfare: dividing his army. Lee sent Stonewall Jackson&#x27;s corps to attack Hooker&#x27;s exposed flank, on the opposite side of the battlefield. The significant victory that followed came with a price. Among the heavy casualties was Jackson, his finest corps commander, accidentally fired on by his own troops.

Even though he scored another impressive victory over an enemy army much larger than his own, Lee felt unsatisfied by the fact that he had made little territorial gains up to that point. Things were going poorly for the Confederacy in the West, and Lee started to grow restless; he devised a plan to once again invade the North, for similar reasons to before: relieve Virginia and its citizens of the weariness of battle, and potentially march on the Federal Capital and force terms of peace.

===Battle of Gettysburg===

Critical decisions came in May–June 1863, after Lee&#x27;s smashing victory at the Battle of Chancellorsville. The western front was crumbling, as multiple uncoordinated Confederate armies were unable to handle General Ulysses S. Grant&#x27;s campaign against Vicksburg. The top military advisers wanted to save Vicksburg, but Lee persuaded Davis to overrule them and authorize yet another invasion of the North. The immediate goal was to acquire urgently needed supplies from the rich farming districts of Pennsylvania; a long-term goal was to stimulate peace activity in the North by demonstrating the power of the South to invade. Lee&#x27;s decision proved a significant strategic blunder and cost the Confederacy control of its western regions, and nearly cost Lee his own army as Union forces cut him off from the South.
Lee launched the Gettysburg Campaign when he abandoned his position on the Rapahannock and crossed the Potomac River into Maryland in June. Hooker mobilized his men and pursued, but was replaced by Gen. George G. Meade on June 28, a few days before the two armies clashed at the town of Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, in early July; the battle produced the largest number of casualties in the American Civil War. Some of Lee&#x27;s subordinates were new and inexperienced to their commands, and J.E.B. Stuart&#x27;s cavalry failed to perform effective reconnaissance. The first day was a surprise affair for both sides, and the Confederates managed to rally their forces first, pushing the panicked Union troops away from town, and towards key terrain that should have been taken by General Ewell, but was not. The second day unfolded differently for the Confederates. They took too much time to assemble, and launched repeated failed assaults against the Union left flank over difficult terrain. Lee&#x27;s decision on the third day, going against the advice of his best corps commander, Gen. James Longstreet, to launch a massive frontal assault on the center of the Union line, was disastrous. It was carried out over a wide field, and has come to be known commonly as Pickett&#x27;s Charge. Easily repulsed, Pickett&#x27;s Charge, named after the general whose division participated, resulted in severe Confederate losses. Lee rode out to meet the remains of the division and proclaimed, &quot;All this has been my fault.&quot; He had no choice but to withdraw, and he escaped Meade&#x27;s ineffective pursuit, slipping back into Virginia.

Following his defeat at Gettysburg, Lee sent a letter of resignation to President Davis on August 8, 1863, but Davis refused Lee&#x27;s pleas to retire. That fall, Lee and Meade met again in two minor campaigns, Bristoe and Mine Run, that did little to change the strategic standoff. The Confederate Army never fully recovered from the substantial losses incurred during the three-day battle in southern Pennsylvania. Civil War Historian Shelby Foote once stated, &quot;Gettysburg was the price the South paid for having Robert E. Lee as commander.&quot;

===Ulysses S. Grant and the Union offensive===
In 1864 the new Union general-in-chief, Lt. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant, sought to use his large advantages in manpower and material resources to destroy Lee&#x27;s army by attrition, pinning Lee against his capital of Richmond. Lee successfully stopped each attack, but Grant with his superior numbers kept pushing each time a bit farther to the southeast. These battles in the Overland Campaign included the Wilderness, Spotsylvania Court House and Cold Harbor.

Grant eventually was able to stealthily move his army across the James River. After stopping a Union attempt to capture Petersburg, Virginia, a vital railroad link supplying Richmond, Lee&#x27;s men built elaborate trenches and were besieged in Petersburg, a development which presaged the trench warfare of World War I. Lee attempted to break the stalemate by sending Jubal A. Early on a raid through the Shenandoah Valley to Washington, D.C., but Early was defeated early on by the superior forces of Philip Sheridan. The Siege of Petersburg lasted from June 1864 until March 1865, with Lee&#x27;s outnumbered and poorly supplied army shrinking daily because of desertions by disheartened Confederates.

===General in Chief===
On February 6, 1865, Lee was appointed General in Chief of the Armies of the Confederate States.

As the South ran out of manpower, the issue of arming the slaves became paramount. Lee explained, &quot;We should employ them without delay ... [along with] gradual and general emancipation&quot;. The first units were in training as the war ended. As the Confederate army was devastated by casualties, disease and desertion, the Union attack on Petersburg succeeded on April 2, 1865. Lee abandoned Richmond and retreated west. Lee then made an attempt to escape to the southwest and join up with Joseph E. Johnston&#x27;s Army of Tennessee in North Carolina. However, his forces were soon surrounded and he surrendered them to Grant on April 9, 1865, at the Battle of Appomattox Court House. Other Confederate armies followed suit and the war ended. The day after his surrender, Lee issued his Farewell Address to his army.

Lee resisted calls by some officers to reject surrender and allow small units to melt away into the mountains, setting up a lengthy guerrilla war. He insisted the war was over and energetically campaigned for inter-sectional reconciliation. &quot;So far from engaging in a war to perpetuate slavery, I am rejoiced that slavery is abolished. I believe it will be greatly for the interests of the South.&quot;

==Summaries of Lee&#x27;s Civil War battles==
The following are summaries of Civil War campaigns and major battles where Robert E. Lee was the commanding officer:


==Postbellum life==

After the war, Lee was not arrested or punished (although he was indicted), but he did lose the right to vote as well as some property. Lee&#x27;s prewar family home, the Custis-Lee Mansion, was seized by Union forces during the war and turned into Arlington National Cemetery, and his family was not compensated until more than a decade after his death.

In 1866, Lee counseled Southerners not to resume fighting, which prompted Grant to say that Lee was &quot;setting an example of forced acquiescence so grudging and pernicious in its effects as to be hardly realized&quot;. Lee joined with Democrats in opposing the Radical Republicans, who demanded punitive measures against the South, distrusted the South&#x27;s commitment to the abolition of slavery, and, indeed, distrusted the region&#x27;s loyalty to the United States. Lee supported a system of free public schools for black people but opposed allowing them to vote: &quot;My own opinion is that, at this time, they [black Southerners] cannot vote intelligently, and that giving them the [vote] would lead to a great deal of demagogism, and lead to embarrassments in various ways.&quot; Emory Thomas says Lee had become a suffering Christ-like icon for ex-Confederates. President Grant invited him to the White House in 1869, and he went. Nationally, Lee became an icon of reconciliation between the white people of the North and South, and the reintegration of former Confederates into the national fabric.

Lee hoped to retire to a farm of his own, but he was too much a regional symbol to live in obscurity. From April to June 1865, he and his family resided in Richmond at the Stewart-Lee House. He accepted an offer to serve as the president of Washington College (now Washington and Lee University) in Lexington, Virginia, and served from October 1865 until his death. The trustees used his famous name in large-scale fund-raising appeals and Lee transformed Washington College into a leading Southern college, expanding its offerings significantly, adding programs in commerce and journalism, and incorporating the Lexington Law School. Lee was well liked by the students, which enabled him to announce an &quot;honor system&quot; like that of West Point, explaining that &quot;we have but one rule here, and it is that every student be a gentleman&quot;. To speed up national reconciliation, Lee recruited students from the North and made certain they were well treated on campus and in town.

Several glowing appraisals of Lee&#x27;s tenure as college president have survived, depicting the dignity and respect he commanded among all. Previously, most students had been obliged to occupy the campus dormitories, while only the most mature were allowed to live off-campus. Lee quickly reversed this rule, requiring most students to board off-campus, and allowing only the most mature to live in the dorms as a mark of privilege; the results of this policy were considered a success. A typical account by a professor there states that &quot;the students fairly worshipped him, and deeply dreaded his displeasure; yet so kind, affable, and gentle was he toward them that all loved to approach him. ... No student would have dared to violate General Lee&#x27;s expressed wish or appeal.&quot;

While at Washington College, Lee told a colleague that the greatest mistake of his life was taking a military education. He also defended his father in a biographical sketch.

===President Johnson&#x27;s amnesty pardons===
On May 29, 1865, President Andrew Johnson issued a Proclamation of Amnesty and Pardon to persons who had participated in the rebellion against the United States. There were fourteen excepted classes, though, and members of those classes had to make special application to the president. Lee sent an application to Grant and wrote to President Johnson on June 13, 1865:

On October 2, 1865, the same day that Lee was inaugurated as president of Washington College, he signed his Amnesty Oath, thereby complying fully with the provision of Johnson&#x27;s proclamation. Lee was not pardoned, nor was his citizenship restored.

Three years later, on December 25, 1868, Johnson proclaimed a second amnesty which removed previous exceptions, such as the one that affected Lee.

===Postwar politics===
Lee, who had opposed secession and remained mostly indifferent to politics before the Civil War, supported President Andrew Johnson&#x27;s plan of Presidential Reconstruction that took effect in 1865–66. However, he opposed the Congressional Republican program that took effect in 1867. In February 1866, he was called to testify before the Joint Congressional Committee on Reconstruction in Washington, where he expressed support for Johnson&#x27;s plans for quick restoration of the former Confederate states, and argued that restoration should return, as far as possible, to the &quot;status quo ante&quot; in the Southern states&#x27; governments (with the exception of slavery).

Lee told the committee that &quot;every one with whom I associate expresses kind feelings towards the freedmen. They wish to see them get on in the world, and particularly to take up some occupation for a living, and to turn their hands to some work.&quot; and that &quot;Where I am, and have been, the people have exhibited a willingness that the blacks should be educated, and ... that it would be better for the blacks and for the whites&quot;. However, when he was asked &quot;General, you are very competent to judge of the capacity of black men for acquiring knowledge: I want your opinion on that capacity, as compared with the capacity of white men?&quot; Lee replied &quot;I do not think that he is as capable of acquiring knowledge as the white man is.&quot; Lee forthrightly opposed allowing blacks to vote: &quot;My own opinion is that, at this time, they [black Southerners] cannot vote intelligently, and that giving them the [vote] would lead to a great deal of demagogism, and lead to embarrassments in various ways.&quot;

In an interview in May 1866, Lee said: &quot;The Radical party are likely to do a great deal of harm, for we wish now for good feeling to grow up between North and South, and the President, Mr. Johnson, has been doing much to strengthen the feeling in favor of the Union among us. The relations between the Negroes and the whites were friendly formerly, and would remain so if legislation be not passed in favor of the blacks, in a way that will only do them harm.&quot;

In 1868, Lee&#x27;s ally Alexander H. H. Stuart drafted a public letter of endorsement for the Democratic Party&#x27;s presidential campaign, in which Horatio Seymour ran against Lee&#x27;s old foe Republican Grant. Lee signed it along with thirty-one other ex-Confederates. The Democratic campaign, eager to publicize the endorsement, published the statement widely in newspapers. Their letter claimed paternalistic concern for the welfare of freed Southern blacks, stating that &quot;The idea that the Southern people are hostile to the negroes and would oppress them, if it were in their power to do so, is entirely unfounded. They have grown up in our midst, and we have been accustomed from childhood to look upon them with kindness.&quot; However, it also called for the restoration of white political rule, arguing that &quot;It is true that the people of the South, in common with a large majority of the people of the North and West, are, for obvious reasons, inflexibly opposed to any system of laws that would place the political power of the country in the hands of the negro race. But this opposition springs from no feeling of enmity, but from a deep-seated conviction that, at present, the negroes have neither the intelligence nor the other qualifications which are necessary to make them safe depositories of political power.&quot;

In his public statements and private correspondence, Lee argued that a tone of reconciliation and patience would further the interests of white Southerners better than hotheaded antagonism to federal authority or the use of violence. Lee repeatedly expelled white students from Washington College for violent attacks on local black men, and publicly urged obedience to the authorities and respect for law and order. He privately chastised fellow ex-Confederates such as Davis and Jubal Early for their frequent, angry responses to perceived Northern insults, writing in private to them as he had written to a magazine editor in 1865, that &quot;It should be the object of all to avoid controversy, to allay passion, give full scope to reason and to every kindly feeling. By doing this and encouraging our citizens to engage in the duties of life with all their heart and mind, with a determination not to be turned aside by thoughts of the past and fears of the future, our country will not only be restored in material prosperity, but will be advanced in science, in virtue and in religion.&quot;

==Illness, death and funeral==

On September 28, 1870, Lee suffered a stroke. Two weeks later, shortly after 9 a.m. on October 12, 1870, Lee died in Lexington, Virginia, from pneumonia. According to one account, Lee&#x27;s last words the day of his death were, &quot;Tell Hill he &quot;must&quot; come up! Strike the tent&quot;, but this is not fully confirmed because there are conflicting accounts and because Lee&#x27;s stroke had resulted in aphasia, possibly rendering him unable to speak.

At first no suitable coffin for the body could be located. The muddy roads were too flooded for anyone to get in or out of the town of Lexington. An undertaker had ordered three from Richmond that had reached Lexington, but due to unprecedented flooding from long-continued heavy rains, the caskets were washed down the Maury River. Two neighborhood boys, C.G. Chittum and Robert E. Hillis, found one of the coffins that had been swept ashore. Undamaged, it was used for the body, though it was a bit short for him. As a result, Lee was buried without shoes. 

The honor guard of Virginia Military Institute guarded Lee&#x27;s body overnight at University Chapel at Washington and Lee University. His funeral took place in the morning of Saturday, October 15th. Attendees of the procession included officers and soldiers of the Confederate Army, cadets, faculty and visitors of VMI, students and faculty of Lee University, and Virginia state dignitaries. The Episcopal Church funeral service was led by Rev. William Pendleton. Pallbearers included Judge Francis Anderson, David E. Moore, former Governor of Virginia John Letcher, and Commodore Matthew Maury.

Lee was buried underneath the college chapel where his body remains.

==Legacy==


Among the supporters of the Confederacy, Lee came to be even more revered after his surrender than he had been during the war, when Stonewall Jackson had been the great Confederate hero. In an 1874 address before the Southern Historical Society in Atlanta, Georgia, Benjamin Harvey Hill described Lee in this way:

By the end of the 19th century, Lee&#x27;s popularity had spread to the North. Lee&#x27;s admirers have pointed to his character and devotion to duty, and his occasional tactical successes in battles against a stronger foe.

Military historians continue to pay attention to his battlefield tactics and maneuvering, though many think he should have designed better strategic plans for the Confederacy. He was not given full direction of the Southern war effort until late in the conflict.

Historian Eric Foner writes that at the end of his life

Robert E. Lee has been commemorated on U.S. postage stamps at least five times, the first one being a commemorative stamp that also honored Stonewall Jackson, issued in 1936. A second &quot;regular-issue&quot; stamp was issued in 1955. He was commemorated with a 32-cent stamp issued in the American Civil War Issue of June 29, 1995. His horse Traveller is pictured in the background.

Washington and Lee University in Lexington, Virginia was commemorated on its 200th anniversary on November 23, 1948, with a three-cent postage stamp. The central design is a view of the university, flanked by portraits of generals George Washington and Robert E. Lee. Lee was again commemorated on a commemorative stamp in 1970, along with Jefferson Davis and Thomas J. &quot;Stonewall&quot; Jackson, depicted on horseback on the six-cent Stone Mountain Memorial commemorative issue, modeled after the actual Stone Mountain Memorial carving in Georgia. The stamp was issued on September 19, 1970, in conjunction with the dedication of the Stone Mountain Confederate Memorial in Georgia on May 9, 1970. The design of the stamp replicates the memorial, the largest high relief sculpture in the world. It is carved on the side of Stone Mountain 400 feet above the ground.

Stone Mountain also led to Lee&#x27;s appearance on a commemorative coin, the 1925 Stone Mountain Memorial half dollar. During the 1920s and &#x27;30s dozens of specially designed half dollars were struck to raise money for various events and causes. This issue had a particularly wide distribution, with 1,314,709 minted. Unlike some of the other issues it remains a very common coin.

In 1865, after the war, Lee was paroled and signed an oath of allegiance, asking to have his citizenship of the United States restored. However, his application was not processed by Secretary of State William Seward, and as a result Lee did not receive a pardon and his citizenship was not restored. On January 30, 1975, Senate Joint Resolution 23, &quot;A joint resolution to restore posthumously full rights of citizenship to General R. E. Lee&quot; was introduced into the Senate by Senator Harry F. Byrd Jr. (I-VA), the result of a five-year campaign to accomplish this. Proponents portrayed the lack of pardon as a mere clerical error. The resolution, which enacted Public Law 94–67, was passed, and the bill was signed by President Gerald Ford on August 5.

World War II general George S. Patton said he had prayed to a portrait of General Lee, as well as one of Stonewall Jackson, as a young child, believing them to be portraits of God and Jesus, and associating their features with his perceptions of the two men.

===Monuments, memorials and commemorations===
Lee opposed the construction of public memorials to Confederate rebellion on the grounds that they would prevent the healing of wounds inflicted during the war. Nevertheless, after his death, he became an icon used by promoters of &quot;Lost Cause&quot; mythology, who sought to romanticize the Confederate cause and strengthen white supremacy in the South. Later in the 20th century, particularly following the civil rights movement, historians reassessed Lee; his reputation fell based on his failure to support rights for freedmen after the war, and even his strategic choices as a military leader fell under scrutiny.

Arlington House, The Robert E. Lee Memorial, also known as the Custis–Lee Mansion, is a Greek revival mansion in Arlington, Virginia, that was once Lee&#x27;s home. It overlooks the Potomac River and the National Mall in Washington, D.C. During the Civil War, the grounds of the mansion were selected as the site of Arlington National Cemetery, in part to ensure that Lee would never again be able to return to his home. The United States designated the mansion as a National Memorial to Lee in 1955, a mark of widespread respect for him in both the North and South.

In Richmond, Virginia, a large equestrian statue of Lee by French sculptor Jean Antonin Mercié was the centerpiece of Monument Avenue, along with four other statues of Confederates. This monument to Lee was unveiled on May 29, 1890; over 100,000 people attended this dedication. That has been described as &quot;the day white Virginia stopped admiring Gen. Robert E. Lee and started worshiping him&quot;. The four other Confederate statues were removed in 2020, and the equestrian statue of Lee was removed on September 8, 2021, at the direction of the state government.

Lee is also shown mounted on Traveller in Gettysburg National Military Park on top of the Virginia Monument; he is facing roughly in the direction of Pickett&#x27;s Charge. Lee&#x27;s portrayal on a mural on Richmond&#x27;s flood wall on the James River, considered offensive by some, was removed in the late 1990s, but currently is back on the flood wall.

In Baltimore&#x27;s Wyman Park, a large double equestrian statue of Lee and Jackson is located directly across from the Baltimore Museum of Art. Designed by Laura Gardin Fraser and dedicated in 1948, Lee is depicted astride his horse Traveller next to Stonewall Jackson who is mounted on &quot;Little Sorrel&quot;. Architect John Russell Pope created the base, which was dedicated on the anniversary of the eve of the Battle of Chancellorsville. The Baltimore area of Maryland is also home to a large nature park called Robert E. Lee Memorial Park.

A statue of Robert E. Lee was one of the two statues (the other is George Washington) representing Virginia in Statuary Hall in the U.S. Capitol in Washington, D.C. It was removed from the Capitol on December 21, 2020, after a state commission voted to replace it with a statue of Civil Rights activist Barbara Rose Johns. Lee is one of the figures depicted in bas-relief carved into Stone Mountain near Atlanta. Accompanying him on horseback in the relief are Stonewall Jackson and Jefferson Davis.

The birthday of Robert E. Lee is celebrated or commemorated in several states. In Texas, he is celebrated as part of Confederate Heroes Day on January 19, Lee&#x27;s birthday. In Alabama and Mississippi, his birthday is celebrated on the same day as Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, while in Georgia, this occurred on the day after Thanksgiving before 2016, when the state stopped officially recognizing the holiday. In Virginia, Lee–Jackson Day was celebrated on the Friday preceding Martin Luther King, Jr. Day which is the third Monday in January, until 2020, when the Virginia legislature eliminated the holiday, making Election Day a state holiday instead.

One United States college and one junior college are named for Lee: Washington and Lee University in Lexington, Virginia; and Lee College in Baytown, Texas, respectively. University Chapel at Washington and Lee University marks Lee&#x27;s final resting place. Throughout the South, many primary and secondary schools were also named for him as well as private schools such as Robert E. Lee Academy in Bishopville, South Carolina.

Lee is featured on the 1925 Stone Mountain Memorial half dollar.


In 1862, the newly formed Confederate Navy purchased a 642-ton iron-hulled side-wheel gunboat, built in at Glasgow, Scotland, and gave her the name of CSS &quot;Robert E. Lee&quot; in honor of this Confederate General. During the next year, she became one of the South&#x27;s most famous Confederate blockade runners, successfully making more than twenty runs through the Union blockade.

The Mississippi River steamboat &quot;Robert E. Lee&quot; was named for Lee after the Civil War. It was the participant in an 1870 St. Louis – New Orleans race with the &quot;Natchez VI&quot;, which was featured in a Currier and Ives lithograph. The &quot;Robert E. Lee&quot; won the race. The steamboat inspired the 1912 song &quot;Waiting for the Robert E. Lee&quot; by Lewis F. Muir and L. Wolfe Gilbert. In more modern times, the , a built in 1958, was named for Lee, as was the M3 Lee tank, produced in 1941 and 1942.

The Commonwealth of Virginia issues an optional license plate honoring Lee, making reference to him as &#x27;The Virginia Gentleman&#x27;. In February 2014, a road at Fort Bliss previously named for Lee was renamed to honor Buffalo Soldiers.

A recent biographer, Jonathan Horn, outlines the unsuccessful efforts in Washington to memorialize Lee in the naming of the Arlington Memorial Bridge after both Grant and Lee.

====Unite the Right rally and removal of monuments====

In February 2017, the City Council of Charlottesville, Virginia, voted to remove a sculpture of Lee, who has no historical link to the city, as well as one of Stonewall Jackson. This was temporarily stayed by court action, though the city did rename Lee Park: first to Emancipation Park, then later to Market Street Park. The prospect of the statues being removed and the parks being renamed brought many out-of-towners, described as white supremacist and alt-right, to Charlottesville in the Unite the Right rally of August 2017, in which 3 people died. As of July 2021, the statue has been permanently removed. The statue was melted in October 2023.
Several other statues and monuments to Lee were removed in the aftermath of the incident, including:
* A -tall monument in the center of Lee Circle (formerly Tivoli Circle) in New Orleans. Installed in 1884, it featured a bronze statue of Lee on a marble column. Former Confederate soldier George Washington Cable described it in a tribute: &quot;His arms are folded on that breast that never knew fear, and his calm, dauntless gaze meets the morning sun as it rises.&quot; The statue was removed on May 19, 2017, the last of four Confederate monuments in New Orleans to be taken down.
* A stained-glass window in the Washington National Cathedral, showing Lee on horseback at Chancellorsville, as well as one in honor of Stonewall Jackson. Sponsored by the United Daughters of the Confederacy, they were installed in 1953 and removed in September 2017. The cathedral plans to keep the windows and eventually display them in historical context.
* A bust of Lee in the Hall of Fame for Great Americans (the first Hall of Fame in the United States, completed 1900), in what is now Bronx Community College.
* A bronze statue of Lee which had been on display at the University of Texas at Austin, and another, with his horse Traveller, in Robert E. Lee Park in Dallas.

=== Biographies ===
Douglas Southall Freeman&#x27;s Pulitzer prize-winning four-volume &quot;R. E. Lee: A Biography&quot; (1936), which was for a long period considered the definitive work on Lee, downplayed his involvement in slavery and emphasized Lee as a virtuous person. Eric Foner, who describes Freeman&#x27;s volume as a &quot;hagiography&quot;, notes that on the whole, Freeman &quot;displayed little interest in Lee&#x27;s relationship to slavery. The index to his four volumes contained 22 entries for &#x27;devotion to duty&#x27;, 19 for &#x27;kindness&#x27;, 53 for Lee&#x27;s celebrated horse, Traveller. But &#x27;slavery&#x27;, &#x27;slave emancipation&#x27; and &#x27;slave insurrection&#x27; together received five. Freeman observed, without offering details, that slavery in Virginia represented the system &#x27;at its best&#x27;. He ignored the postwar testimony of Lee&#x27;s former slave Wesley Norris about the brutal treatment to which he had been subjected.&quot;

More recent biographies offer a broader variety of perspectives. Thomas L. Connelly&#x27;s &quot;The Marble Man: Robert E. Lee and His Image in American Society&quot; (1977) was an iconoclastic revision of Lee&#x27;s mythical status in the South. &quot;Robert E. Lee: A Biography&quot; (1995) by Emory M. Thomas attempted a &quot;post-revisionist&quot; compromise between the traditional and more recent views. &quot;Robert E. Lee: A Life&quot; (2021) by Allen C. Guelzo focuses on a study of Lee&#x27;s character.

==Dates of rank==

* § Breveted for conduct in the Battle of Cerro Gordo
* † Breveted for conduct in Battles of Contreras and Churubusco
* ‡ Breveted for conduct in Battle of Chapultepec

==In popular culture==
Lee is a main character in the Shaara Family novels &quot;The Killer Angels&quot; (1974), &quot;Gods and Generals&quot; (1996), and &quot;The Last Full Measure&quot; (2000), as well as the film adaptations of &quot;Gettysburg&quot; (1993) and &quot;Gods and Generals&quot; (2003). He is played by Martin Sheen in the former and by Lee&#x27;s descendant Robert Duvall in the latter. Lee is portrayed as a hero in the historical children&#x27;s novel &quot;Lee and Grant at Appomattox&quot; (1950) by MacKinlay Kantor. His part in the Civil War is told from the perspective of his horse in Richard Adams&#x27;s book &quot;Traveller&quot; (1988).

Lee is an obvious subject for American Civil War alternate histories. Ward Moore&#x27;s &quot;Bring the Jubilee&quot; (1953), MacKinlay Kantor&#x27;s &quot;If the South Had Won the Civil War&quot; (1960), and Harry Turtledove&#x27;s &quot;The Guns of the South&quot; (1992), all have Lee ending up as president of a victorious Confederacy and freeing the slaves (or laying the groundwork for the slaves to be freed in a later decade). Although Moore and Kantor&#x27;s novels relegate him to a set of passing references, Lee is more of a main character in Turtledove&#x27;s &quot;Guns&quot;. He is also the prime character of Turtledove&#x27;s &quot;Lee at the Alamo&quot;. Turtledove&#x27;s &quot;War Between the Provinces&quot; series is an allegory of the Civil War told in the language of fairy tales, with Lee appearing as a knight named &quot;Duke Edward of Arlington&quot;. Lee is also a knight in &quot;The Charge of Lee&#x27;s Brigade&quot; in &quot;Alternate Generals&quot; volume 1, written by Turtledove&#x27;s friend S. M. Stirling and featuring Lee, whose Virginia is still a loyal British colony, fighting for the Crown against the Russians in Crimea. In Lee Allred&#x27;s &quot;East of Appomattox&quot; in &quot;Alternate Generals&quot; volume 3, Lee is the Confederate Minister to London circa 1868, desperately seeking help for a CSA which has turned out poorly suited to independence. Robert Skimin&#x27;s &quot;Grey Victory&quot; features Lee as a supporting character preparing to run for the presidency in 1867.

In Connie Willis&#x27; 1987 novel &quot;Lincoln&#x27;s Dreams&quot;, a research assistant meets a young woman who dreams about the Civil War from Robert E. Lee&#x27;s point of view.

The Dodge Charger featured in the CBS television series &quot;The Dukes of Hazzard&quot; (1979–1985) was named The General Lee. In the 2005 film based on this series, the car is driven past a statue of Lee, while the car&#x27;s occupants salute him.

==See also==

* List of American Civil War generals (Confederate)
* List of memorials to Robert E. Lee
* Removal of Confederate monuments and memorials
==References==
== Notes ==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Historiography===
* Foner, Eric. &quot;The Making and the Breaking of the Legend of Robert E. Lee&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, August 28, 2017

==Further reading==
* 
* Guelzo, Allen C. (2021). &quot;Robert E. Lee: A Life&quot;. New York: Knopf. 
* 
* Reeves, John (2018). &quot;The Lost Indictment of Robert E. Lee: The Forgotten Case Against an American Icon&quot;. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
* 

==External links==

* Biographical article by Stanley L. Klos
* Obituary of Robert E. Lee, from a Northern point of view. &quot;The New York Times&quot;, October 13, 1870
* &quot;Robert E. Lee&quot; – An &quot;American Experience&quot; documentary
* Letter from Dwight Eisenhower about Lee 
===Primary sources===
* Original Historical Letters: Lincoln Refuses Lee&#x27;s Armistice Shapell Manuscript Foundation
* Interactive Animation of the Battle of Gettysburg – A chronicle of the 3-day battle, it also touches on Lee&#x27;s tactical strategies during the American Civil War.
* Correspondences of Robert E. Lee during the American Civil War – held in the Walter Havighurst Special Collections, Miami University
* 
* Stuart A. Rose Manuscript, Archives, and Rare Book Library, Emory University: Robert E. Lee collection, 1835–1869

===Monuments and memorials===
* University Chapel at Washington and Lee University where Robert E. Lee is buried</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="0" end="17" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert Edward Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135313" start="62" end="81" title="general officers in the Confederate States Army" label="Confederate general"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="93" end="111" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205650" start="135" end="152" title="General in Chief of the Armies of the Confederate States" label="overall commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="160" end="183" title="Confederate States Army" label="Confederate States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q689847" start="222" end="247" title="Army of Northern Virginia" label="Army of Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="386" end="403" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q450175" start="412" end="455" title="Henry Lee III" label="Henry &amp;quot;Light Horse Harry&amp;quot; Lee III"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="487" end="517" title="United States Military Academy" label="United States Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q158797" start="549" end="566" title="military engineering" label="military engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="574" end="592" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="688" end="708" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895103" start="718" end="770" title="Superintendent of the United States Military Academy" label="Superintendent of the United States Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q299932" start="783" end="799" title="Mary Anna Custis Lee" label="Mary Anna Custis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="824" end="841" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q191789" start="854" end="860" title="Martha Washington" label="Martha"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="879" end="886" title="slavery in the United States" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q28135438" start="981" end="1012" title="Virginia Secession Convention of 1861" label="Virginia declared its secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="1022" end="1027" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999471" start="1278" end="1299" title="President of the Confederate States of America" label="Confederate President"/>
<link wikidata="Q162269" start="1300" end="1315" title="Jefferson Davis" label="Jefferson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154050" start="1392" end="1410" title="Peninsula Campaign" label="Peninsula Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q439669" start="1437" end="1455" title="Joseph E. Johnston" label="Joseph E. Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q653089" start="1491" end="1510" title="Army of the Potomac" label="Army of the Potomac"/>
<link wikidata="Q310192" start="1517" end="1536" title="George B. McClellan" label="George B. McClellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="1574" end="1582" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q492324" start="1594" end="1612" title="Seven Days Battles" label="Seven Days Battles"/>
<link wikidata="Q465291" start="1703" end="1712" title="John Pope (military officer)" label="John Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q233343" start="1720" end="1745" title="Second Battle of Bull Run" label="Second Battle of Bull Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342042" start="1761" end="1781" title="Maryland Campaign" label="invasion of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q719252" start="1825" end="1843" title="Battle of Antietam" label="Battle of Antietam"/>
<link wikidata="Q751186" start="1914" end="1928" title="Battle of Fredericksburg" label="Fredericksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q745979" start="1933" end="1949" title="Battle of Chancellorsville" label="Chancellorsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377639" start="1969" end="1997" title="Gettysburg Campaign" label="second invasion of the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q33132" start="2061" end="2081" title="Battle of Gettysburg" label="Battle of Gettysburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q297121" start="2115" end="2127" title="George Meade" label="George Meade"/>
<link wikidata="Q376969" start="2175" end="2191" title="Bristoe Campaign" label="Bristoe Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="2217" end="2233" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425882" start="2358" end="2368" title="Battle of the Wilderness" label="Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538874" start="2373" end="2385" title="Battle of Spotsylvania Court House" label="Spotsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q815195" start="2405" end="2424" title="Siege of Petersburg" label="Siege of Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355391" start="2575" end="2597" title="Battle of Appomattox Court House" label="Appomattox Court House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785291" start="2657" end="2686" title="Washington and Lee University" label="Washington and Lee University"/>
<link wikidata="Q501761" start="2691" end="2710" title="Lexington, Virginia" label="Lexington, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q175613" start="2858" end="2878" title="Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Thirteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279580" start="2892" end="2907" title="racial equality" label="racial equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="2912" end="2929" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="2990" end="2995" title="Southern United States" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q311514" start="3288" end="3304" title="James Longstreet" label="James Longstreet"/>
<link wikidata="Q216124" start="3306" end="3323" title="Stonewall Jackson" label="Stonewall Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q313583" start="3329" end="3344" title="J. E. B. Stuart" label="J. E. B. Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q569047" start="3884" end="3909" title="Stratford Hall Plantation" label="Stratford Hall Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q494413" start="3913" end="3942" title="Westmoreland County, Virginia" label="Westmoreland County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q450175" start="3947" end="3960" title="Henry Lee III" label="Henry Lee III"/>
<link wikidata="Q26763827" start="3965" end="3985" title="Anne Hill Carter Lee" label="Anne Hill Carter Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327313" start="4021" end="4034" title="Richard Lee I" label="Richard Lee I"/>
<link wikidata="Q23103" start="4051" end="4061" title="Shropshire" label="Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q427276" start="4186" end="4206" title="debtors&amp;#x27; prison" label="debtors&amp;#x27; prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q88" start="4283" end="4293" title="Alexandria, Virginia" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="4334" end="4354" title="Washington, D.C." label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283437" start="4362" end="4389" title="District of Columbia retrocession" label="retroceded back to Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="4691" end="4702" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q502213" start="4764" end="4789" title="Fauquier County, Virginia" label="Fauquier County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="4932" end="4941" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="4971" end="4987" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011988" start="5061" end="5083" title="William Henry Fitzhugh" label="William Henry Fitzhugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296586" start="5169" end="5180" title="Ravensworth (plantation)" label="Ravensworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="5200" end="5230" title="United States Secretary of War" label="United States Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q207191" start="5232" end="5247" title="John C. Calhoun" label="John C. Calhoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="5299" end="5329" title="United States Military Academy" label="United States Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="5511" end="5548" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="United States Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080712" start="5783" end="5796" title="Charles Mason (Iowa judge)" label="Charles Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q911283" start="6013" end="6019" title="brevet (military)" label="brevet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078376" start="6281" end="6296" title="Charles Gratiot" label="Charles Gratiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611170" start="6312" end="6327" title="Cockspur Island" label="Cockspur Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="6329" end="6336" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q370750" start="6426" end="6440" title="Savannah River" label="Savannah River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438683" start="6622" end="6634" title="Fort Pulaski" label="Fort Pulaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438639" start="6689" end="6700" title="Fort Monroe" label="Fort Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553780" start="6719" end="6737" title="Virginia Peninsula" label="Virginia Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q342043" start="6748" end="6765" title="Hampton, Virginia" label="Hampton, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q299932" start="6830" end="6841" title="Mary Anna Custis Lee" label="Mary Custis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="7542" end="7555" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q629961" start="7643" end="7653" title="George Washington Custis Lee" label="Custis Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q507873" start="8097" end="8111" title="Andrew Talcott" label="Andrew Talcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335524" start="8370" end="8378" title="Rip Raps" label="Rip Raps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472371" start="8420" end="8429" title="Fort Wool" label="Fort Wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q507873" start="8987" end="9001" title="Andrew Talcott" label="Andrew Talcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="9846" end="9850" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="9855" end="9863" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60522539" start="9887" end="9902" title="Washington Hood" label="Washington Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715023" start="9909" end="9925" title="First Lieutenant (United States)" label="first lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="9987" end="9996" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="10022" end="10033" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="10038" end="10046" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263526" start="10097" end="10114" title="Des Moines Rapids" label="Des Moines Rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q732549" start="10140" end="10152" title="Keokuk, Iowa" label="Keokuk, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036511" start="10293" end="10300" title="Captain (United States O-3)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471273" start="10348" end="10361" title="Fort Hamilton" label="Fort Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q299932" start="10461" end="10486" title="Mary Anna Custis Lee" label="Mary Anna Randolph Custis"/>
<link wikidata="Q191789" start="10523" end="10540" title="Martha Washington" label="Martha Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162023" start="10562" end="10581" title="Daniel Parke Custis" label="Daniel Parke Custis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="10615" end="10632" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508559" start="10713" end="10743" title="George Washington Parke Custis" label="George Washington Parke Custis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727412" start="10788" end="10812" title="Mary Lee Fitzhugh Custis" label="Mary Lee Fitzhugh Custis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009122" start="10826" end="10842" title="William Fitzhugh" label="William Fitzhugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009122" start="10847" end="10867" title="Ann Bolling Randolph Fitzhugh" label="Ann Bolling Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q675702" start="10914" end="10929" title="Arlington House, The Robert E. Lee Memorial" label="Arlington House"/>
<link wikidata="Q629961" start="11124" end="11152" title="George Washington Custis Lee" label="George Washington Custis Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q75763254" start="11349" end="11364" title="Mary Custis Lee" label="Mary Custis Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387911" start="11418" end="11444" title="William Henry Fitzhugh Lee" label="William Henry Fitzhugh Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q75763632" start="11592" end="11607" title="Anne Carter Lee" label="Anne Carter Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="11659" end="11672" title="typhoid fever" label="typhoid fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q75764077" start="11686" end="11703" title="Eleanor Agnes Lee" label="Eleanor Agnes Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="11746" end="11758" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343828" start="11772" end="11794" title="Robert Edward Lee, Jr." label="Robert Edward Lee, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q29094415" start="11871" end="11891" title="1st Rockbridge Artillery" label="Rockbridge Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q75764091" start="12003" end="12021" title="Mildred Childe Lee" label="Mildred Childe Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370207" start="12205" end="12222" title="University Chapel" label="University Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785291" start="12226" end="12255" title="Washington and Lee University" label="Washington and Lee University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017362" start="12321" end="12337" title="William Randolph" label="William Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324206" start="12368" end="12381" title="Richard Bland (burgess)" label="Richard Bland"/>
<link wikidata="Q708656" start="12383" end="12395" title="Fitzhugh Lee" label="Fitzhugh Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="12477" end="12497" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q38203" start="12549" end="12561" title="Helen Keller" label="Helen Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q517781" start="12620" end="12639" title="Willis Augustus Lee" label="Willis Augustus Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q358391" start="12708" end="12718" title="A. P. Hill" label="A. P. Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914331" start="12848" end="12861" title="Mort Künstler" label="Mort Künstler"/>
<link wikidata="Q55447948" start="12911" end="12923" title="Odette Tyler" label="Odette Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020251" start="12959" end="12983" title="William Whedbee Kirkland" label="William Whedbee Kirkland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="13044" end="13064" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q354759" start="13092" end="13106" title="Winfield Scott" label="Winfield Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q173270" start="13144" end="13152" title="Veracruz (city)" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="13310" end="13318" title="Mexico" label="Mexicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q911283" start="13405" end="13411" title="brevet (military)" label="brevet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888281" start="13428" end="13449" title="Battle of Cerro Gordo" label="Battle of Cerro Gordo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399696" start="13487" end="13496" title="Battle of Contreras" label="Contreras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333407" start="13498" end="13508" title="Battle of Churubusco" label="Churubusco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536618" start="13514" end="13525" title="Battle of Chapultepec" label="Chapultepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="13769" end="13776" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="13825" end="13841" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470892" start="14105" end="14117" title="Fort Carroll" label="Fort Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="14121" end="14130" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362170" start="14273" end="14286" title="Narciso López" label="Narciso López"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073738" start="14381" end="14391" title="Filibuster (military)" label="filibuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="14898" end="14928" title="United States Military Academy" label="Military Academy at West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641270" start="15454" end="15474" title="5th Cavalry Regiment" label="2nd Cavalry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q361140" start="15627" end="15649" title="Albert Sidney Johnston" label="Albert Sidney Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347983" start="15653" end="15664" title="Camp Cooper" label="Camp Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="15731" end="15737" title="Apache" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q117133" start="15746" end="15754" title="Comanche" label="Comanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508559" start="15844" end="15874" title="George Washington Parke Custis" label="George Washington Parke Custis"/>
<link wikidata="Q654437" start="15938" end="15947" title="Executor" label="executing"/>
<link wikidata="Q155656" start="15952" end="15956" title="Will and testament" label="will"/>
<link wikidata="Q88" start="17544" end="17554" title="Alexandria, Virginia" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="17725" end="17733" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="18204" end="18216" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q983247" start="18315" end="18337" title="New York Tribune" label="New York Daily Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336827" start="18908" end="18938" title="National Anti-Slavery Standard" label="National Anti-Slavery Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q214403" start="19787" end="19792" title="brine" label="brine"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="19908" end="19915" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454489" start="20393" end="20404" title="manumission" label="manumission"/>
<link wikidata="Q451929" start="20928" end="20946" title="Douglas S. Freeman" label="Douglas S. Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749715" start="21341" end="21368" title="The Making of Robert E. Lee" label="The Making of Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q331377" start="23924" end="23939" title="Bleeding Kansas" label="Bleeding Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q85801554" start="23985" end="24011" title="Pro-slavery ideology in the United States" label="slavery as a positive good"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="24224" end="24236" title="Abolitionism" label="abolitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454489" start="24655" end="24666" title="manumission" label="manumission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508559" start="24846" end="24864" title="George Washington Parke Custis" label="G. W. Parke Custis"/>
<link wikidata="Q210911" start="24886" end="24915" title="American Colonization Society" label="American Colonization Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="24994" end="25001" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362483" start="25388" end="25409" title="Elizabeth Brown Pryor" label="Elizabeth Brown Pryor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056269" start="27170" end="27180" title="Eric Foner" label="Eric Foner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555039" start="27791" end="27810" title="1860 Democratic National Conventions" label="Southern Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="27833" end="27847" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q273212" start="27848" end="27868" title="John C. Breckinridge" label="John C. Breckinridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q698842" start="27911" end="27937" title="1860 United States presidential election" label="1860 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995078" start="27960" end="27982" title="Lecompton Constitution" label="Lecompton Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q331377" start="27987" end="27993" title="Bleeding Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128268" start="28007" end="28033" title="Constitutional Union Party (United States)" label="Constitutional Union Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349142" start="28042" end="28051" title="John Bell (Tennessee politician)" label="John Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570565" start="28057" end="28074" title="Southern Unionist" label="Southern Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q20708501" start="28093" end="28101" title="1860 United States presidential election in Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350273" start="28124" end="28133" title="Admission to the Union" label="admission"/>
<link wikidata="Q104879333" start="28137" end="28176" title="Constitutions of Kansas" label="Kansas under the Lecompton Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851323" start="28184" end="28220" title="List of United States senators from Tennessee" label="United States Senator from Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q709723" start="29843" end="29861" title="James M. McPherson" label="James M. McPherson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29898" end="29953" title="American Civil War prison camps#Prisoner exchanges" label="prisoner exchange between the Confederacy and the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q391358" start="30124" end="30149" title="Emancipation Proclamation" label="Emancipation Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757369" start="30509" end="30522" title="Andrew Hunter (lawyer)" label="Andrew Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="31673" end="31687" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="32161" end="32173" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q840191" start="32316" end="32326" title="Lost Cause of the Confederacy" label="Lost Cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223430" start="32589" end="32602" title="John Brown&amp;#x27;s raid on Harpers Ferry" label="Harpers Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2489844" start="32611" end="32629" title="Texas in the American Civil War" label="secession of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q189366" start="32800" end="32810" title="John Brown (abolitionist)" label="John Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586032" start="32857" end="32872" title="Harpers Ferry Armory" label="federal arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q985289" start="32876" end="32889" title="Harpers Ferry, West Virginia" label="Harpers Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12325" start="32964" end="32978" title="James Buchanan" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="33037" end="33058" title="United States Marines" label="United States Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594218" start="33686" end="33697" title="Samuel P. Heintzelman" label="Heintzelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613729" start="33701" end="33711" title="Fort Brown, Texas" label="Fort Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173309" start="33898" end="33909" title="Cortina War" label="Cortina War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256528" start="33917" end="33925" title="Rip Ford" label="Rip Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q510865" start="33929" end="33941" title="Texas Rangers Division" label="Texas Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="34246" end="34251" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q448348" start="34278" end="34293" title="David E. Twiggs" label="David E. Twiggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471598" start="34859" end="34876" title="Fort Mason (Texas)" label="Fort Mason, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="35133" end="35162" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="35303" end="35319" title="Founding Fathers" label="Founding Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q474987" start="35761" end="35782" title="Crittenden Compromise" label="Crittenden Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348975" start="36774" end="36787" title="Simon Cameron" label="Simon Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596267" start="36881" end="36901" title="1st Cavalry Regiment (United States)" label="1st Cavalry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660153" start="37251" end="37256" title="Sydney Smith Lee" label="Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218751" start="37268" end="37276" title="Samuel Phillips Lee" label="Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q937791" start="37530" end="37546" title="Francis P. Blair" label="Francis P. Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124610" start="37586" end="37617" title="Civil War Defenses of Washington" label="defense of the national capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q451929" start="38304" end="38328" title="Douglas Southall Freeman" label="Douglas Southall Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q708656" start="39675" end="39683" title="Fitzhugh Lee" label="Fitzhugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238965" start="40190" end="40204" title="John H. Upshur" label="John H. Upshur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358420" start="40266" end="40277" title="Roger Jones (Inspector General)" label="Roger Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q16065769" start="40361" end="40375" title="Philip Richard Fendall II" label="Philip Fendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q108146792" start="40598" end="40626" title="Provisional Army of Virginia" label="Provisional Army of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934533" start="40635" end="40654" title="Virginia State Navy" label="Virginia State Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135313" start="40805" end="40818" title="Full General (CSA)" label="full generals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426037" start="41246" end="41270" title="Battle of Cheat Mountain" label="Battle of Cheat Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284279" start="41543" end="41555" title="Battle of Fort Pulaski" label="Fort Pulaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438578" start="41915" end="41927" title="Fort James Jackson" label="Fort Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052780" start="42293" end="42334" title="Sherman&amp;#x27;s March to the Sea" label="Sherman&amp;#x27;s approach from the interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165392" start="42606" end="42623" title="Seacoast defense in the United States" label="Third System Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999471" start="42855" end="42876" title="President of the Confederate States" label="Confederate President"/>
<link wikidata="Q162269" start="42877" end="42892" title="Jefferson Davis" label="Jefferson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="42905" end="42926" title="United States Secretary of War" label="U.S. Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="42937" end="42945" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154050" start="43241" end="43259" title="Peninsula Campaign" label="Peninsula Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q653089" start="43271" end="43290" title="Army of the Potomac" label="Army of the Potomac"/>
<link wikidata="Q310192" start="43305" end="43324" title="George B. McClellan" label="George B. McClellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438639" start="43351" end="43362" title="Fort Monroe" label="Fort Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q439669" start="43416" end="43434" title="Joseph E. Johnston" label="Joseph E. Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550466" start="43559" end="43580" title="Battle of Seven Pines" label="Battle of Seven Pines"/>
<link wikidata="Q689847" start="43688" end="43725" title="Army of Northern Virginia" label="Army of &amp;quot;Northern&amp;quot; Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q492324" start="44287" end="44305" title="Seven Days Battles" label="Seven Days Battles"/>
<link wikidata="Q422487" start="44591" end="44602" title="James River (Virginia)" label="James River"/>
<link wikidata="Q465291" start="45332" end="45341" title="John Pope (military officer)" label="John Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q233343" start="45349" end="45374" title="Second Battle of Bull Run" label="Second Battle of Bull Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356912" start="45874" end="45902" title="United States elections, 1862" label="the upcoming Union elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431109" start="46012" end="46029" title="Special Order 191" label="Special Order 191"/>
<link wikidata="Q754473" start="46413" end="46433" title="Sharpsburg, Maryland" label="Sharpsburg, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q719252" start="46481" end="46499" title="Battle of Antietam" label="Battle of Antietam"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="46722" end="46737" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q391358" start="46767" end="46792" title="Emancipation Proclamation" label="Emancipation Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q355444" start="46943" end="46959" title="Ambrose Burnside" label="Ambrose Burnside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333499" start="47040" end="47058" title="Rappahannock River" label="Rappahannock River"/>
<link wikidata="Q492342" start="47062" end="47086" title="Fredericksburg, Virginia" label="Fredericksburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q751186" start="47185" end="47210" title="Battle of Fredericksburg" label="the Union frontal assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q315597" start="47754" end="47767" title="Joseph Hooker" label="Joseph Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477875" start="47950" end="47977" title="Chancellorsville, Virginia" label="Chancellorsville crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q745979" start="48218" end="48228" title="Battle of Chancellorsville" label="was beaten"/>
<link wikidata="Q216124" start="48341" end="48358" title="Stonewall Jackson" label="Stonewall Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="49360" end="49376" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377639" start="49985" end="50004" title="Gettysburg Campaign" label="Gettysburg Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q297121" start="50171" end="50186" title="George G. Meade" label="George G. Meade"/>
<link wikidata="Q33132" start="50232" end="50239" title="Battle of Gettysburg" label="clashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q313583" start="50458" end="50471" title="J.E.B. Stuart" label="J.E.B. Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q431200" start="50746" end="50759" title="Richard S. Ewell" label="General Ewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q311514" start="51057" end="51073" title="James Longstreet" label="James Longstreet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152440" start="51235" end="51256" title="Pickett&amp;#x27;s Charge" label="Pickett&amp;#x27;s Charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q454069" start="51314" end="51321" title="George Pickett" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q376969" start="51820" end="51827" title="Bristoe Campaign" label="Bristoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q305409" start="51832" end="51840" title="Mine Run Campaign" label="Mine Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q714250" start="52046" end="52058" title="Shelby Foote" label="Shelby Foote"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="52260" end="52276" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q831550" start="52378" end="52387" title="attrition warfare" label="attrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q739644" start="52584" end="52601" title="Overland Campaign" label="Overland Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425882" start="52615" end="52625" title="Battle of the Wilderness" label="Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538874" start="52627" end="52651" title="Battle of Spotsylvania Court House" label="Spotsylvania Court House"/>
<link wikidata="Q497797" start="52656" end="52667" title="Battle of Cold Harbor" label="Cold Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q422487" start="52735" end="52746" title="James River (Virginia)" label="James River"/>
<link wikidata="Q511964" start="52790" end="52810" title="Petersburg, Virginia" label="Petersburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q241059" start="52960" end="52974" title="trench warfare" label="trench warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="52978" end="52989" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q257497" start="53039" end="53053" title="Jubal A. Early" label="Jubal A. Early"/>
<link wikidata="Q142668" start="53076" end="53093" title="Shenandoah Valley" label="Shenandoah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q355452" start="53173" end="53188" title="Philip Sheridan" label="Philip Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q815195" start="53194" end="53213" title="Siege of Petersburg" label="Siege of Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205650" start="53438" end="53494" title="General in Chief of the Armies of the Confederate States" label="General in Chief of the Armies of the Confederate States"/>
<link wikidata="Q511964" start="53842" end="53852" title="Petersburg, Virginia" label="Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355391" start="54155" end="54187" title="Battle of Appomattox Court House" label="Battle of Appomattox Court House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6512812" start="54291" end="54307" title="Lee&amp;#x27;s Farewell Address" label="Farewell Address"/>
<link wikidata="Q675702" start="55088" end="55106" title="Arlington House, The Robert E. Lee Memorial" label="Custis-Lee Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="55166" end="55193" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11833539" start="55537" end="55556" title="Radical Republicans" label="Radical Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373704" start="56066" end="56078" title="Emory Thomas" label="Emory Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16900719" start="56560" end="56577" title="Stewart-Lee House" label="Stewart-Lee House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785291" start="56653" end="56682" title="Washington and Lee University" label="Washington and Lee University"/>
<link wikidata="Q501761" start="56687" end="56706" title="Lexington, Virginia" label="Lexington, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972542" start="57001" end="57021" title="Washington and Lee University School of Law" label="Lexington Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084335" start="57098" end="57110" title="honor system" label="honor system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57225" end="57234" title="Gentleman#Robert E. Lee" label="gentleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="58428" end="58442" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q185943" start="58468" end="58475" title="Amnesty" label="Amnesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="58480" end="58486" title="Pardon" label="Pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="58526" end="58535" title="rebellion" label="rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="59313" end="59327" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="59356" end="59370" title="Reconstruction era of the United States" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889648" start="59537" end="59584" title="United States Congress Joint Committee on Reconstruction" label="Joint Congressional Committee on Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q752847" start="59784" end="59799" title="status quo ante bellum" label="status quo ante"/>
<link wikidata="Q372743" start="61418" end="61440" title="Alexander H. H. Stuart" label="Alexander H. H. Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="61488" end="61511" title="United States Democratic Party" label="Democratic Party&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q698955" start="61512" end="61533" title="1868 United States presidential election" label="presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q887320" start="61544" end="61559" title="Horatio Seymour" label="Horatio Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q257497" start="63223" end="63234" title="Jubal Early" label="Jubal Early"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="63912" end="63918" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q501761" start="63991" end="64010" title="Lexington, Virginia" label="Lexington, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="64017" end="64026" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q358391" start="64114" end="64118" title="A. P. Hill" label="Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836" start="64288" end="64295" title="aphasia" label="aphasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061518" start="64658" end="64669" title="Maury River" label="Maury River"/>
<link wikidata="Q785357" start="64918" end="64945" title="Virginia Military Institute" label="Virginia Military Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370207" start="64983" end="65000" title="University Chapel" label="University Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785291" start="65004" end="65033" title="Washington and Lee University" label="Washington and Lee University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636255" start="65341" end="65363" title="William N. Pendleton" label="Rev. William Pendleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482551" start="65386" end="65408" title="Francis T. Anderson" label="Judge Francis Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179089" start="65410" end="65424" title="David E. Moore" label="David E. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q878942" start="65433" end="65453" title="Governor of Virginia" label="Governor of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q880385" start="65454" end="65466" title="John Letcher" label="John Letcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q114385" start="65472" end="65495" title="Matthew Fontaine Maury" label="Commodore Matthew Maury"/>
<link wikidata="Q216124" start="65713" end="65730" title="Stonewall Jackson" label="Stonewall Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569997" start="65798" end="65825" title="Southern Historical Society" label="Southern Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="65829" end="65836" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q547342" start="65847" end="65867" title="Benjamin Harvey Hill" label="Benjamin Harvey Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056269" start="66395" end="66405" title="Eric Foner" label="Eric Foner"/>
<link wikidata="Q216124" start="66582" end="66599" title="Stonewall Jackson" label="Stonewall Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q609700" start="67337" end="67360" title="Stone Mountain Memorial" label="Stone Mountain Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892375" start="67752" end="67770" title="Early United States commemorative coins" label="commemorative coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618997" start="67781" end="67816" title="Stone Mountain Memorial half dollar" label="Stone Mountain Memorial half dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451972" start="68139" end="68157" title="Loyalty oath" label="oath of allegiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q15133865" start="68178" end="68210" title="citizenship of the United States" label="citizenship of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q297308" start="68286" end="68300" title="William Seward" label="William Seward"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268711" start="68579" end="68596" title="Harry F. Byrd Jr." label="Harry F. Byrd Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="68823" end="68834" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q186492" start="68870" end="68886" title="George S. Patton" label="George S. Patton"/>
<link wikidata="Q216124" start="68954" end="68971" title="Stonewall Jackson" label="Stonewall Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q840191" start="69392" end="69402" title="Lost Cause of the Confederacy" label="Lost Cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="69483" end="69498" title="white supremacy" label="white supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="69567" end="69588" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q841571" start="69680" end="69688" title="Freedman" label="freedmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q675702" start="69778" end="69821" title="Arlington House, The Robert E. Lee Memorial" label="Arlington House, The Robert E. Lee Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513688" start="69866" end="69879" title="Greek Revival architecture" label="Greek revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="69960" end="69973" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q465811" start="69982" end="69995" title="National Mall" label="National Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="70094" end="70121" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245432" start="70245" end="70262" title="National Memorial (United States)" label="National Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357541" start="70328" end="70333" title="Northern United States" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="70338" end="70343" title="Southern United States" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q46999400" start="70371" end="70401" title="Robert E. Lee Monument (Richmond, Virginia)" label="large equestrian statue of Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274629" start="70421" end="70440" title="Jean Antonin Mercié" label="Jean Antonin Mercié"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141531" start="70464" end="70479" title="Monument Avenue" label="Monument Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554764" start="70960" end="70993" title="Gettysburg National Military Park" label="Gettysburg National Military Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152440" start="71068" end="71089" title="Pickett&amp;#x27;s Charge" label="Pickett&amp;#x27;s Charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460082" start="71142" end="71152" title="flood wall" label="flood wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q422487" start="71160" end="71171" title="James River" label="James River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="71279" end="71288" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q745979" start="71694" end="71720" title="Battle of Chancellorsville" label="Battle of Chancellorsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="71744" end="71752" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343853" start="71796" end="71823" title="Robert E. Lee Memorial Park" label="Robert E. Lee Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="71925" end="71933" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q993553" start="71937" end="71950" title="National Statuary Hall" label="Statuary Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="71958" end="71970" title="United States Capitol" label="U.S. Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859265" start="72129" end="72147" title="Barbara Rose Johns" label="Barbara Rose Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="72187" end="72197" title="bas-relief" label="bas-relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q609700" start="72210" end="72224" title="Stone Mountain" label="Stone Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="72230" end="72237" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159677" start="72444" end="72466" title="Confederate Memorial Day" label="Confederate Heroes Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q11095193" start="72753" end="72768" title="Lee–Jackson Day" label="Lee–Jackson Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q751738" start="72808" end="72835" title="Martin Luther King, Jr. Day" label="Martin Luther King, Jr. Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785291" start="73054" end="73083" title="Washington and Lee University" label="Washington and Lee University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6513309" start="73112" end="73123" title="Lee College" label="Lee College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370207" start="73157" end="73174" title="University Chapel" label="University Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343833" start="73362" end="73383" title="Robert E. Lee Academy" label="Robert E. Lee Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618997" start="73445" end="73480" title="Stone Mountain Memorial half dollar" label="Stone Mountain Memorial half dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014341" start="73635" end="73664" title="CSS Robert E. Lee" label="CSS &amp;quot;Robert E. Lee&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927238" start="73772" end="73800" title="Blockade runners of the American Civil War" label="Confederate blockade runners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="73877" end="73894" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q178193" start="73895" end="73904" title="steamboat" label="steamboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343831" start="73911" end="73924" title="Robert E. Lee (steamboat)" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="74004" end="74013" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="74016" end="74027" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144898" start="74090" end="74106" title="Currier and Ives" label="Currier and Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q16910795" start="74206" end="74235" title="Waiting for the Robert E. Lee" label="Waiting for the Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536540" start="74245" end="74258" title="Lewis F. Muir" label="Lewis F. Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q329358" start="74263" end="74279" title="L. Wolfe Gilbert" label="L. Wolfe Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q223184" start="74356" end="74362" title="M3 Lee" label="M3 Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="74417" end="74425" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22706" start="74445" end="74458" title="license plate" label="license plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q707110" start="74564" end="74574" title="Fort Bliss" label="Fort Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002108" start="74621" end="74636" title="Buffalo Soldier" label="Buffalo Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328779" start="74764" end="74789" title="Arlington Memorial Bridge" label="Arlington Memorial Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q123766" start="74911" end="74936" title="Charlottesville, Virginia" label="Charlottesville, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15272827" start="74956" end="74972" title="Robert Edward Lee (sculpture)" label="sculpture of Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="75307" end="75324" title="white supremacist" label="white supremacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018230" start="75329" end="75338" title="alt-right" label="alt-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q36248530" start="75366" end="75387" title="Unite the Right rally" label="Unite the Right rally"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75456" end="75484" title="Robert E. Lee Monument (Charlottesville, Virginia)#Removal" label="has been permanently removed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343855" start="75636" end="75644" title="Robert E. Lee Monument (New Orleans, Louisiana)" label="monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q6513292" start="75662" end="75672" title="Lee Circle" label="Lee Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="75701" end="75712" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508545" start="75815" end="75838" title="George Washington Cable" label="George Washington Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="76115" end="76135" title="stained-glass window" label="stained-glass window"/>
<link wikidata="Q668710" start="76143" end="76172" title="Washington National Cathedral" label="Washington National Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q745979" start="76202" end="76218" title="Battle of Chancellorsville" label="Chancellorsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887679" start="76283" end="76318" title="United Daughters of the Confederacy" label="United Daughters of the Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508557" start="76493" end="76525" title="Hall of Fame for Great Americans" label="Hall of Fame for Great Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974180" start="76604" end="76627" title="Bronx Community College" label="Bronx Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q37074686" start="76631" end="76653" title="Statue of Robert E. Lee (Austin, Texas)" label="A bronze statue of Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="76687" end="76716" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q39922533" start="76722" end="76729" title="Robert E. Lee (Proctor)" label="another"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="76782" end="76788" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q451929" start="76811" end="76835" title="Douglas Southall Freeman" label="Douglas Southall Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q208628" start="77126" end="77137" title="hagiography" label="hagiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q952566" start="77399" end="77408" title="Traveller (horse)" label="Traveller"/>
<link wikidata="Q108565873" start="77847" end="77865" title="Thomas L. Connelly" label="Thomas L. Connelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373704" start="78078" end="78093" title="Emory M. Thomas" label="Emory M. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731564" start="78237" end="78252" title="Allen C. Guelzo" label="Allen C. Guelzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888281" start="78349" end="78370" title="Battle of Cerro Gordo" label="Battle of Cerro Gordo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399696" start="78410" end="78419" title="Battle of Contreras" label="Contreras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333407" start="78424" end="78434" title="Battle of Churubusco" label="Churubusco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536618" start="78463" end="78484" title="Battle of Chapultepec" label="Battle of Chapultepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521472" start="78567" end="78584" title="The Killer Angels" label="The Killer Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q13373598" start="78605" end="78622" title="Gods and Generals (novel)" label="Gods and Generals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745774" start="78647" end="78668" title="The Last Full Measure (novel)" label="The Last Full Measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q123166" start="78724" end="78734" title="Gettysburg (1993 film)" label="Gettysburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533901" start="78758" end="78775" title="Gods and Generals (film)" label="Gods and Generals"/>
<link wikidata="Q184572" start="78806" end="78818" title="Martin Sheen" label="Martin Sheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q171736" start="78862" end="78875" title="Robert Duvall" label="Robert Duvall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515676" start="78964" end="78991" title="Lee and Grant at Appomattox" label="Lee and Grant at Appomattox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226282" start="79008" end="79024" title="MacKinlay Kantor" label="MacKinlay Kantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q313289" start="79097" end="79110" title="Richard Adams" label="Richard Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836055" start="79129" end="79138" title="Traveller (novel)" label="Traveller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743413" start="79184" end="79222" title="American Civil War alternate histories" label="American Civil War alternate histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q947986" start="79224" end="79234" title="Ward Moore" label="Ward Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4132785" start="79248" end="79265" title="Bring the Jubilee" label="Bring the Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226282" start="79280" end="79296" title="MacKinlay Kantor" label="MacKinlay Kantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25044848" start="79310" end="79344" title="If the South Had Won the Civil War" label="If the South Had Won the Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q455780" start="79363" end="79379" title="Harry Turtledove" label="Harry Turtledove"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738533" start="79393" end="79414" title="The Guns of the South" label="The Guns of the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q17106552" start="79851" end="79876" title="War Between the Provinces" label="War Between the Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="79983" end="79989" title="knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368527" start="80183" end="80197" title="S. M. Stirling" label="S. M. Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="80223" end="80231" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="80249" end="80256" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="80282" end="80287" title="Queen Victoria" label="Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="80300" end="80308" title="Russian Empire" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="80312" end="80318" title="Crimean War" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4436312" start="80381" end="80399" title="Alternate Generals III" label="Alternate Generals"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="80451" end="80457" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349829" start="80557" end="80570" title="Robert Skimin" label="Robert Skimin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598240" start="80584" end="80596" title="Grey Victory" label="Grey Victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q234700" start="80691" end="80704" title="Connie Willis" label="Connie Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550348" start="80728" end="80749" title="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Dreams" label="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q669856" start="80875" end="80888" title="Dodge Charger" label="Dodge Charger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304408" start="80933" end="80953" title="The Dukes of Hazzard" label="The Dukes of Hazzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2541723" start="80982" end="80997" title="General Lee (car)" label="The General Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306995" start="81002" end="81036" title="The Dukes of Hazzard (film)" label="the 2005 film based on this series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3759575" start="81138" end="81187" title="List of American Civil War generals (Confederate)" label="List of American Civil War generals (Confederate)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182203" start="81190" end="81224" title="List of memorials to Robert E. Lee" label="List of memorials to Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q37030910" start="81227" end="81273" title="Removal of Confederate monuments and memorials" label="Removal of Confederate monuments and memorials"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731564" start="81519" end="81535" title="Allen C. Guelzo" label="Guelzo, Allen C."/>
<link wikidata="Q3968105" start="81804" end="81819" title="Stanley L. Klos" label="Stanley L. Klos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842919" start="81968" end="81987" title="American Experience" label="American Experience"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25742" wikidata="Q182270" url="?curid=25742" title="Raster graphics">
<text>In computer graphics and digital photography, a raster graphic represents a two-dimensional picture as a rectangular matrix or grid of pixels, viewable via a computer display, paper, or other display medium. A raster image is technically characterized by the width and height of the image in pixels and by the number of bits per pixel. Raster images are stored in image files with varying dissemination, production, generation, and acquisition formats.

The printing and prepress industries know raster graphics as contones (from &quot;continuous tones&quot;). In contrast, line art is usually implemented as vector graphics in digital systems.
Many raster manipulations map directly onto the mathematical formalisms of linear algebra, where mathematical objects of matrix structure are of central concern.

==Etymological ==
The word &quot;raster&quot; has its origins in the Latin &quot;&quot; (a rake), which is derived from &quot;&quot; (to scrape). It originates from the raster scan of cathode-ray tube (CRT) video monitors, which draw the image line by line by magnetically or electrostatically steering a focused electron beam. By association, it can also refer to a rectangular grid of pixels. The word rastrum is now used to refer to a device for drawing musical staff lines.

==Data model==
The fundamental strategy underlying the raster data model is the tessellation of a plane, into a two-dimensional array of squares, each called a &quot;cell&quot; or &quot;pixel&quot; (from &quot;picture element&quot;). In digital photography, the plane is the visual field as projected onto the image sensor; in computer art, the plane is a virtual canvas; in geographic information systems, the plane is a projection of the Earth&#x27;s surface. The size of each square pixel, known as the &quot;resolution&quot; or &quot;support&quot;, is constant across the grid.
Raster or &quot;gridded data&quot; may be the result of a gridding procedure.

A single numeric value is then stored for each pixel. For most images, this value is a visible color, but other measurements are possible, even numeric codes for qualitative categories. Each raster grid has a specified &quot;pixel format&quot;, the data type for each number. Common pixel formats are binary, gray-scale, palettized, and full-color, where color depth determines the fidelity of the colors represented, and color space determines the range of color coverage (which is often less than the full range of human color vision). Most modern color raster formats represent color using 24 bits (over 16 million distinct colors), with 8 bits (values 0–255) for each color channel (red, green, and blue). The digital sensors used for remote sensing and astronomy are often able to detect and store wavelengths beyond the visible spectrum; the large CCD bitmapped sensor at the Vera C. Rubin Observatory captures 3.2 gigapixels in a single image (6.4 GB raw), over six color channels which exceed the spectral range of human color vision.

== Uses ==
===Image storage===

Most computer images are stored in raster graphics formats or compressed variations, including GIF, JPEG, and PNG, which are popular on the World Wide Web. A raster data structure is based on a (usually rectangular, square-based) tessellation of the 2D plane into cells, each containing a single value. To store the data in a file, the two-dimensional array must be serialized. The most common way to do this is a &quot;row-major&quot; format, in which the cells along the first (usually top) row are listed left to right, followed immediately by those of the second row, and so on. 

In the example at right, the cells of tessellation A are overlaid on the point pattern B resulting in an array C of quadrant counts representing the number of points in each cell. For purposes of visualization a lookup table has been used to color each of the cells in an image D. Here are the numbers as a serial row-major array:

1 3 0 0 1 12 8 0 1 4 3 3 0 2 0 2 1 7 4 1 5 4 2 2 0 3 1 2 2 2 2 3 0 5 1 9 3 3 3 4 5 0 8 0 2 4 3 2 8 4 3 2 2 7 2 3 2 10 1 5 2 1 3 7

To reconstruct the two-dimensional grid, the file must include a &quot;header&quot; section at the beginning that contains at least the number of columns, and the pixel datatype (especially the number of bits or bytes per value) so the reader knows where each value ends to start reading the next one. Headers may also include the number of rows, georeferencing parameters for geographic data, or other metadata tags, such as those specified in the Exif standard.

====Compression====
High-resolution raster grids contain a large number of pixels, and thus consume a large amount of memory. This has led to multiple approaches to compressing the data volume into smaller files. The most common strategy is to look for patterns or trends in the pixel values, then store a parameterized form of the pattern instead of the original data. Common raster compression algorithms include run-length encoding (RLE), JPEG, LZ (the basis for PNG and ZIP), Lempel–Ziv–Welch (LZW) (the basis for GIF), and others.

For example, Run length encoding looks for repeated values in the array, and replaces them with the value and the number of times it appears. Thus, the raster above would be represented as:

This technique is very efficient when there are large areas of identical values, such as a line drawing, but in a photograph where pixels are usually slightly different from their neighbors, the RLE file would be up to twice the size of the original.

Some compression algorithms, such as RLE and LZW, are &quot;lossless&quot;, where the original pixel values can be perfectly regenerated from the compressed data. Other algorithms, such as JPEG, are &quot;lossy&quot;, because the parameterized patterns are only an approximation of the original pixel values, so the latter can only be estimated from the compressed data.

====Raster–vector conversion====
Vector images (line work) can be rasterized (converted into pixels), and raster images vectorized (raster images converted into vector graphics), by software. In both cases some information is lost, although certain vectorization operations can recreate salient information, as in the case of optical character recognition.

===Displays===
Early mechanical televisions developed in the 1920s employed rasterization principles. Electronic television based on cathode-ray tube displays are raster scanned with horizontal rasters painted left to right, and the raster lines painted top to bottom. 

Modern flat-panel displays such as LED monitors still use a raster approach. Each on-screen pixel directly corresponds to a small number of bits in memory. The screen is refreshed simply by scanning through pixels and coloring them according to each set of bits. The refresh procedure, being speed critical, is often implemented by dedicated circuitry, often as a part of a graphics processing unit. 

Using this approach, the computer contains an area of memory that holds all the data that are to be displayed. The central processor writes data into this region of memory and the video controller collects them from there. The bits of data stored in this block of memory are related to the eventual pattern of pixels that will be used to construct an image on the display.

An early scanned display with raster computer graphics was invented in the late 1960s by A. Michael Noll at Bell Labs, but its patent application filed February 5, 1970, was abandoned at the Supreme Court in 1977 over the issue of the patentability of computer software.

===Printing===

During the 1970s and 1980s, pen plotters, using Vector graphics, were common for creating precise drawings, especially on large format paper. However, since then almost all printers create the printed image as a raster grid, including both laser and inkjet printers. When the source information is vector, rendering specifications and software such as PostScript are used to create the raster image.

===Three-dimensional rasters===
Three-dimensional voxel raster graphics are employed in video games and are also used in medical imaging such as MRI scanners.

===Geographic information systems===

Geographic phenomena are commonly represented in a raster format in GIS. The raster grid is &quot;georeferenced&quot;, so that each pixel (commonly called a &quot;cell&quot; in GIS because the &quot;picture&quot; part of &quot;pixel&quot; is not relevant) represents a square region of geographic space. The value of each cell then represents some measurable (qualitative or quantitative) property of that region, typically conceptualized as a field. Examples of fields commonly represented in rasters include: temperature, population density, soil moisture, land cover, surface elevation, etc. Two sampling models are used to derive cell values from the field: in a &quot;lattice&quot;, the value is measured at the center point of each cell; in a &quot;grid&quot;, the value is a summary (usually a mean or mode) of the value over the entire cell.

==Resolution==
Raster graphics are resolution dependent, meaning they cannot scale up to an arbitrary resolution without loss of apparent quality. This property contrasts with the capabilities of vector graphics, which easily scale up to the quality of the device rendering them. Raster graphics deal more practically than vector graphics with photographs and photo-realistic images, while vector graphics often serve better for typesetting or for graphic design. Modern computer-monitors typically display about 72 to 130 pixels per inch (PPI), and some modern consumer printers can resolve 2400 dots per inch (DPI) or more; determining the most appropriate image resolution for a given printer-resolution can pose difficulties, since printed output may have a greater level of detail than a viewer can discern on a monitor. Typically, a resolution of 150 to 300 PPI works well for 4-color process (CMYK) printing.

However, for printing technologies that perform color mixing through dithering (halftone) rather than through overprinting (virtually all home/office inkjet and laser printers), printer DPI and image PPI have a very different meaning, and this can be misleading. Because, through the dithering process, the printer builds a single image pixel out of several printer dots to increase color depth, the printer&#x27;s DPI setting must be set far higher than the desired PPI to ensure sufficient color depth without sacrificing image resolution. Thus, for instance, printing an image at 250 PPI may actually require a printer setting of 1200 DPI.

==Raster-based image editors==
Raster-based image editors, such as PaintShop Pro, Corel Painter, Adobe Photoshop, Paint.NET, Microsoft Paint, Krita, and GIMP, revolve around editing pixels, unlike vector-based image editors, such as Xfig, CorelDRAW, Adobe Illustrator, or Inkscape, which revolve around editing lines and shapes (vectors). When an image is rendered in a raster-based image editor, the image is composed of millions of pixels. At its core, a raster image editor works by manipulating each individual pixel. Most pixel-based image editors work using the RGB color model, but some also allow the use of other color models such as the CMYK color model.

==See also==
*Comparison of raster graphics editors
*Dither
*Halftone
*Pixel-art scaling algorithms
*Raster graphics editor
*Raster graphics file formats
*Raster image processor
*Raster scan
*Rasterisation
*Text semigraphics
*Texture atlas 
*Vector graphics – a contrasting graphics method

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="3" end="20" title="computer graphics" label="computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q173095" start="25" end="44" title="digital photography" label="digital photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q182270" start="48" end="62" title="Raster graphics" label="raster graphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q355198" start="135" end="140" title="pixel" label="pixel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290" start="158" end="174" title="computer display" label="computer display"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="176" end="181" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q690110" start="320" end="334" title="bits per pixel" label="bits per pixel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572121" start="364" end="374" title="image file" label="image file"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196904" start="389" end="402" title="electronic publishing" label="dissemination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351962" start="404" end="414" title="raster graphics editor" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911860" start="416" end="426" title="3D rendering" label="generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q654383" start="432" end="451" title="raw image format" label="acquisition formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q11034" start="458" end="466" title="printing" label="printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q389675" start="471" end="479" title="prepress" label="prepress"/>
<link wikidata="Q182270" start="515" end="523" title="Raster graphics" label="contones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749750" start="547" end="552" title="tints and shades" label="tones"/>
<link wikidata="Q365552" start="574" end="582" title="line art" label="line art"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="609" end="624" title="vector graphics" label="vector graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q82571" start="720" end="734" title="linear algebra" label="linear algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q44337" start="766" end="772" title="matrix (mathematics)" label="matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641959" start="977" end="988" title="raster scan" label="raster scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="992" end="1008" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q327065" start="1015" end="1028" title="video monitor" label="video monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q207340" start="1121" end="1134" title="electron beam" label="electron beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q919012" start="1212" end="1219" title="rastrum" label="rastrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q214856" start="1367" end="1379" title="tessellation" label="tessellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q355198" start="1473" end="1478" title="pixel" label="pixel"/>
<link wikidata="Q173095" start="1524" end="1543" title="digital photography" label="digital photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364768" start="1562" end="1574" title="visual field" label="visual field"/>
<link wikidata="Q209121" start="1597" end="1609" title="image sensor" label="image sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376265" start="1614" end="1626" title="computer art" label="computer art"/>
<link wikidata="Q483130" start="1662" end="1692" title="geographic information systems" label="geographic information systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q186386" start="1709" end="1719" title="Map projection" label="projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334079" start="1927" end="1935" title="gridding" label="gridding"/>
<link wikidata="Q864118" start="2249" end="2255" title="binary image" label="binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q685727" start="2257" end="2267" title="gray-scale" label="gray-scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357944" start="2269" end="2279" title="palette (computing)" label="palettized"/>
<link wikidata="Q166194" start="2285" end="2295" title="RGB color model" label="full-color"/>
<link wikidata="Q690110" start="2303" end="2314" title="color depth" label="color depth"/>
<link wikidata="Q166863" start="2370" end="2381" title="color space" label="color space"/>
<link wikidata="Q374259" start="2471" end="2483" title="color vision" label="color vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506062" start="2620" end="2633" title="color channel" label="color channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q199687" start="2687" end="2701" title="remote sensing" label="remote sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="2706" end="2715" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="2774" end="2790" title="visible spectrum" label="visible spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="2802" end="2805" title="charge-coupled device" label="CCD"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2830" end="2855" title="Vera C. Rubin Observatory" label="Vera C. Rubin Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506062" start="2921" end="2935" title="channel (digital image)" label="color channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="2953" end="2961" title="electromagnetic spectrum" label="spectral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3059" end="3082" title="Image file formats#Raster formats" label="raster graphics formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192" start="3119" end="3122" title="GIF" label="GIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195" start="3124" end="3128" title="JPEG" label="JPEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q178051" start="3134" end="3137" title="Portable Network Graphics" label="PNG"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="3164" end="3178" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q214856" start="3254" end="3266" title="tessellation" label="tessellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285" start="3277" end="3282" title="plane (geometry)" label="plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q690265" start="3821" end="3833" title="lookup table" label="lookup table"/>
<link wikidata="Q772007" start="4419" end="4433" title="georeferencing" label="georeferencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="4475" end="4483" title="metadata" label="metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q196465" start="4521" end="4525" title="Exif" label="Exif"/>
<link wikidata="Q2797" start="4952" end="4971" title="run-length encoding" label="run-length encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195" start="4979" end="4983" title="JPEG" label="JPEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670963" start="4985" end="4987" title="LZ77 and LZ78" label="LZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q178051" start="5003" end="5006" title="Portable Network Graphics" label="PNG"/>
<link wikidata="Q136218" start="5011" end="5014" title="Zip (file format)" label="ZIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681" start="5017" end="5033" title="Lempel–Ziv–Welch" label="Lempel–Ziv–Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192" start="5055" end="5058" title="GIF" label="GIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524612" start="5955" end="5965" title="rasterisation" label="rasterized"/>
<link wikidata="Q265186" start="6009" end="6019" title="image tracing" label="vectorized"/>
<link wikidata="Q167555" start="6215" end="6244" title="optical character recognition" label="optical character recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638417" start="6268" end="6289" title="mechanical television" label="mechanical television"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="6349" end="6370" title="Electronic television" label="Electronic television"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="6380" end="6396" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641959" start="6410" end="6421" title="raster scan" label="raster scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183484" start="6892" end="6916" title="graphics processing unit" label="graphics processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="7402" end="7411" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q193255" start="7610" end="7622" title="Plotter" label="pen plotters"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="7630" end="7645" title="Vector graphics" label="Vector graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q67972035" start="7822" end="7827" title="Laser printing" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q95474715" start="7832" end="7838" title="Inkjet printing" label="inkjet"/>
<link wikidata="Q218170" start="7934" end="7944" title="PostScript" label="PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q663554" start="8033" end="8038" title="voxel" label="voxel"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="8128" end="8140" title="Magnetic resonance imaging" label="MRI scanners"/>
<link wikidata="Q483130" start="8249" end="8252" title="Geographic information system" label="GIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q772007" start="8279" end="8292" title="Georeferencing" label="georeferenced"/>
<link wikidata="Q951437" start="8541" end="8568" title="Level of measurement" label="qualitative or quantitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446870" start="8625" end="8630" title="Field (geography)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006273" start="9153" end="9177" title="pixellation" label="loss of apparent quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="9228" end="9243" title="vector graphics" label="vector graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q176953" start="9296" end="9305" title="Rendering (computer graphics)" label="rendering"/>
<link wikidata="Q837721" start="9461" end="9472" title="typesetting" label="typesetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q185925" start="9480" end="9494" title="graphic design" label="graphic design"/>
<link wikidata="Q904055" start="9555" end="9570" title="pixels per inch" label="pixels per inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q305896" start="9629" end="9642" title="dots per inch" label="dots per inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q166432" start="9932" end="9936" title="CMYK" label="CMYK"/>
<link wikidata="Q376493" start="10018" end="10024" title="dither" label="dither"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110021" start="10029" end="10037" title="halftone" label="halftone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330674" start="10059" end="10071" title="overprinting" label="overprinting"/>
<link wikidata="Q690110" start="10332" end="10343" title="color depth" label="color depth"/>
<link wikidata="Q24614" start="10660" end="10673" title="PaintShop Pro" label="PaintShop Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070296" start="10675" end="10688" title="Corel Painter" label="Corel Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q129793" start="10690" end="10705" title="Adobe Photoshop" label="Adobe Photoshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q827328" start="10707" end="10716" title="Paint.NET" label="Paint.NET"/>
<link wikidata="Q334046" start="10718" end="10733" title="Microsoft Paint" label="Microsoft Paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q604945" start="10735" end="10740" title="Krita" label="Krita"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038" start="10746" end="10750" title="GIMP" label="GIMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q355198" start="10775" end="10781" title="pixels" label="pixels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093884" start="10826" end="10830" title="Xfig" label="Xfig"/>
<link wikidata="Q142371" start="10832" end="10841" title="CorelDRAW" label="CorelDRAW"/>
<link wikidata="Q215016" start="10843" end="10860" title="Adobe Illustrator" label="Adobe Illustrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041" start="10865" end="10873" title="Inkscape" label="Inkscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="10922" end="10929" title="vector graphics" label="vectors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11161" end="11176" title="RGB color model#Digital representations" label="RGB color model"/>
<link wikidata="Q166432" start="11240" end="11256" title="CMYK color model" label="CMYK color model"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438334" start="11273" end="11310" title="Comparison of raster graphics editors" label="Comparison of raster graphics editors"/>
<link wikidata="Q376493" start="11312" end="11318" title="Dither" label="Dither"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110021" start="11320" end="11328" title="Halftone" label="Halftone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4060698" start="11330" end="11358" title="Pixel-art scaling algorithms" label="Pixel-art scaling algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351962" start="11360" end="11382" title="Raster graphics editor" label="Raster graphics editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572121" start="11384" end="11412" title="Raster graphics file formats" label="Raster graphics file formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132167" start="11414" end="11436" title="Raster image processor" label="Raster image processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641959" start="11438" end="11449" title="Raster scan" label="Raster scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524612" start="11451" end="11464" title="Rasterisation" label="Rasterisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937822" start="11466" end="11483" title="Text semigraphics" label="Text semigraphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708528" start="11485" end="11498" title="Texture atlas" label="Texture atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="11501" end="11516" title="Vector graphics" label="Vector graphics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25745" wikidata="Q1183447" url="?curid=25745" title="Rerun">
<text>A rerun or repeat is a rebroadcast of an episode of a radio or television program. The two types of reruns are those that occur during a hiatus and those that occur when a program is syndicated.

==Variations==
In the United Kingdom, the word &quot;repeat&quot; refers only to a single episode; &quot;rerun&quot; or &quot;rerunning&quot; is the preferred term for an entire series/season. A &quot;repeat&quot; is a single episode of a series that is broadcast outside its original timeslot on the same channel/network. The episode is usually the &quot;repeat&quot; of the scheduled episode that was broadcast in the original timeslot earlier the previous week. It allows viewers who were not able to watch the show in its timeslot to catch up before the next episode is broadcast. The term &quot;rerun&quot; can also be used in some respects as a synonym for &quot;reprint&quot;, the equivalent term for print items; this is especially true for print items that are part of ongoing series such as comic strips. (&quot;Peanuts&quot;, for instance, has been in reruns since the retirement and death of creator Charles M. Schulz). In South Africa, reruns of the daily soap opera &quot;7de Laan&quot; and others are called an omnibus. The omnibus is a weekly rerun that is broadcast on a Sunday afternoon on the original channel/network. It only broadcasts the past week&#x27;s episodes back-to-back.

When used to refer to the rebroadcast of a single episode, Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz are generally credited as the inventors of the rerun. It was first used for the American television series &quot;I Love Lucy&quot; (1951–57) during Ball&#x27;s pregnancy. Prior to &quot;I Love Lucy&quot; rerunning its episodes during the summer, shows typically went on a summer hiatus and were replaced with summer replacements, generally lower-priority programs; this strategy has seen increased use in the 21st century as fewer episodes have been produced each season and in-season reruns have increased. Rod Serling&#x27;s 1955 teleplay &quot;Patterns&quot; was credited with proving reruns&#x27; viability. Buoyed by strong word of mouth, the rerun of &quot;Patterns&quot; drew more viewers than the first run as people who had missed the first airing a month prior tuned in to catch the reairing.

==Reruns in the United States==
In the United States, most television shows from the late 1940s and early 1950s were performed live, and in many cases, they were never recorded. However, television networks in the United States began making kinescope recordings of shows broadcast live from the East Coast. This allowed the show to be broadcast later for the West Coast. These kinescopes, along with previously filmed shows, and later, videotape, paved the way for extensive reruns of syndicated television series.

===During hiatus===
In the United States, currently running shows rerun older episodes from the same season to fill the time slot with the same program during the &quot;off-season&quot; period when no new episodes are being made. Shows tend to start rerunning episodes after the November sweeps period (the ratings that determine the cost of a commercial run during that time slot), and usually show only reruns from mid-December until mid-January or even February sweeps. This winter (or &quot;mid-season&quot;) phase is also used to try out new shows that did not make it onto the fall schedule to see how they fare with the public. These series usually run six to 13 episodes. If they do well with the public, they may get a renewal for a half (13 weeks) or full season in the new schedule. Shows that are already popular return from February sweeps until the end of the season (which sometimes ends before May sweeps) with only limited reruns used.

The number of episodes per season, originally well over 30 episodes during the 1950s and 1960s, dropped below 26 (the number of episodes required to fill a time slot for a year without rerunning any episode more than once) in the 1970s. Specials typically pad out the remainder of the schedule.

===Television specials===
Often, if a television special such as &quot;Peter Pan&quot; or a network television broadcast of a classic film such as &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; is especially well received, it will be rerun from time to time. Before the VCR era, this would be the only opportunity audiences had of seeing a program more than once.

Seasonal programming such as &quot;How the Grinch Stole Christmas&quot;, &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot;, &quot;It&#x27;s A Wonderful Life&quot;, or the Charlie Brown television specials are normally reshown each year, for the appropriate holiday season.

===Syndication===
A television program goes into syndication when many episodes of the program are sold as a package. Generally, the buyer is either a cable channel or an owner of local television stations. Often, programs are not particularly profitable until they are sold for syndication. Since local television stations often need to sell more commercial airtime than network affiliates, syndicated shows are usually edited to make room for extra commercials. Often, about 100 episodes (four to five seasons&#x27; worth) are required for a weekly series to be rerun in daily syndication (at least four times a week). Very popular series running more than four seasons may start daily reruns of the first seasons, while production and airings continue of the current season&#x27;s episodes; until around the early 1980s, shows that aired in syndication while still in production had the reruns aired under an alternate name (or multiple alternate names, as was the case with &quot;Death Valley Days&quot;) to differentiate the reruns from the first-run episodes.

Few people anticipated the long life that a popular television series would eventually have in syndication, so most performers signed contracts that limited residual payments to about six repeats. After that, the actors received nothing and the production company would keep 100% of any income until the copyright expired; many shows did not even have their copyrights renewed and others were systematically destroyed, such was the lack of awareness of the potential for revenue from them. This situation went unchanged until the mid-1970s, when contracts for new shows extended residual payments for the performers, regardless of the number of reruns, while tape recycling effectively came to an end (rapid advancements in digital video in the 1990s made preservation far more economical) and the Copyright Act of 1976 extended copyright terms to much longer lengths, eliminating the need for renewal.

Once a series is no longer performing well enough to be sold in syndication, it may still remain in &quot;barter&quot; syndication, in which television stations are offered the program for free in exchange for a requirement to air additional advertisements (without compensation) bundled with the free program during other shows (barter syndication is far more common, if not the norm, in radio, where only the most popular programs charge rights fees). The Program Exchange was once the most prominent barter syndicator in United States television, offering mostly older series from numerous network libraries. Barter syndicated series may be seen on smaller, independent stations with small budgets or as short-term filler on larger stations; they tend not to be as widely syndicated as programs syndicated with a rights fee. Free ad-supported streaming television (FAST) relies on the barter model for its revenue.

===Classic television===
With the growing availability of cable and satellite television channels, as well as over-the-air digital subchannels, combined with a growing body of available postsyndication programming, a handful of specialty channels have been built solely or primarily to run former network programming, which otherwise would no longer be in syndication. Branded as &quot;classic television&quot;, these often carry reruns of programming dating back to the black-and-white television era and are promoted as nostalgia. The corresponding radio format would be that of an oldies, classic rock, classic hits, or adult standards station. Depending on the programs chosen for a classic network, running the format can be very inexpensive, due to many shows beginning to fall into the public domain.

On cable and satellite, channels that devote at least some of their program schedule to postsyndication reruns include Nick at Nite, TV Land, TBS, USA Network, WGN America, Logo TV, Pop, Discovery Family, Game Show Network, Boomerang, Nicktoons, INSP, fetv, RFD-TV, and the Hallmark Channel. Equity Media Holdings had been using low-power television stations to carry its own Retro Television Network in various markets; those stations were, as a result of Equity going bankrupt, sold to religious broadcaster Daystar Television Network. Since the early 2010s, the growth of digital subchannel networks has allowed for increasing specialization of these classic networks: in addition to general-interest program networks such as MeTV, MeTV+, getTV, Antenna TV and Rewind TV, there exist networks solely for comedies (Catchy Comedy and Laff), game shows (Buzzr), ethnic-oriented programs (Bounce TV and TheGrio), lifestyle and reality programming (Story Television, TBD, TrueReal, Defy TV, Twist, and Quest), westerns (Grit, and Heroes &amp; Icons), music programming (Circle), sports programming (Stadium and SportsGrid), sci-fi and action programming (Comet and Charge!), true crime and court programming (True Crime Network, Court TV, Ion Mystery, and Start TV), news programming (Newsy), and feature films (Movies!, and This TV).

Traditionally, shows most likely to be rerun in this manner are scripted comedies and dramas. Such shows are more likely to be considered evergreen content that can be rerun for a long period of time without losing its cultural relevance. Game shows, variety shows, Saturday morning cartoons, and to a lesser extent, newsmagazines, tabloid talk shows, and late-night talk shows (often in edited form) have been seen less commonly in reruns; game shows can quickly become dated because of inflation, while talk shows often draw humor from contemporary events. Tabloid talk shows, with episode archives of thousands of episodes, tend to do well in reruns compared to talk shows without an element of conflict. Newsmagazines, especially those that focus on evergreen stories such as true crime, are easily repackaged for the syndication market, which (along with much lower residuals compared to a scripted series with star talent) can also make them cheaper than a first-run program or scripted reruns. Most variants of reality television have proven to be a comparative failure in reruns, due to a number of factors (high cast turnover, loss of the element of surprise, overall hostility toward the format, and lack of media cross-promotion among them); some self-contained and personality-driven reality shows have been successfully rerun. Reruns of sports broadcasts, which face many of the same issues reality shows face, have found a niche on multichannel television and free ad-supported streaming television.

===DVD retail===
With the rise of the DVD video format, box sets featuring season or series runs of television series have become an increasingly important retail item. Some view this development as a rising new idea in the industry of reruns as an increasingly major revenue source in themselves instead of the standard business model as a draw for audiences for advertising. While there were videotape releases of television series before DVD, the format&#x27;s limited content capacity, large size and reliance on mechanical winding made it impractical as a widespread retail item. Many series which continue to air first-run episodes (such as &quot;Modern Family&quot; and &quot;Grey&#x27;s Anatomy&quot;) may release DVD sets of the prior season between the end of that season and the beginning of the next.

Some television programs that are released on DVD (particularly those that have been out of production for several years) may not have all of the seasons released, either due to poor overall sales or prohibitive costs for obtaining rights to music used in the program; one such incidence is &quot;Perfect Strangers&quot;, which has seldom been in wide syndication since the late 1990s primarily due to lack of demand, which had only a DVD set of the first and second seasons released due to the expensiveness of relicensing songs used in later seasons of the series that are performed by the show&#x27;s two lead characters. In some cases, series whose later season releases have been held up for these reasons may have the remaining seasons made available on DVD, often after a distributor that does not hold syndication rights to the program (such as Shout! Factory) secures the rights for future DVD releases.

===TV listings===
TV Guide originally used the term &quot;rerun&quot; to designate rebroadcast programs, but abruptly changed to &quot;repeat&quot; between April and May in 1971.

Other TV listings services and publications, including local newspapers, often indicated reruns as &quot;(R)&quot;; since the early 2000s, many listing services only provide a notation if an episode is new -&quot;(N)&quot;, with reruns getting no notation.

==Repeats internationally==
Reruns are often carried by Canadian broadcasters in much the same way as they are in the United States, especially on specialty television channels that rely largely on off-network or library rights to programs (and in many cases, may originate little to no first run programming of their own). Reruns of a broadcaster&#x27;s own library programs are often used to comply with Canadian content regulations enforced by the CRTC, requiring that a minimum of the broadcaster&#x27;s programming be dedicated to programming that is produced by Canadians.

In the United Kingdom, most drama and comedy series run for shorter seasons – typically six, seven, or thirteen episodes – and are then replaced by others. An exception is soap operas, which are either on all year-round (for example, &quot;EastEnders&quot; and &quot;Coronation Street&quot;), or are on for a season similar to the American format.

As in the U.S., fewer new episodes are made during the summer. Until recently, the BBC, ITV and Channel 4 commonly repeated classic shows from their archives, but this has more or less dried up in favor of newer (and cheaper) formats such as reality shows, except on the BBC, where older BBC shows, especially sitcoms, including &quot;Dad&#x27;s Army&quot; and &quot;Fawlty Towers&quot;, are frequently repeated.

Syndication did not exist as such in United Kingdom until the arrival of satellite, cable, and later, from 1998 on, digital television, although many ITV programs up to the early 1990s, particularly imported programming, were syndicated in the sense that each ITV region bought some programs independently of the ITV Network, and in particular many programs out of primetime made by smaller ITV stations were &quot;part-networked&quot; where some regions would show them and others would not. Nowadays, many channels in the UK (for example, Gold) repackage and rebroadcast &quot;classic&quot; programming from both sides of the Atlantic. Some of these channels, like their U.S. counterparts, make commercial timing cuts; others get around this by running shows in longer time slots, and critics of timing cuts see no reason why all channels should not do the same.

It has been common practice by networks, notably the BBC, to rerun some series after they have not fared particularly well on their original run. This was particularly common with sitcoms such as &quot;The Office&quot;, which had very low ratings in its first series, as well as a poor reception from both critics and focus groups and was almost cancelled. The series started to gain traction once the BBC decided to repeat it in a different timeslot and &quot;The Office&quot; went on to be an award-winning and critically acclaimed show which has regularly featured in lists of the Best Sitcoms ever. In 2019, the series was ranked 6th on &quot;The Guardian&quot;&#x27;s list of the 100 best TV shows of the 21st century.

Early on in the history of British television, agreements with the actors&#x27; union Equity and other trade bodies limited the number of times a single program could be broadcast, usually only twice, and these showings were limited to within a set time period such as five years. This was due to the unions&#x27; fear that the channels filling their schedules with repeats could put actors and other production staff out of work as fewer new shows would be made. It also had the unintentional side effect of causing many programs to be junked after their repeat rights had expired, as they were considered to be of no further use by the broadcasters. Although these agreements changed during the 1980s and beyond, it is still expensive to repeat archive television series on British terrestrial television, as new contracts have to be drawn up and payments made to the artists concerned. Repeats on multichannel television are cheaper, as are reshowings of newer programs covered by less strict repeat clauses. However, programs are no longer destroyed, as the historical and cultural reasons for keeping them have now been seen and the cost to maintain archives is now far less, even if the programs have little or no repeat value.

==See also==
* First run

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1183447" start="2" end="7" title="Rerun" label="rerun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183447" start="11" end="17" title="Rerun" label="repeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q374638" start="74" end="81" title="Broadcast programming" label="program"/>
<link wikidata="Q5750548" start="137" end="143" title="Hiatus (television)" label="hiatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="183" end="193" title="Broadcast syndication" label="syndicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="218" end="232" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962297" start="865" end="872" title="reprint" label="reprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q838795" start="997" end="1008" title="comic strip" label="comic strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115636" start="1018" end="1025" title="Peanuts" label="Peanuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q298920" start="1108" end="1125" title="Charles M. Schulz" label="Charles M. Schulz"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="1131" end="1143" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480857" start="1182" end="1190" title="7de Laan" label="7de Laan"/>
<link wikidata="Q209662" start="1457" end="1469" title="Lucille Ball" label="Lucille Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q472535" start="1474" end="1484" title="Desi Arnaz" label="Desi Arnaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q181943" start="1598" end="1609" title="I Love Lucy" label="I Love Lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q435920" start="1993" end="2004" title="Rod Serling" label="Rod Serling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148400" start="2032" end="2040" title="Patterns (Kraft Television Theatre)" label="Patterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q15737157" start="2114" end="2127" title="word of mouth" label="word of mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2328" end="2341" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630352" start="2530" end="2539" title="kinescope" label="kinescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="2584" end="2594" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="2648" end="2658" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q747779" start="2725" end="2734" title="videotape" label="videotape"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="3093" end="3106" title="sweeps" label="sweeps period"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="3270" end="3276" title="sweeps" label="sweeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261214" start="3996" end="4004" title="Television special" label="Specials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261214" start="4093" end="4111" title="television special" label="television special"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376796" start="4126" end="4135" title="Peter Pan (1954 musical)" label="Peter Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193695" start="4208" end="4224" title="The Wizard of Oz (1939 film)" label="The Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q380616" start="4307" end="4310" title="VCR" label="VCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q251801" start="4437" end="4467" title="How the Grinch Stole Christmas! (TV special)" label="How the Grinch Stole Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q746733" start="4481" end="4501" title="The Ten Commandments (1956 film)" label="The Ten Commandments"/>
<link wikidata="Q204191" start="4515" end="4541" title="It&amp;#x27;s A Wonderful Life" label="It&amp;#x27;s A Wonderful Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833806" start="4556" end="4589" title="List of Peanuts media" label="Charlie Brown television specials"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517772" start="4642" end="4656" title="holiday season" label="holiday season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="4708" end="4719" title="Broadcast syndication" label="syndication"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="4810" end="4823" title="cable channel" label="cable channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416102" start="5031" end="5048" title="network affiliate" label="network affiliate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546200" start="5136" end="5148" title="100 episodes" label="100 episodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230894" start="5643" end="5660" title="Death Valley Days" label="Death Valley Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026712" start="6119" end="6143" title="Lost television broadcast" label="systematically destroyed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315501" start="6305" end="6322" title="residual (entertainment industry)" label="residual payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196755" start="6524" end="6545" title="Copyright Act of 1976" label="Copyright Act of 1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758498" start="7084" end="7104" title="The Program Exchange" label="The Program Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q113561613" start="7458" end="7496" title="Free ad-supported streaming television" label="Free ad-supported streaming television"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="7607" end="7612" title="cable television" label="cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="7617" end="7637" title="satellite television" label="satellite television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276171" start="7672" end="7690" title="digital subchannel" label="digital subchannel"/>
<link wikidata="Q258137" start="8020" end="8046" title="analog television" label="black-and-white television"/>
<link wikidata="Q589183" start="8100" end="8112" title="radio format" label="radio format"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852647" start="8133" end="8139" title="oldies" label="oldies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096120" start="8141" end="8153" title="classic rock" label="classic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128242" start="8155" end="8167" title="classic hits" label="classic hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685936" start="8172" end="8187" title="adult standards" label="adult standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="8342" end="8355" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q541051" start="8477" end="8489" title="Nick at Nite" label="Nick at Nite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109582" start="8491" end="8498" title="TV Land" label="TV Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q543534" start="8500" end="8503" title="TBS (U.S. TV channel)" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q248713" start="8505" end="8516" title="USA Network" label="USA Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q105409747" start="8518" end="8529" title="WGN America" label="WGN America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812233" start="8531" end="8538" title="Logo TV" label="Logo TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672341" start="8540" end="8543" title="Pop (U.S. TV network)" label="Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q565847" start="8545" end="8561" title="Discovery Family" label="Discovery Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243012" start="8563" end="8580" title="Game Show Network" label="Game Show Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q157906" start="8582" end="8591" title="Boomerang (TV network)" label="Boomerang"/>
<link wikidata="Q18878" start="8593" end="8602" title="Nicktoons (American TV channel)" label="Nicktoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972443" start="8604" end="8608" title="The Inspiration Network" label="INSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611599" start="8610" end="8614" title="fetv" label="fetv"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276574" start="8616" end="8622" title="RFD-TV" label="RFD-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q641746" start="8632" end="8648" title="Hallmark Channel" label="Hallmark Channel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8650" end="8671" title="Equity Media Holdings#Retro Television Network Stations" label="Equity Media Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015033" start="8687" end="8716" title="low-power broadcasting" label="low-power television stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077724" start="8734" end="8758" title="Retro Television Network" label="Retro Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q827000" start="8868" end="8894" title="Daystar (TV network)" label="Daystar Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276171" start="8933" end="8951" title="digital subchannel" label="digital subchannel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303733" start="9087" end="9091" title="MeTV" label="MeTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303733" start="9093" end="9098" title="MeTV Plus" label="MeTV+"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627596" start="9100" end="9105" title="getTV" label="getTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852675" start="9107" end="9117" title="Antenna TV" label="Antenna TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q108559218" start="9122" end="9131" title="Rewind TV" label="Rewind TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350875" start="9175" end="9188" title="Catchy Comedy" label="Catchy Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19599473" start="9193" end="9197" title="Laff (TV network)" label="Laff"/>
<link wikidata="Q846662" start="9200" end="9209" title="game show" label="game show"/>
<link wikidata="Q18890226" start="9212" end="9217" title="Buzzr" label="Buzzr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922164" start="9246" end="9255" title="Bounce TV" label="Bounce TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738314" start="9260" end="9267" title="TheGrio" label="TheGrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q111962965" start="9305" end="9321" title="Story Television" label="Story Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q30598791" start="9323" end="9326" title="TBD (TV network)" label="TBD"/>
<link wikidata="Q107564116" start="9328" end="9336" title="TrueReal" label="TrueReal"/>
<link wikidata="Q107564110" start="9338" end="9345" title="Defy TV" label="Defy TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q106609096" start="9347" end="9352" title="Twist (TV network)" label="Twist"/>
<link wikidata="Q48460186" start="9358" end="9363" title="Quest (American TV network)" label="Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150453" start="9376" end="9380" title="Grit (TV network)" label="Grit"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349263" start="9386" end="9404" title="Heroes &amp;amp; Icons" label="Heroes &amp;amp; Icons"/>
<link wikidata="Q81729877" start="9426" end="9432" title="Circle (TV network)" label="Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612306" start="9455" end="9462" title="Stadium (TV network)" label="Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15505371" start="9467" end="9477" title="SportsGrid" label="SportsGrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q21189282" start="9511" end="9516" title="Comet (TV network)" label="Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599160" start="9521" end="9528" title="Charge! (TV network)" label="Charge!"/>
<link wikidata="Q19572320" start="9565" end="9583" title="True Crime Network" label="True Crime Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q60656247" start="9585" end="9593" title="Court TV" label="Court TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q18149700" start="9595" end="9606" title="Ion Mystery" label="Ion Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q56290032" start="9612" end="9620" title="Start TV" label="Start TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957649" start="9641" end="9646" title="Newsy" label="Newsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926899" start="9668" end="9675" title="Movies!" label="Movies!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524762" start="9681" end="9688" title="This TV" label="This TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="9756" end="9773" title="situation comedy" label="scripted comedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643019" start="9830" end="9847" title="evergreen (journalism)" label="evergreen content"/>
<link wikidata="Q846662" start="9931" end="9940" title="Game show" label="Game show"/>
<link wikidata="Q336181" start="9943" end="9955" title="variety show" label="variety show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543107" start="9958" end="9982" title="Saturday morning cartoon" label="Saturday morning cartoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684600" start="10009" end="10021" title="newsmagazine" label="newsmagazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546572" start="10024" end="10041" title="tabloid talk show" label="tabloid talk show"/>
<link wikidata="Q986699" start="10048" end="10068" title="late-night talk show" label="late-night talk show"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="10180" end="10189" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541116" start="10472" end="10482" title="true crime" label="true crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="10710" end="10728" title="reality television" label="reality television"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241317" start="10861" end="10896" title="criticism of reality television" label="overall hostility toward the format"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758705" start="11129" end="11134" title="niche market" label="niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="11245" end="11248" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q394970" start="11263" end="11270" title="box set" label="box set"/>
<link wikidata="Q15416" start="11307" end="11324" title="television series" label="television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q747779" start="11601" end="11610" title="videotape" label="videotape"/>
<link wikidata="Q16756" start="11860" end="11873" title="Modern Family" label="Modern Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q438406" start="11890" end="11909" title="Grey&amp;#x27;s Anatomy" label="Grey&amp;#x27;s Anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304597" start="12318" end="12335" title="Perfect Strangers (TV series)" label="Perfect Strangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851132" start="12625" end="12633" title="Balki Bartokomous" label="two lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304597" start="12634" end="12644" title="Larry Appleton" label="characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502767" start="12874" end="12888" title="Shout! Factory" label="Shout! Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="12953" end="12961" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q561068" start="13520" end="13540" title="specialty television" label="specialty television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030730" start="13779" end="13795" title="Canadian content" label="Canadian content"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993801" start="13824" end="13828" title="CRTC" label="CRTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="14125" end="14135" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q607514" start="14193" end="14203" title="EastEnders" label="EastEnders"/>
<link wikidata="Q945030" start="14220" end="14237" title="Coronation Street" label="Coronation Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="14385" end="14388" title="British Broadcasting Corporation" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="14390" end="14393" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="14398" end="14407" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="14544" end="14551" title="Reality television" label="reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="14612" end="14619" title="Situation comedy" label="sitcoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q659575" start="14637" end="14652" title="Dad&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Dad&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q212731" start="14669" end="14682" title="Fawlty Towers" label="Fawlty Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475898" start="14789" end="14798" title="Sky Television (1984–1990)" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q964303" start="15257" end="15261" title="Gold (UK TV channel)" label="Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="15762" end="15768" title="sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q23829" start="15784" end="15794" title="The Office (British TV series)" label="The Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="16229" end="16241" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384659" start="16393" end="16399" title="British Actors&amp;#x27; Equity Association" label="Equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026712" start="16844" end="16850" title="Wiping (magnetic tape)" label="junked"/>
<link wikidata="Q175122" start="17091" end="17113" title="terrestrial television" label="terrestrial television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454240" start="17557" end="17566" title="First run (film)" label="First run"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25748" wikidata="Q5318" url="?curid=25748" title="Router (computing)">
<text>A router is a computer and networking device that forwards data packets between computer networks, including internetworks such as the global Internet.

Routers perform the &quot;traffic directing&quot; functions on the Internet. A router is connected to two or more data lines from different IP networks. When a data packet comes in on a line, the router reads the network address information in the packet header to determine the ultimate destination. Then, using information in its routing table or routing policy, it directs the packet to the next network on its journey. Data packets are forwarded from one router to another through an internetwork until it reaches its destination node.

The most familiar type of IP routers are home and small office routers that forward IP packets between the home computers and the Internet. More sophisticated routers, such as enterprise routers, connect large business or ISP networks to powerful core routers that forward data at high speed along the optical fiber lines of the Internet backbone.

Routers can be built from standard computer parts but are mostly specialized purpose-built computers. Early routers used software-based forwarding, running on a CPU. More sophisticated devices use application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) to increase performance or add advanced filtering and firewall functionality.

==Operation==
When multiple routers are used in interconnected networks, the routers can exchange information about destination addresses using a routing protocol. Each router builds up a routing table, a list of routes, between two computer systems on the interconnected networks.

The software that runs the router is composed of two functional processing units that operate simultaneously, called &quot;planes&quot;:
* Control plane: A router maintains a routing table that lists which route should be used to forward a data packet, and through which physical interface connection. It does this using internal pre-configured directives, called static routes, or by learning routes dynamically using a routing protocol. Static and dynamic routes are stored in the routing table. The control-plane logic then strips non-essential directives from the table and builds a forwarding information base (FIB) to be used by the forwarding plane.
* Forwarding plane: This unit forwards the data packets between incoming and outgoing interface connections. It reads the header of each packet as it comes in, matches the destination to entries in the FIB supplied by the control plane, and directs the packet to the outgoing network specified in the FIB.

== Applications ==
A router may have interfaces for multiple types of physical layer connections, such as copper cables, fiber optic, or wireless transmission. It can also support multiple network layer transmission standards. Each network interface is used to enable data packets to be forwarded from one transmission system to another. Routers may also be used to connect two or more logical groups of computer devices known as subnets, each with a unique network prefix.

Routers may provide connectivity within enterprises, between enterprises and the Internet, or between internet service providers&#x27; (ISPs&#x27;) networks, they are also responsible for directing data between different networks. The largest routers (such as the Cisco CRS-1 or Juniper PTX) interconnect the various ISPs, or may be used in large enterprise networks. Smaller routers usually provide connectivity for typical home and office networks.

All sizes of routers may be found inside enterprises. The most powerful routers are usually found in ISPs, academic and research facilities. Large businesses may also need more powerful routers to cope with ever-increasing demands of intranet data traffic. A hierarchical internetworking model for interconnecting routers in large networks is in common use. Some routers can connect to Data service units for T1 connections via serial ports.

=== Access, core and distribution ===

The hierarchical internetworking model divides enterprise networks into three layers: core, distribution, and access.

Access routers, including small office/home office (SOHO) models, are located at home and customer sites such as branch offices that do not need hierarchical routing of their own. Typically, they are optimized for low cost. Some SOHO routers are capable of running alternative free Linux-based firmware like Tomato, OpenWrt, or DD-WRT.

Distribution routers aggregate traffic from multiple access routers. Distribution routers are often responsible for enforcing quality of service across a wide area network (WAN), so they may have considerable memory installed, multiple WAN interface connections, and substantial onboard data processing routines. They may also provide connectivity to groups of file servers or other external networks.

In enterprises, a core router may provide a collapsed backbone interconnecting the distribution tier routers from multiple buildings of a campus, or large enterprise locations. They tend to be optimized for high bandwidth but lack some of the features of edge routers.

=== Security ===
External networks must be carefully considered as part of the overall security strategy of the local network. A router may include a firewall, VPN handling, and other security functions, or they may be handled by separate devices. Routers also commonly perform network address translation which restricts connections initiated from external connections but is not recognized as a security feature by all experts. Some experts argue that open source routers are more secure and reliable than closed source routers because errors and potentially exploitable vulnerabilities are more likely to be discovered and addressed in an open-source environment.

=== Routing different networks ===
Routers are also often distinguished on the basis of the network in which they operate. A router in a local area network (LAN) of a single organization is called an &quot;interior router&quot;. A router that is operated in the Internet backbone is described as &quot;exterior router&quot;. While a router that connects a LAN with the Internet or a wide area network (WAN) is called a &quot;border router&quot;, or &quot;gateway router&quot;.

=== Internet connectivity and internal use ===
Routers intended for ISP and major enterprise connectivity usually exchange routing information using the Border Gateway Protocol (BGP). defines the types of BGP routers according to their functions:
* &quot;Edge router or inter-AS border router:&quot; Placed at the edge of an ISP network, where the router is used to peer with the upstream IP transit providers, bilateral peers through IXP, private peering (or even settlement-free peering) through Private Network Interconnect (PNI) via the extensive use of Exterior Border Gateway Protocol (eBGP).
* Provider Router (P): A Provider router is also called a &quot;transit-router&quot;, it sits in an MPLS network and is responsible for establishing label-switched paths between the PE routers.
* &quot;Provider edge router (PE):&quot; An MPLS-specific router in the network&#x27;s access layer that interconnects with customer edge routers to provide layer 2 or layer 3 VPN services.
* &quot;Customer edge router&quot; (CE): Located at the edge of the subscriber&#x27;s network, it interconnects with the PE router for L2VPN services, or direct layer 3 IP hand-off in the case of Dedicated Internet Access, if IP Transit services are provided through an MPLS core, the CE peers with the PE using eBGP with the public ASNs of each respective network. In the case of L3VPN services the CE can exchange routes with the PE using eBGP. It is commonly used in both service provider and enterprise or data center organizations.
* Core router: Resides within an Autonomous System as a backbone to carry traffic between edge routers.
* Within an ISP: In the ISP&#x27;s autonomous system, a router uses internal BGP to communicate with other ISP edge routers, other intranet core routers, or the ISP&#x27;s intranet provider border routers.
* Internet backbone: The Internet no longer has a clearly identifiable backbone, unlike its predecessor networks. See default-free zone (DFZ). The major ISPs&#x27; system routers make up what could be considered to be the current Internet backbone core. ISPs operate all four types of the BGP routers described here. An ISP core router is used to interconnect its edge and border routers. Core routers may also have specialized functions in virtual private networks based on a combination of BGP and Multiprotocol Label Switching protocols.
* Port forwarding: In some networks, that rely on legacy IPv4 and NAT, routers (often labeled as NAT boxes) are also used for port forwarding configuration between RFC1918 address space and their publicly assigned IPv4 address.
* Voice, data, fax, and video processing routers: Commonly referred to as access servers or gateways, these devices are used to route and process voice, data, video and fax traffic on the Internet. Since 2005, most long-distance phone calls have been processed as IP traffic (VOIP) through a voice gateway. Use of access server-type routers expanded with the advent of the Internet, first with dial-up access and another resurgence with voice phone service.
* Larger networks commonly use multilayer switches, with layer-3 devices being used to simply interconnect multiple subnets within the same security zone, and higher-layer switches when filtering, translation, load balancing, or other higher-level functions are required, especially between zones.

===Wi-Fi routers===

Wi-Fi routers combine the functions of a router with those of a wireless access point. They are typically devices with a small form factor, operating on the standard electric power supply for residential use. Connected to the Internet as offered by an Internet service provider, they provide Internet access through a wireless network for home or office use.

== History ==
The concepts of a &quot;switching node&quot; using software and an &quot;interface computer&quot; were first proposed by Donald Davies for the NPL network in 1966. The same idea was conceived by Wesley Clark the following year for use in the ARPANET, which were named &quot;Interface Message Processors&quot; (IMPs). The first interface computer was implemented at the National Physical Laboratory in the United Kingdom in early 1969, followed later that year by the IMPs at the University of California, Los Angeles, the Stanford Research Institute, the University of California, Santa Barbara, and the University of Utah School of Computing in the United States. All were built with the Honeywell 516. These computers had fundamentally the same functionality as a router does today.

The idea for a router (called a &quot;gateway&quot; at the time) initially came about through an international group of computer networking researchers called the International Network Working Group (INWG). These gateway devices were different from most previous packet switching schemes in two ways. First, they connected dissimilar kinds of networks, such as serial lines and local area networks. Second, they were connectionless devices, which had no role in assuring that traffic was delivered reliably, leaving that function entirely to the hosts. This particular idea, the end-to-end principle, was pioneered in the CYCLADES network.

The idea was explored in more detail, with the intention to produce a prototype system as part of two contemporaneous programs. One was a program at Xerox PARC to explore new networking technologies, which produced the PARC Universal Packet system. Some time after early 1974, the first Xerox routers became operational. Due to corporate intellectual property concerns, it received little attention outside Xerox for years. The other was the DARPA-initiated program, which created the TCP/IP architecture in use today. The first true IP router was developed by Ginny Travers at BBN, as part of that DARPA-initiated effort, during 1975–1976. By the end of 1976, three PDP-11-based routers were in service in the experimental prototype Internet. Mike Brecia, Ginny Travers, and Bob Hinden received the IEEE Internet Award for early IP routers in 2008.

The first multiprotocol routers were independently created by staff researchers at MIT and Stanford in 1981 and both were also based on PDP-11s. Stanford&#x27;s router program was led by William Yeager and MIT&#x27;s by Noel Chiappa. Virtually all networking now uses TCP/IP, but multiprotocol routers are still manufactured. They were important in the early stages of the growth of computer networking when protocols other than TCP/IP were in use. Modern routers that handle both IPv4 and IPv6 are multiprotocol but are simpler devices than ones processing AppleTalk, DECnet, IPX, and Xerox protocols.

From the mid-1970s and in the 1980s, general-purpose minicomputers served as routers. Modern high-speed routers are network processors or highly specialized computers with extra hardware acceleration added to speed both common routing functions, such as packet forwarding, and specialized functions such as IPsec encryption. There is substantial use of Linux and Unix software-based machines, running open source routing code, for research and other applications. The Cisco IOS operating system was independently designed. Major router operating systems, such as Junos and NX-OS, are extensively modified versions of Unix software.

== Forwarding ==

The main purpose of a router is to connect multiple networks and forward packets destined either for directly attached networks or more remote networks. A router is considered a layer-3 device because its primary forwarding decision is based on the information in the layer-3 IP packet, specifically the destination IP address. When a router receives a packet, it searches its routing table to find the best match between the destination IP address of the packet and one of the addresses in the routing table. Once a match is found, the packet is encapsulated in the layer-2 data link frame for the outgoing interface indicated in the table entry. A router typically does not look into the packet payload, but only at the layer-3 addresses to make a forwarding decision, plus optionally other information in the header for hints on, for example, quality of service (QoS). For pure IP forwarding, a router is designed to minimize the state information associated with individual packets. Once a packet is forwarded, the router does not retain any historical information about the packet.

The routing table itself can contain information derived from a variety of sources, such as a default or static routes that are configured manually, or dynamic entries from routing protocols where the router learns routes from other routers. A default route is one that is used to route all traffic whose destination does not otherwise appear in the routing table; it is common – even necessary – in small networks, such as a home or small business where the default route simply sends all non-local traffic to the Internet service provider. The default route can be manually configured (as a static route); learned by dynamic routing protocols; or be obtained by DHCP.

A router can run more than one routing protocol at a time, particularly if it serves as an autonomous system border router between parts of a network that run different routing protocols; if it does so, then redistribution may be used (usually selectively) to share information between the different protocols running on the same router.

Besides deciding to which interface a packet is forwarded, which is handled primarily via the routing table, a router also has to manage congestion when packets arrive at a rate higher than the router can process. Three policies commonly used are tail drop, random early detection (RED), and weighted random early detection (WRED). Tail drop is the simplest and most easily implemented: the router simply drops new incoming packets once buffer space in the router is exhausted. RED probabilistically drops datagrams early when the queue exceeds a pre-configured portion of the buffer, until reaching a pre-determined maximum, when it drops all incoming packets, thus reverting to tail drop. WRED can be configured to drop packets more readily dependent on the type of traffic.

Another function a router performs is traffic classification and deciding which packet should be processed first. This is managed through QoS, which is critical when Voice over IP is deployed, so as not to introduce excessive latency.

Yet another function a router performs is called policy-based routing where special rules are constructed to override the rules derived from the routing table when a packet forwarding decision is made.

Some of the functions may be performed through an application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) to avoid the overhead of scheduling CPU time to process the packets. Others may have to be performed through the CPU as these packets need special attention that cannot be handled by an ASIC.

== See also ==
* Mobile broadband modem
* Modem
* Residential gateway
* Switch virtual interface
* Wireless router

==Notes==
== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5318" start="2" end="8" title="Router (computing)" label="router"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="14" end="22" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546066" start="27" end="44" title="networking device" label="networking device"/>
<link wikidata="Q874048" start="50" end="58" title="Packet forwarding" label="forwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q214111" start="59" end="70" title="data packet" label="data packet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="80" end="96" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067099" start="109" end="122" title="internetworks" label="internetworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="142" end="150" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="293" end="303" title="IP network" label="IP network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4418000" start="366" end="381" title="network address" label="network address"/>
<link wikidata="Q290066" start="485" end="498" title="routing table" label="routing table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648707" start="502" end="516" title="routing policy" label="routing policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067099" start="641" end="653" title="internetwork" label="internetwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q173106" start="687" end="691" title="Node (networking)" label="node"/>
<link wikidata="Q8795" start="720" end="722" title="Internet Protocol" label="IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755130" start="735" end="764" title="Residential gateway" label="home and small office routers"/>
<link wikidata="Q56660405" start="778" end="787" title="IP packet (disambiguation)" label="IP packet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170211" start="941" end="952" title="core router" label="core router"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="996" end="1009" title="optical fiber" label="optical fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360517" start="1023" end="1040" title="Internet backbone" label="Internet backbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="1108" end="1143" title="embedded system" label="specialized purpose-built computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="1164" end="1172" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="1204" end="1207" title="CPU" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q217302" start="1240" end="1279" title="application-specific integrated circuit" label="application-specific integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q80998" start="1343" end="1351" title="Firewall (computing)" label="firewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648707" start="1514" end="1530" title="routing protocol" label="routing protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q290066" start="1556" end="1569" title="routing table" label="routing table"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371619" start="1790" end="1803" title="Control plane" label="Control plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119410" start="2015" end="2027" title="static route" label="static route"/>
<link wikidata="Q352483" start="2052" end="2063" title="Dynamic routing" label="dynamically"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473309" start="2238" end="2265" title="forwarding information base" label="forwarding information base"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473302" start="2310" end="2326" title="Forwarding plane" label="Forwarding plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141160" start="2430" end="2436" title="Header (computing)" label="header"/>
<link wikidata="Q192727" start="2685" end="2699" title="physical layer" label="physical layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="2736" end="2747" title="fiber optic" label="fiber optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q249" start="2752" end="2760" title="wireless" label="wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q208074" start="2804" end="2817" title="network layer" label="network layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11414" start="3045" end="3052" title="subnets" label="subnets"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="3073" end="3087" title="network prefix" label="network prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="3192" end="3217" title="internet service provider" label="internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045076" start="3354" end="3365" title="Cisco CRS-1" label="Cisco CRS-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049080" start="3369" end="3376" title="Juniper Networks" label="Juniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q483426" start="3776" end="3784" title="intranet" label="intranet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5753103" start="3801" end="3835" title="hierarchical internetworking model" label="hierarchical internetworking model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227349" start="3928" end="3945" title="Data service unit" label="Data service unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180989" start="3951" end="3965" title="Digital Signal 1" label="T1 connections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5753103" start="4028" end="4062" title="hierarchical internetworking model" label="hierarchical internetworking model"/>
<link wikidata="Q483426" start="4071" end="4089" title="enterprise network" label="enterprise network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4106295" start="4169" end="4193" title="small office/home office" label="small office/home office"/>
<link wikidata="Q12878103" start="4288" end="4308" title="hierarchical routing" label="hierarchical routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q250918" start="4451" end="4457" title="Tomato (firmware)" label="Tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140401" start="4459" end="4466" title="OpenWrt" label="OpenWrt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152232" start="4471" end="4477" title="DD-WRT" label="DD-WRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q11384" start="4634" end="4651" title="wide area network" label="wide area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170211" start="4901" end="4912" title="core router" label="core router"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142907" start="4927" end="4945" title="collapsed backbone" label="collapsed backbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q80998" start="5303" end="5311" title="Firewall (computing)" label="firewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q170963" start="5313" end="5316" title="VPN" label="VPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q11182" start="5431" end="5458" title="network address translation" label="network address translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="5607" end="5618" title="Open-source software" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q218616" start="5661" end="5674" title="closed source" label="closed source"/>
<link wikidata="Q631425" start="5726" end="5741" title="Vulnerability (computing)" label="vulnerabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="5958" end="5976" title="local area network" label="local area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="6083" end="6091" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11384" start="6204" end="6221" title="wide area network" label="wide area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755130" start="6276" end="6290" title="gateway router" label="gateway router"/>
<link wikidata="Q11155" start="6452" end="6475" title="Border Gateway Protocol" label="Border Gateway Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433061" start="6734" end="6737" title="IXP" label="IXP"/>
<link wikidata="Q772532" start="6797" end="6825" title="Private Network Interconnect" label="Private Network Interconnect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11155" start="6857" end="6889" title="Exterior Border Gateway Protocol" label="Exterior Border Gateway Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330575" start="7478" end="7503" title="Dedicated line" label="Dedicated Internet Access"/>
<link wikidata="Q671224" start="7792" end="7803" title="data center" label="data center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170211" start="7821" end="7832" title="Core router" label="Core router"/>
<link wikidata="Q483426" start="8054" end="8062" title="intranet" label="intranet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021187" start="8247" end="8264" title="default-free zone" label="default-free zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q170963" start="8570" end="8593" title="virtual private network" label="virtual private network"/>
<link wikidata="Q677023" start="8629" end="8658" title="Multiprotocol Label Switching" label="Multiprotocol Label Switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049673" start="8796" end="8811" title="port forwarding" label="port forwarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978818" start="8972" end="8986" title="access servers" label="access servers"/>
<link wikidata="Q487365" start="8990" end="8998" title="Gateway (telecommunications)" label="gateways"/>
<link wikidata="Q8795" start="9162" end="9164" title="Internet Protocol" label="IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="9174" end="9178" title="VOIP" label="VOIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q264071" start="9387" end="9404" title="multilayer switch" label="multilayer switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q80998" start="9542" end="9551" title="firewall (computing)" label="filtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11182" start="9553" end="9564" title="network address translation" label="translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q575614" start="9566" end="9580" title="load balancing (computing)" label="load balancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q326717" start="9740" end="9761" title="wireless access point" label="wireless access point"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="9928" end="9953" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q11375" start="9994" end="10010" title="wireless network" label="wireless network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240482" start="10171" end="10184" title="Donald Davies" label="Donald Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907385" start="10193" end="10204" title="NPL network" label="NPL network"/>
<link wikidata="Q252554" start="10245" end="10257" title="Wesley A. Clark" label="Wesley Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q177524" start="10292" end="10299" title="ARPANET" label="ARPANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451440" start="10318" end="10358" title="Interface Message Processor" label="&amp;quot;Interface Message Processors&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967606" start="10419" end="10447" title="National Physical Laboratory (United Kingdom)" label="National Physical Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="10529" end="10566" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q604924" start="10572" end="10599" title="Stanford Research Institute" label="Stanford Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q263064" start="10605" end="10644" title="University of California, Santa Barbara" label="University of California, Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q22096108" start="10654" end="10692" title="University of Utah School of Computing" label="University of Utah School of Computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q623187" start="10739" end="10752" title="Honeywell 316" label="Honeywell 516"/>
<link wikidata="Q487365" start="10874" end="10881" title="Gateway (telecommunications)" label="gateway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16643941" start="10999" end="11034" title="International Network Working Group" label="International Network Working Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q193446" start="11099" end="11115" title="packet switching" label="packet switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q385390" start="11197" end="11208" title="serial line" label="serial line"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="11214" end="11232" title="local area network" label="local area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q727896" start="11253" end="11267" title="connectionless" label="connectionless"/>
<link wikidata="Q829281" start="11382" end="11387" title="host (network)" label="hosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527392" start="11415" end="11435" title="end-to-end principle" label="end-to-end principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024621" start="11458" end="11466" title="CYCLADES" label="CYCLADES"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="11626" end="11636" title="Xerox PARC" label="Xerox PARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118200" start="11696" end="11717" title="PARC Universal Packet" label="PARC Universal Packet"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="11919" end="11924" title="DARPA" label="DARPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="11962" end="11968" title="TCP/IP" label="TCP/IP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12038" end="12051" title="Ginny Travers" label="Ginny Travers"/>
<link wikidata="Q891612" start="12055" end="12058" title="BBN Technologies" label="BBN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327833" start="12144" end="12150" title="PDP-11" label="PDP-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146631" start="12277" end="12296" title="IEEE Internet Award" label="IEEE Internet Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="12411" end="12414" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="12419" end="12427" title="Stanford" label="Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581146" start="12515" end="12529" title="William Yeager" label="William Yeager"/>
<link wikidata="Q16187010" start="12548" end="12560" title="Noel Chiappa" label="Noel Chiappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q185131" start="12985" end="12997" title="minicomputer" label="minicomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755335" start="13048" end="13065" title="network processor" label="network processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q600158" start="13110" end="13131" title="hardware acceleration" label="hardware acceleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q210214" start="13239" end="13244" title="IPsec" label="IPsec"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="13285" end="13290" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="13295" end="13299" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="13333" end="13344" title="Open-source software" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q753576" start="13400" end="13409" title="Cisco IOS" label="Cisco IOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041744" start="13495" end="13500" title="Junos" label="Junos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869717" start="13505" end="13510" title="NX-OS" label="NX-OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q208074" start="13761" end="13768" title="layer-3" label="layer-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q194134" start="14150" end="14157" title="layer-2" label="layer-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q220501" start="14429" end="14447" title="quality of service" label="quality of service"/>
<link wikidata="Q599031" start="14516" end="14521" title="State (computer science)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022120" start="14765" end="14772" title="default route" label="default"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119410" start="14776" end="14788" title="static route" label="static route"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648707" start="14844" end="14860" title="routing protocol" label="routing protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="15186" end="15211" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q11166" start="15335" end="15339" title="DHCP" label="DHCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388627" start="15928" end="15937" title="tail drop" label="tail drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q560448" start="15939" end="15961" title="random early detection" label="random early detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070478" start="15973" end="16004" title="weighted random early detection" label="weighted random early detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832484" start="16497" end="16519" title="traffic classification" label="traffic classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q220501" start="16597" end="16600" title="Quality of service" label="QoS"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="16625" end="16638" title="Voice over IP" label="Voice over IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096504" start="16685" end="16692" title="Latency (audio)" label="latency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209671" start="16744" end="16764" title="policy-based routing" label="policy-based routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q217302" start="16948" end="16987" title="application-specific integrated circuit" label="application-specific integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549420" start="17205" end="17227" title="Mobile broadband modem" label="Mobile broadband modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="17230" end="17235" title="Modem" label="Modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755130" start="17238" end="17257" title="Residential gateway" label="Residential gateway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659074" start="17260" end="17284" title="Switch virtual interface" label="Switch virtual interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407440" start="17287" end="17302" title="Wireless router" label="Wireless router"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25750" wikidata="Q22725" url="?curid=25750" title="Routing">
<text>Routing is the process of selecting a path for traffic in a network or between or across multiple networks. Broadly, routing is performed in many types of networks, including circuit-switched networks, such as the public switched telephone network (PSTN), and computer networks, such as the Internet.

In packet switching networks, routing is the higher-level decision making that directs network packets from their source toward their destination through intermediate network nodes by specific packet forwarding mechanisms. Packet forwarding is the transit of network packets from one network interface to another. Intermediate nodes are typically network hardware devices such as routers, gateways, firewalls, or switches. General-purpose computers also forward packets and perform routing, although they have no specially optimized hardware for the task.

The routing process usually directs forwarding on the basis of routing tables. Routing tables maintain a record of the routes to various network destinations. Routing tables may be specified by an administrator, learned by observing network traffic or built with the assistance of routing protocols.

Routing, in a narrower sense of the term, often refers to IP routing and is contrasted with bridging. IP routing assumes that network addresses are structured and that similar addresses imply proximity within the network. Structured addresses allow a single routing table entry to represent the route to a group of devices. In large networks, structured addressing (routing, in the narrow sense) outperforms unstructured addressing (bridging). Routing has become the dominant form of addressing on the Internet. Bridging is still widely used within local area networks.

==Delivery schemes==

Routing schemes differ in how they deliver messages:
Unicast is the dominant form of message delivery on the Internet. This article focuses on unicast routing algorithms.

==Topology distribution==
With static routing, small networks may use manually configured routing tables. Larger networks have complex topologies that can change rapidly, making the manual construction of routing tables unfeasible. Nevertheless, most of the public switched telephone network (PSTN) uses pre-computed routing tables, with fallback routes if the most direct route becomes blocked (see routing in the PSTN).

Dynamic routing attempts to solve this problem by constructing routing tables automatically, based on information carried by routing protocols, allowing the network to act nearly autonomously in avoiding network failures and blockages. Dynamic routing dominates the Internet. Examples of dynamic-routing protocols and algorithms include Routing Information Protocol (RIP), Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) and Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing Protocol (EIGRP).

===Distance vector algorithms===

Distance vector algorithms use the Bellman–Ford algorithm. This approach assigns a &quot;cost&quot; number to each of the links between each node in the network. Nodes send information from point A to point B via the path that results in the lowest &quot;total cost&quot; (i.e. the sum of the costs of the links between the nodes used).

When a node first starts, it only knows of its immediate neighbors and the direct cost involved in reaching them. (This information — the list of destinations, the total cost to each, and the &quot;next hop&quot; to send data to get there — makes up the routing table, or &quot;distance table&quot;.) Each node, on a regular basis, sends to each neighbor node its own current assessment of the total cost to get to all the destinations it knows of. The neighboring nodes examine this information and compare it to what they already know; anything that represents an improvement on what they already have, they insert in their own table. Over time, all the nodes in the network discover the best next hop and total cost for all destinations.

When a network node goes down, any nodes that used it as their next hop discard the entry and convey the updated routing information to all adjacent nodes, which in turn repeat the process. Eventually, all the nodes in the network receive the updates and discover new paths to all the destinations that do not involve the down node.

===Link-state algorithms===

When applying link-state algorithms, a graphical map of the network is the fundamental data used for each node. To produce its map, each node floods the entire network with information about the other nodes it can connect to. Each node then independently assembles this information into a map. Using this map, each router independently determines the least-cost path from itself to every other node using a standard shortest paths algorithm such as Dijkstra&#x27;s algorithm. The result is a tree graph rooted at the current node, such that the path through the tree from the root to any other node is the least-cost path to that node. This tree then serves to construct the routing table, which specifies the best next hop to get from the current node to any other node.

===Optimized Link State Routing algorithm===

A link-state routing algorithm optimized for mobile ad hoc networks is the optimized Link State Routing Protocol (OLSR). OLSR is proactive; it uses Hello and Topology Control (TC) messages to discover and disseminate link-state information through the mobile ad hoc network. Using Hello messages, each node discovers 2-hop neighbor information and elects a set of &quot;multipoint relays&quot; (MPRs). MPRs distinguish OLSR from other link-state routing protocols.

===Path-vector protocol===

Distance vector and link-state routing are both intra-domain routing protocols. They are used inside an autonomous system, but not between autonomous systems. Both of these routing protocols become intractable in large networks and cannot be used in inter-domain routing. Distance vector routing is subject to instability if there are more than a few hops in the domain. Link state routing needs significant resources to calculate routing tables. It also creates heavy traffic due to flooding.

Path-vector routing is used for inter-domain routing. It is similar to distance vector routing. Path-vector routing assumes that one node (there can be many) in each autonomous system acts on behalf of the entire autonomous system. This node is called the &quot;speaker node.&quot; The speaker node creates a routing table and advertises it to neighboring speaker nodes in neighboring autonomous systems. The idea is the same as distance vector routing except that only speaker nodes in each autonomous system can communicate with each other. The speaker node advertises the path, not the metric, of the nodes in its autonomous system or other autonomous systems.

The path-vector routing algorithm is similar to the distance vector algorithm in the sense that each border router advertises the destinations it can reach to its neighboring router. However, instead of advertising networks in terms of a destination and the distance to that destination, networks are advertised as destination addresses and path descriptions to reach those destinations. The path, expressed in terms of the domains (or confederations) traversed so far, is carried in a special path attribute that records the sequence of routing domains through which the reachability information has passed. A route is defined as a pairing between a destination and the attributes of the path to that destination, thus the name, path-vector routing; The routers receive a vector that contains paths to a set of destinations.

==Path selection==
Path selection involves applying a routing metric to multiple routes to select (or predict) the best route. Most routing algorithms use only one network path at a time. Multipath routing and specifically equal-cost multi-path routing techniques enable the use of multiple alternative paths.

In computer networking, the metric is computed by a routing algorithm, and can cover information such as bandwidth, network delay, hop count, path cost, load, maximum transmission unit, reliability, and communication cost. The routing table stores only the best possible routes, while link-state or topological databases may store all other information as well.

In case of overlapping or equal routes, algorithms consider the following elements in priority order to decide which routes to install into the routing table:
#&quot;Prefix length&quot;: A matching route table entry with a longer subnet mask is always preferred as it specifies the destination more exactly.
#&quot;Metric&quot;: When comparing routes learned via the same routing protocol, a lower metric is preferred. Metrics cannot be compared between routes learned from different routing protocols.
#&quot;Administrative distance&quot;: When comparing route table entries from different sources such as different routing protocols and static configuration, a lower administrative distance indicates a more reliable source and thus a preferred route.

Because a routing metric is specific to a given routing protocol, multi-protocol routers must use some external heuristic to select between routes learned from different routing protocols. Cisco routers, for example, attribute a value known as the administrative distance to each route, where smaller administrative distances indicate routes learned from a protocol assumed to be more reliable.

A local administrator can set up host-specific routes that provide more control over network usage, permits testing, and better overall security. This is useful for debugging network connections or routing tables.

In some small systems, a single central device decides ahead of time the complete path of every packet. In some other small systems, whichever edge device injects a packet into the network decides ahead of time the complete path of that particular packet. In either case, the route-planning device needs to know a lot of information about what devices are connected to the network and how they are connected to each other. Once it has this information, it can use an algorithm such as A* search algorithm to find the best path.

In high-speed systems, there are so many packets transmitted every second that it is infeasible for a single device to calculate the complete path for each and every packet. Early high-speed systems dealt with this with circuit switching by setting up a path once for the first packet between some source and some destination; later packets between that same source and that same destination continue to follow the same path without recalculating until the circuit teardown. Later high-speed systems inject packets into the network without any one device ever calculating a complete path for packets.

In large systems, there are so many connections between devices, and those connections change so frequently, that it is infeasible for any one device to even know how all the devices are connected to each other, much less calculate a complete path through them. Such systems generally use next-hop routing.

Most systems use a deterministic dynamic routing algorithm. When a device chooses a path to a particular final destination, that device always chooses the same path to that destination until it receives information that makes it think some other path is better.

A few routing algorithms do not use a deterministic algorithm to find the best link for a packet to get from its original source to its final destination. Instead, to avoid congestion hot spots in packet systems, a few algorithms use a randomized algorithm—Valiant&#x27;s paradigm—that routes a path to a randomly picked intermediate destination, and from there to its true final destination. In many early telephone switches, a randomizer was often used to select the start of a path through a multistage switching fabric.

Depending on the application for which path selection is performed, different metrics can be used. For example, for web requests one can use minimum latency paths to minimize web page load time, or for bulk data transfers one can choose the least utilized path to balance load across the network and increase throughput. A popular path selection objective is to reduce the average completion times of traffic flows and the total network bandwidth consumption. Recently, a path selection metric was proposed that computes the total number of bytes scheduled on the edges per path as selection metric. An empirical analysis of several path selection metrics, including this new proposal, has been made available.

==Multiple agents==
In some networks, routing is complicated by the fact that no single entity is responsible for selecting paths; instead, multiple entities are involved in selecting paths or even parts of a single path. Complications or inefficiency can result if these entities choose paths to optimize their own objectives, which may conflict with the objectives of other participants.

A classic example involves traffic in a road system, in which each driver picks a path that minimizes their travel time. With such routing, the equilibrium routes can be longer than optimal for all drivers. In particular, Braess&#x27;s paradox shows that adding a new road can &quot;lengthen&quot; travel times for all drivers.

In a single-agent model used, for example, for routing automated guided vehicles (AGVs) on a terminal, reservations are made for each vehicle to prevent simultaneous use of the same part of an infrastructure. This approach is also referred to as context-aware routing. 

The Internet is partitioned into autonomous systems (ASs) such as internet service providers (ISPs), each of which controls routes involving its network. Routing occurs at multiple levels. First, AS-level paths are selected via the BGP protocol that produces a sequence of ASs through which packets flow. Each AS may have multiple paths, offered by neighboring ASs, from which to choose. These routing decisions often correlate with business relationships with these neighboring ASs, which may be unrelated to path quality or latency. Second, once an AS-level path has been selected, there are often multiple corresponding router-level paths to choose from. This is due, in part, because two ISPs may be connected through multiple connections. In choosing the single router-level path, it is common practice for each ISP to employ hot-potato routing: sending traffic along the path that minimizes the distance through the ISP&#x27;s own network—even if that path lengthens the total distance to the destination.

For example, consider two ISPs, &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot;. Each has a presence in New York, connected by a fast link with latency —and each has a presence in London connected by a 5 ms link. Suppose both ISPs have trans-Atlantic links that connect their two networks, but &quot;A&quot;&#x27;s link has latency 100 ms and &quot;B&quot;&#x27;s has latency 120 ms. When routing a message from a source in &quot;A&quot;&#x27;s London network to a destination in &quot;B&quot;&#x27;s New York network, &quot;A&quot; may choose to immediately send the message to &quot;B&quot; in London. This saves &quot;A&quot; the work of sending it along an expensive trans-Atlantic link, but causes the message to experience latency 125 ms when the other route would have been 20 ms faster.

Additionally, a similar routing challenge can be observed in cellular networks, where different packets are destined for various endpoints, and each link exhibits varying spectral efficiency. In this context, the selection of the &quot;optimal&quot; path involves considering latency and packet error rate. To address this, multiple independent entities, one for each base station, play a crucial role in path selection while striving to optimize overall network performance.

A 2003 measurement study of Internet routes found that, between pairs of neighboring ISPs, more than 30% of paths have inflated latency due to hot-potato routing, with 5% of paths being delayed by at least 12 ms. Inflation due to AS-level path selection, while substantial, was attributed primarily to BGP&#x27;s lack of a mechanism to directly optimize for latency, rather than to selfish routing policies. It was also suggested that, were an appropriate mechanism in place, ISPs would be willing to cooperate to reduce latency rather than use hot-potato routing. Such a mechanism was later published by the same authors, first for the case of two ISPs and then for the global case.

==Route analytics==
As the Internet and IP networks have become mission critical business tools, there has been increased interest in techniques and methods to monitor the routing posture of networks. Incorrect routing or routing issues cause undesirable performance degradation, flapping or downtime. Monitoring routing in a network is achieved using route analytics tools and techniques.

==Centralized routing==
In networks where a logically centralized control is available over the forwarding state, for example, using software-defined networking, routing techniques can be used that aim to optimize global and network-wide performance metrics. This has been used by large internet companies that operate many data centers in different geographical locations attached using private optical links, examples of which include Microsoft&#x27;s Global WAN, Facebook&#x27;s Express Backbone, and Google&#x27;s B4. 

Global performance metrics to optimize include maximizing network utilization, minimizing traffic flow completion times, maximizing the traffic delivered prior to specific deadlines and reducing the completion times of flows. Work on the later over private WAN discusses modeling routing as a graph optimization problem by pushing all the queuing to the end-points. The authors also propose a heuristic to solve the problem efficiently while sacrificing negligible performance.

==See also==

* Black hole (networking)
* Collective routing
* Deflection routing
* Edge disjoint shortest pair algorithm
* Flood search routing
* Fuzzy routing
* Geographic routing
* Heuristic routing
* Path computation element (PCE)
* Policy-based routing
* Wormhole routing
* Small-world routing
* Turn restriction routing
==References==
==Further reading==
* Ciscopress 
* Ciscopress 
* 


==External links==
* Count-To-Infinity Problem
* , ways of avoiding the count-to-infinity problem
* Cisco IT Case Studies about Routing and Switching</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q22725" start="0" end="7" title="Routing" label="Routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192971" start="60" end="67" title="Network theory" label="network"/>
<link wikidata="Q506273" start="175" end="199" title="circuit-switched network" label="circuit-switched network"/>
<link wikidata="Q243961" start="214" end="247" title="public switched telephone network" label="public switched telephone network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="260" end="276" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="291" end="299" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q214111" start="389" end="403" title="network packet" label="network packet"/>
<link wikidata="Q173106" start="469" end="481" title="network node" label="network node"/>
<link wikidata="Q874048" start="525" end="542" title="Packet forwarding" label="Packet forwarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q165233" start="586" end="603" title="Network interface controller" label="network interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546066" start="649" end="665" title="network hardware" label="network hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318" start="682" end="689" title="Router (computing)" label="routers"/>
<link wikidata="Q487365" start="691" end="699" title="gateway (telecommunications)" label="gateways"/>
<link wikidata="Q80998" start="701" end="710" title="Firewall (computing)" label="firewalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503" start="715" end="723" title="network switch" label="switches"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="741" end="749" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q290066" start="922" end="935" title="routing table" label="routing table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648707" start="1140" end="1156" title="routing protocol" label="routing protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973191" start="1218" end="1228" title="IP routing" label="IP routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q188635" start="1252" end="1260" title="bridging (networking)" label="bridging"/>
<link wikidata="Q4418000" start="1286" end="1301" title="network address" label="network address"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="1709" end="1727" title="local area network" label="local area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119410" start="1956" end="1970" title="static routing" label="static routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q145490" start="2060" end="2070" title="network topology" label="topologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q243961" start="2183" end="2216" title="public switched telephone network" label="public switched telephone network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371623" start="2325" end="2344" title="routing in the PSTN" label="routing in the PSTN"/>
<link wikidata="Q352483" start="2348" end="2363" title="Dynamic routing" label="Dynamic routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648707" start="2473" end="2489" title="routing protocol" label="routing protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q207580" start="2685" end="2713" title="Routing Information Protocol" label="Routing Information Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q220169" start="2721" end="2745" title="Open Shortest Path First" label="Open Shortest Path First"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091139" start="2757" end="2799" title="Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing Protocol" label="Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q816022" start="2879" end="2901" title="Bellman–Ford algorithm" label="Bellman–Ford algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="4326" end="4339" title="Graph (discrete mathematics)" label="graphical map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058754" start="4703" end="4717" title="shortest paths" label="shortest paths"/>
<link wikidata="Q8548" start="4736" end="4761" title="Dijkstra&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Dijkstra&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q272735" start="4779" end="4789" title="tree graph" label="tree graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4085781" start="5151" end="5172" title="mobile ad hoc network" label="mobile ad hoc network"/>
<link wikidata="Q749245" start="5704" end="5721" title="Autonomous system (Internet)" label="autonomous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3799443" start="5850" end="5862" title="inter-domain" label="inter-domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535986" start="7641" end="7655" title="routing metric" label="routing metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035396" start="7775" end="7792" title="Multipath routing" label="Multipath routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367790" start="7810" end="7839" title="equal-cost multi-path routing" label="equal-cost multi-path routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576430" start="8003" end="8012" title="Bandwidth (computing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q436417" start="8014" end="8027" title="network delay" label="network delay"/>
<link wikidata="Q13091219" start="8029" end="8038" title="hop count" label="hop count"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163115" start="8057" end="8082" title="maximum transmission unit" label="maximum transmission unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755411" start="8183" end="8193" title="link-state" label="link-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535986" start="8576" end="8582" title="Metrics (networking)" label="Metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q358792" start="8771" end="8794" title="Administrative distance" label="Administrative distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q201413" start="9128" end="9137" title="heuristic" label="heuristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173395" start="9205" end="9210" title="Cisco" label="Cisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q358792" start="9264" end="9287" title="administrative distance" label="administrative distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q277680" start="10112" end="10131" title="A* search algorithm" label="A* search algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q506273" start="10376" end="10393" title="circuit switching" label="circuit switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130860" start="10621" end="10629" title="teardown (communications)" label="teardown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11047" end="11055" title="hop (networking)#Next hop" label="next-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q352483" start="11099" end="11114" title="dynamic routing" label="dynamic routing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11824" end="11851" title="1ESS switch#Switching fabric" label="multistage switching fabric"/>
<link wikidata="Q23389" start="13101" end="13112" title="Nash equilibrium" label="equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q897194" start="13179" end="13200" title="Braess&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="Braess&amp;#x27;s paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368584" start="13341" end="13365" title="automated guided vehicle" label="automated guided vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q749245" start="13590" end="13608" title="autonomous system (Internet)" label="autonomous systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="13623" end="13648" title="internet service provider" label="internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q11155" start="13789" end="13792" title="BGP" label="BGP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909577" start="14388" end="14406" title="hot-potato routing" label="hot-potato routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="14658" end="14666" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="14734" end="14740" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q968946" start="16576" end="16592" title="mission critical" label="mission critical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048565" start="16792" end="16800" title="route flapping" label="flapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965787" start="16864" end="16879" title="route analytics" label="route analytics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655198" start="17036" end="17063" title="software-defined networking" label="software-defined networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q880302" start="17922" end="17945" title="Black hole (networking)" label="Black hole (networking)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146183" start="17948" end="17966" title="Collective routing" label="Collective routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251653" start="17969" end="17987" title="Deflection routing" label="Deflection routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337697" start="17990" end="18027" title="Edge disjoint shortest pair algorithm" label="Edge disjoint shortest pair algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460078" start="18030" end="18050" title="Flood search routing" label="Flood search routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511131" start="18053" end="18066" title="Fuzzy routing" label="Fuzzy routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535067" start="18069" end="18087" title="Geographic routing" label="Geographic routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5748257" start="18090" end="18107" title="Heuristic routing" label="Heuristic routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144646" start="18110" end="18134" title="Path computation element" label="Path computation element"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209671" start="18143" end="18163" title="Policy-based routing" label="Policy-based routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036869" start="18166" end="18182" title="Wormhole routing" label="Wormhole routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542618" start="18185" end="18204" title="Small-world routing" label="Small-world routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136308" start="18207" end="18231" title="Turn restriction routing" label="Turn restriction routing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25751" wikidata="Q224105" url="?curid=25751" title="RIP (disambiguation)">
<text>[[RIP]] (abbreviating &quot;rest in peace&quot;, or ) is a common element of Christian epitaphs.

RIP may also refer to:

== Arts, entertainment, and media ==
=== Music ===
* RIP (band), punk band from Basque Country (Spain)
* R.I.P. or R.I.P. Productions, an alias of the UK garage duo Double 99

==== Albums ====
* &quot;R.I.P.&quot; (Coroner album), 1987
* &quot;R.I.P.&quot; (The Zombies album), originally scheduled for 1969, later released in 2000
* &quot;R.I.P.&quot; (Murder City Devils album), 2003
* &quot;R.I.P.&quot; (Rocket from the Crypt album), 2008
* &quot;R.I.P.&quot; (Actress album), 2012
* &quot;R.I.P. (Recording In Progress)&quot;, 2014 album by Lil Rob

==== Songs ====
* &quot;R.I.P.&quot; (Rita Ora song)
* &quot;R.I.P.&quot; (Sofía Reyes song)
* &quot;R.I.P.&quot; (Young Jeezy song)
* &quot;Rip (Rest in Peace)&quot; by Aidan and Ira Losco
* &quot;R.i.p. (duskCOre RemIx)&quot;, by Bring Me the Horizon on the album &quot;Post Human: Nex Gen&quot;
* &quot;R.I.P. (Rock in Peace)&quot;, on the album &quot;Backtracks&quot;
* &quot;R.I.P. (Rest in Pain)&quot;, by Sepultura from 1987 album &quot;Schizophrenia&quot;
* &quot;R.I.P.&quot; (2007), by September on album &quot;Dancing Shoes&quot;
* &quot;R.I.P.&quot; (2019), by Brooke Candy featuring Ashnikko from the album &quot;Sexorcism&quot;
* &quot;RIP&quot; (2017), by Olivia O&#x27;Brien
* &quot;R.I.P.&quot; (2018), by Playboi Carti from the album &quot;Die Lit&quot;

=== Other uses in arts, entertainment, and media ===
* &quot;R.I.P.&quot; (story) (1998), by Poppy Z. Brite
* &quot;RiP!: A Remix Manifesto&quot; (2008), open-source documentary film
* &quot;R.I.P.: Requiem in Phonybrian&quot;, 1999 manga

==Biology==
* Repeat-induced point mutation, a process by which DNA in some fungi accumulates mutations
* Ribosome-inactivating protein, a type of protein that controls ribosomes
* RNA immunoprecipitation, with an antibody

==Computing==
* Raster image processor
* Relative Instruction-Pointer, a processor register for holding an instruction pointer in the x86-64 architecture
* Remote Imaging Protocol, for using graphics instead of text on a BBS
* Routing Information Protocol, in computer networks

==Other uses==
* Ranger Indoctrination Program, U.S. Army
* Reduced ignition propensity cigarette 
* Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000, a UK act of Parliament
* Restricted isometry property, in mathematics
* R.I.P. cartridge (Round, Irritant, Personnel), or tear-gas cartridge, a specialist shotgun ammunition
* RIP Medical Debt, American charity
* Ripponlea railway station, Melbourne

==See also==
* Rip (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q224105" start="0" end="7" title="RIP (disambiguation)" label="[[RIP]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q224105" start="98" end="101" title="RIP (disambiguation)" label="RIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323676" start="175" end="185" title="RIP (band)" label="RIP (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740260" start="287" end="296" title="Double 99" label="Double 99"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120456" start="317" end="351" title="R.I.P. (Coroner album)" label="&amp;quot;R.I.P.&amp;quot; (Coroner album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85795370" start="360" end="398" title="R.I.P. (The Zombies album)" label="&amp;quot;R.I.P.&amp;quot; (The Zombies album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22265107" start="456" end="501" title="R.I.P. (Murder City Devils album)" label="&amp;quot;R.I.P.&amp;quot; (Murder City Devils album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273354" start="510" end="558" title="R.I.P. (Rocket from the Crypt album)" label="&amp;quot;R.I.P.&amp;quot; (Rocket from the Crypt album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273353" start="567" end="601" title="R.I.P. (Actress album)" label="&amp;quot;R.I.P.&amp;quot; (Actress album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25094956" start="616" end="646" title="R.I.P. (Recording In Progress)" label="R.I.P. (Recording In Progress)"/>
<link wikidata="Q568708" start="695" end="729" title="R.I.P. (Rita Ora song)" label="&amp;quot;R.I.P.&amp;quot; (Rita Ora song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q62268672" start="732" end="769" title="R.I.P. (Sofía Reyes song)" label="&amp;quot;R.I.P.&amp;quot; (Sofía Reyes song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17065986" start="772" end="809" title="R.I.P. (Young Jeezy song)" label="&amp;quot;R.I.P.&amp;quot; (Young Jeezy song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q130390611" start="818" end="837" title="Rip (Rest in Peace)" label="Rip (Rest in Peace)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="949" end="968" title="Post Human: Nex Gen" label="Post Human: Nex Gen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1032" end="1042" title="Backtracks (AC/DC album)#Track listing" label="Backtracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q937894" start="1115" end="1140" title="Schizophrenia (Sepultura album)" label="&amp;quot;Schizophrenia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q964719" start="1198" end="1211" title="Dancing Shoes" label="Dancing Shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053602" start="1303" end="1312" title="Sexorcism (Brooke Candy album)" label="Sexorcism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23978275" start="1348" end="1367" title="Olivia O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Olivia O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q55390989" start="1435" end="1442" title="Die Lit" label="Die Lit"/>
<link wikidata="Q450868" start="1505" end="1531" title="R.I.P. (story)" label="&amp;quot;R.I.P.&amp;quot; (story)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1566" end="1589" title="RiP!: A Remix Manifesto" label="RiP!: A Remix Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1641" end="1670" title="R.I.P.: Requiem in Phonybrian" label="R.I.P.: Requiem in Phonybrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415380" start="1704" end="1733" title="Repeat-induced point mutation" label="Repeat-induced point mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q24788543" start="1796" end="1825" title="Ribosome-inactivating protein" label="Ribosome-inactivating protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q901305" start="1871" end="1894" title="RNA immunoprecipitation" label="RNA immunoprecipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132167" start="1930" end="1952" title="Raster image processor" label="Raster image processor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2048" end="2054" title="x86-64#Architectural features" label="x86-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312156" start="2070" end="2093" title="Remote Imaging Protocol" label="Remote Imaging Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q207580" start="2141" end="2169" title="Routing Information Protocol" label="Routing Information Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292758" start="2210" end="2239" title="Ranger Indoctrination Program" label="Ranger Indoctrination Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451652" start="2253" end="2280" title="Reduced ignition propensity" label="Reduced ignition propensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138784" start="2294" end="2337" title="Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000" label="Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099734" start="2364" end="2392" title="Restricted isometry property" label="Restricted isometry property"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273358" start="2411" end="2427" title="R.I.P. cartridge" label="R.I.P. cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q102428243" start="2515" end="2531" title="RIP Medical Debt" label="RIP Medical Debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335746" start="2552" end="2577" title="Ripponlea railway station" label="Ripponlea railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201346" start="2605" end="2625" title="Rip (disambiguation)" label="Rip (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25754" wikidata="Q5321" url="?curid=25754" title="Resistor">
<text>A resistor is a passive two-terminal electrical component that implements electrical resistance as a circuit element. In electronic circuits, resistors are used to reduce current flow, adjust signal levels, to divide voltages, bias active elements, and terminate transmission lines, among other uses. High-power resistors that can dissipate many watts of electrical power as heat may be used as part of motor controls, in power distribution systems, or as test loads for generators.
Fixed resistors have resistances that only change slightly with temperature, time or operating voltage. Variable resistors can be used to adjust circuit elements (such as a volume control or a lamp dimmer), or as sensing devices for heat, light, humidity, force, or chemical activity.

Resistors are common elements of electrical networks and electronic circuits and are ubiquitous in electronic equipment. Practical resistors as discrete components can be composed of various compounds and forms. Resistors are also implemented within integrated circuits.

The electrical function of a resistor is specified by its resistance: common commercial resistors are manufactured over a range of more than nine orders of magnitude. The nominal value of the resistance falls within the manufacturing tolerance, indicated on the component.

==Electronic symbols and notation==
Two typical schematic diagram symbols are as follows:
The notation to state a resistor&#x27;s value in a circuit diagram varies.

One common scheme is the RKM code following IEC 60062. Rather than using a decimal separator, this notation uses a letter loosely associated with SI prefixes corresponding with the part&#x27;s resistance. For example, &quot;8K2&quot; as part marking code, in a circuit diagram or in a bill of materials (BOM) indicates a resistor value of 8.2 kΩ. Additional zeros imply a tighter tolerance, for example &quot;15M0&quot; for three significant digits. When the value can be expressed without the need for a prefix (that is, multiplicator 1), an &quot;R&quot; is used instead of the decimal separator. For example, &quot;1R2&quot; indicates 1.2 Ω, and &quot;18R&quot; indicates 18 Ω.

==Theory of operation==
===Ohm&#x27;s law===
An &quot;ideal resistor&quot; (i.e. a resistance without reactance) obeys Ohm&#x27;s law:

formula_1

Ohm&#x27;s law states that the voltage (formula_2) across a resistor is proportional to the current (formula_3) passing through it, where the constant of proportionality is the resistance (formula_4). For example, if a 300-ohm resistor is attached across the terminals of a 12-volt battery, then a current of 12 / 300 = 0.04 amperes flows through that resistor.

The ohm (symbol: Ω) is the SI unit of electrical resistance, named after Georg Simon Ohm. An ohm is equivalent to a volt per ampere. Since resistors are specified and manufactured over a very large range of values, the derived units of milliohm (1 mΩ = 10−3 Ω), kilohm (1 kΩ = 103 Ω), and megohm (1 MΩ = 106 Ω) are also in common usage.

===Series and parallel resistors===

The total resistance of resistors connected in series is the sum of their individual resistance values.

formula_5

The total resistance of resistors connected in parallel is the reciprocal of the sum of the reciprocals of the individual resistors.

formula_6

For example, a 10 ohm resistor connected in parallel with a 5 ohm resistor and a 15 ohm resistor produces ohms of resistance, or = 2.727 ohms.

A resistor network that is a combination of parallel and series connections can be broken up into smaller parts that are either one or the other. Some complex networks of resistors cannot be resolved in this manner, requiring more sophisticated circuit analysis. Generally, the Y-Δ transform, or matrix methods can be used to solve such problems.

===Power dissipation===

At any instant, the power &quot;P&quot; (watts) consumed by a resistor of resistance &quot;R&quot; (ohms) is calculated as:
formula_7
where &quot;V&quot; (volts) is the voltage across the resistor and &quot;I&quot; (amps) is the current flowing through it. Using Ohm&#x27;s law, the two other forms can be derived. This power is converted into heat which must be dissipated by the resistor&#x27;s package before its temperature rises excessively.

Resistors are rated according to their maximum power dissipation. Discrete resistors in solid-state electronic systems are typically rated as , , or watt. They usually absorb much less than a watt of electrical power and require little attention to their power rating.
Power resistors are required to dissipate substantial amounts of power and are typically used in power supplies, power conversion circuits, and power amplifiers; this designation is loosely applied to resistors with power ratings of 1 watt or greater. Power resistors are physically larger and may not use the preferred values, color codes, and external packages described below.

If the average power dissipated by a resistor is more than its power rating, damage to the resistor may occur, permanently altering its resistance; this is distinct from the reversible change in resistance due to its temperature coefficient when it warms. Excessive power dissipation may raise the temperature of the resistor to a point where it can burn the circuit board or adjacent components, or even cause a fire. There are flameproof resistors that will not produce flames with any overload of any duration.

Resistors may be specified with higher rated dissipation than is experienced in service to account for poor air circulation, high altitude, or high operating temperature.

All resistors have a maximum voltage rating; this may limit the power dissipation for higher resistance values. For instance, among watt resistors (a very common sort of leaded resistor) one is listed with a resistance of 100 MΩ and a maximum rated voltage of 750 V. However even placing 750 V across a 100 MΩ resistor continuously would only result in a power dissipation of less than 6 mW, making the nominal watt rating meaningless.

== Nonideal properties ==
Practical resistors have a series inductance and a small parallel capacitance; these specifications can be important in high-frequency applications. And while even an ideal resistor inherently has Johnson noise, some resistors have worse noise characteristics and so may be an issue for low-noise amplifiers or other sensitive electronics.

In some precision applications, the temperature coefficient of the resistance may also be of concern.

The unwanted inductance, excess noise, and temperature coefficient are mainly dependent on the technology used in manufacturing the resistor. They are not normally specified individually for a particular family of resistors manufactured using a particular technology. A family of discrete resistors may also be characterized according to its form factor, that is, the size of the device and the position of its leads (or terminals). This is relevant in the practical manufacturing of circuits that may use them.

Practical resistors are also specified as having a maximum power rating which must exceed the anticipated power dissipation of that resistor in a particular circuit: this is mainly of concern in power electronics applications.
Resistors with higher power ratings are physically larger and may require heat sinks. In a high-voltage circuit, attention must sometimes be paid to the rated maximum working voltage of the resistor. While there is no minimum working voltage for a given resistor, failure to account for a resistor&#x27;s maximum rating may cause the resistor to incinerate when current is run through it.

==Fixed resistors==

===Lead arrangements===

Through-hole components typically have &quot;leads&quot; (pronounced ) leaving the body &quot;axially&quot;, that is, on a line parallel with the part&#x27;s longest axis. Others have leads coming off their body &quot;radially&quot; instead. Other components may be SMT (surface mount technology), while high power resistors may have one of their leads designed into the heat sink.

===Carbon composition===
Carbon composition resistors (CCR) consist of a solid cylindrical resistive element with embedded wire leads or metal end caps to which the lead wires are attached. The body of the resistor is protected with paint or plastic. Early 20th-century carbon composition resistors had uninsulated bodies; the lead wires were wrapped around the ends of the resistance element rod and soldered. The completed resistor was painted for color-coding of its value.

The resistive element in carbon composition resistors is made from a mixture of finely powdered carbon and an insulating material, usually ceramic. A resin holds the mixture together. The resistance is determined by the ratio of the fill material (the powdered ceramic) to the carbon. Higher concentrations of carbon, which is a good conductor, result in lower resistances. Carbon composition resistors were commonly used in the 1960s and earlier, but are not popular for general use now as other types have better specifications, such as tolerance, voltage dependence, and stress. Carbon composition resistors change value when stressed with over-voltages. Moreover, if internal moisture content, such as from exposure for some length of time to a humid environment, is significant, soldering heat creates a non-reversible change in resistance value. Carbon composition resistors have poor stability with time and were consequently factory sorted to, at best, only 5% tolerance. These resistors are non-inductive, which provides benefits when used in voltage pulse reduction and surge protection applications. Carbon composition resistors have higher capability to withstand overload relative to the component&#x27;s size.

Carbon composition resistors are still available, but relatively expensive. Values ranged from fractions of an ohm to 22 megohms. Due to their high price, these resistors are no longer used in most applications. However, they are used in power supplies and welding controls. They are also in demand for repair of vintage electronic equipment where authenticity is a factor.

===Carbon pile===
A carbon pile resistor is made of a stack of carbon disks compressed between two metal contact plates. Adjusting the clamping pressure changes the resistance between the plates. These resistors are used when an adjustable load is required, such as in testing automotive batteries or radio transmitters. A carbon pile resistor can also be used as a speed control for small motors in household appliances (sewing machines, hand-held mixers) with ratings up to a few hundred watts. A carbon pile resistor can be incorporated in automatic voltage regulators for generators, where the carbon pile controls the field current to maintain relatively constant voltage. This principle is also applied in the carbon microphone.

===Carbon film===

In manufacturing carbon film resistors, a carbon film is deposited on an insulating substrate, and a helix is cut in it to create a long, narrow resistive path. Varying shapes, coupled with the resistivity of amorphous carbon (ranging from 500 to 800 μΩ m), can provide a wide range of resistance values. Carbon film resistors feature lower noise compared to carbon composition resistors because of the precise distribution of the pure graphite without binding. Carbon film resistors feature a power rating range of 0.125 W to 5 W at 70 °C. Resistances available range from 1 ohm to 10 megaohm. The carbon film resistor has an operating temperature range of −55 °C to 155 °C. It has 200 to 600 volts maximum working voltage range. Special carbon film resistors are used in applications requiring high pulse stability.

===Printed carbon resistors===
Carbon composition resistors can be printed directly onto printed circuit board (PCB) substrates as part of the PCB manufacturing process. Although this technique is more common on hybrid PCB modules, it can also be used on standard fibreglass PCBs. Tolerances are typically quite large and can be in the order of 30%. A typical application would be non-critical pull-up resistors.

===Thick and thin film===

Thick film resistors became popular during the 1970s, and most SMD (surface mount device) resistors today are of this type. The resistive element of thick films is 1000 times thicker than thin films, but the principal difference is how the film is applied to the cylinder (axial resistors) or the surface (SMD resistors).

Thin film resistors are made by sputtering (a method of vacuum deposition) the resistive material onto an insulating substrate. The film is then etched in a similar manner to the old (subtractive) process for making printed circuit boards; that is, the surface is coated with a photo-sensitive material, covered by a pattern film, irradiated with ultraviolet light, and then the exposed photo-sensitive coating is developed, and underlying thin film is etched away.

Thick film resistors are manufactured using screen and stencil printing processes.

Because the time during which the sputtering is performed can be controlled, the thickness of the thin film can be accurately controlled. The type of material also varies, consisting of one or more ceramic (cermet) conductors such as tantalum nitride (TaN), ruthenium oxide (), lead oxide (PbO), bismuth ruthenate (), nickel chromium (NiCr), or bismuth iridate ().

The resistance of both thin and thick film resistors after manufacture is not highly accurate; they are usually trimmed to an accurate value by abrasive or laser trimming. Thin film resistors are usually specified with tolerances of 1% and 5%, and with temperature coefficients of 5 to 50 ppm/K. They also have much lower noise levels, on the level of 10–100 times less than thick film resistors. Thick film resistors may use the same conductive ceramics, but they are mixed with sintered (powdered) glass and a carrier liquid so that the composite can be screen-printed. This composite of glass and conductive ceramic (cermet) material is then fused (baked) in an oven at about 850 °C.

When first manufactured, thick film resistors had tolerances of 5%, but standard tolerances have improved to 2% or 1% in the last few decades. Temperature coefficients of thick film resistors are typically ±200 or ±250 ppm/K; a 40-kelvin (70 °F) temperature change can change the resistance by 1%.

Thin film resistors are usually far more expensive than thick film resistors. For example, SMD thin film resistors, with 0.5% tolerances and with 25 ppm/K temperature coefficients, when bought in full size reel quantities, are about twice the cost of 1%, 250 ppm/K thick film resistors.

===Metal film===
A common type of axial-leaded resistor today is the metal-film resistor. Metal Electrode Leadless Face (MELF) resistors often use the same technology.

Metal film resistors are usually coated with nickel chromium (NiCr), but might be coated with any of the cermet materials listed above for thin film resistors. Unlike thin film resistors, the material may be applied using different techniques than sputtering (though this is one technique used). The resistance value is determined by cutting a helix through the coating rather than by etching, similar to the way carbon resistors are made. The result is a reasonable tolerance (0.5%, 1%, or 2%) and a temperature coefficient that is generally between 50 and 100 ppm/K. Metal film resistors possess good noise characteristics and low non-linearity due to a low voltage coefficient. They are also beneficial due to long-term stability.

===Metal oxide film===
Metal-oxide film resistors are made of metal oxides which results in a higher operating temperature and greater stability and reliability than metal film. They are used in applications with high endurance demands.

===Wire wound===

Wirewound resistors are commonly made by winding a metal wire, usually nichrome, around a ceramic, plastic, or fiberglass core. The ends of the wire are soldered or welded to two caps or rings, attached to the ends of the core. The assembly is protected with a layer of paint, molded plastic, or an enamel coating baked at high temperature. These resistors are designed to withstand unusually high temperatures of up to 450 °C. Wire leads in low power wirewound resistors are usually between 0.6 and 0.8 mm in diameter and tinned for ease of soldering. For higher power wirewound resistors, either a ceramic outer case or an aluminum outer case on top of an insulating layer is used. If the outer case is ceramic, such resistors are sometimes described as &quot;cement&quot; resistors, though they do not actually contain any traditional cement. The aluminum-cased types are designed to be attached to a heat sink to dissipate the heat; the rated power is dependent on being used with a suitable heat sink, e.g., a 50 W power rated resistor overheats at a fraction of the power dissipation if not used with a heat sink. Large wirewound resistors may be rated for 1,000 watts or more.

Because wirewound resistors are coils they have more undesirable inductance than other types of resistor. However, winding the wire in sections with alternately reversed direction can minimize inductance. Other techniques employ bifilar winding, or a flat thin former (to reduce cross-section area of the coil). For the most demanding circuits, resistors with Ayrton–Perry winding are used.

Applications of wirewound resistors are similar to those of composition resistors with the exception of high frequency applications. The high frequency response of wirewound resistors is substantially worse than that of a composition resistor.

===Metal foil resistor===
In 1960, Felix Zandman and Sidney J. Stein presented a development of resistor film of very high stability.

The primary resistance element of a foil resistor is a chromium nickel alloy foil several micrometers thick. Chromium nickel alloys are characterized by having a large electrical resistance (about 58 times that of copper), a small temperature coefficient and high resistance to oxidation. Examples are Chromel A and Nichrome V, whose typical composition is 80 Ni and 20 Cr, with a melting point of 1420 °C. When iron is added, the chromium nickel alloy becomes more ductile. The Nichrome and Chromel C are examples of an alloy containing iron. The composition typical of Nichrome is 60 Ni, 12 Cr, 26 Fe, 2 Mn and Chromel C, 64 Ni, 11 Cr, Fe 25. The melting temperature of these alloys are 1350 °C and 1390 °C, respectively.

Since their introduction in the 1960s, foil resistors have had the best precision and stability of any resistor available. One of the important parameters of stability is the temperature coefficient of resistance (TCR). The TCR of foil resistors is extremely low, and has been further improved over the years. One range of ultra-precision foil resistors offers a TCR of 0.14 ppm/°C, tolerance ±0.005%, long-term stability (1 year) 25 ppm, (3 years) 50 ppm (further improved 5-fold by hermetic sealing), stability under load (2000 hours) 0.03%, thermal EMF 0.1 μV/°C, noise −42 dB, voltage coefficient 0.1 ppm/V, inductance 0.08 μH, capacitance 0.5 pF.

The thermal stability of this type of resistor also has to do with the opposing effects of the metal&#x27;s electrical resistance increasing with temperature, and being reduced by thermal expansion leading to an increase in thickness of the foil, whose other dimensions are constrained by a ceramic substrate.

===Ammeter shunts===
An ammeter shunt is a special type of current-sensing resistor, having four terminals and a value in milliohms or even micro-ohms. Current-measuring instruments, by themselves, can usually accept only limited currents. To measure high currents, the current passes through the shunt across which the voltage drop is measured and interpreted as current. A typical shunt consists of two solid metal blocks, sometimes brass, mounted on an insulating base. Between the blocks, and soldered or brazed to them, are one or more strips of low temperature coefficient of resistance (TCR) manganin alloy. Large bolts threaded into the blocks make the current connections, while much smaller screws provide volt meter connections. Shunts are rated by full-scale current, and often have a voltage drop of 50 mV at rated current. Such meters are adapted to the shunt full current rating by using an appropriately marked dial face; no change need to be made to the other parts of the meter.

===Grid resistor===
In heavy-duty industrial high-current applications, a grid resistor is a large convection-cooled lattice of stamped metal alloy strips connected in rows between two electrodes. Such industrial grade resistors can be as large as a refrigerator; some designs can handle over 500 amperes of current, with a range of resistances extending lower than 0.04 ohms. They are used in applications such as dynamic braking and load banking for locomotives and trams, neutral grounding for industrial AC distribution, control loads for cranes and heavy equipment, load testing of generators and harmonic filtering for electric substations.

The term &quot;grid resistor&quot; is sometimes used to describe a resistor of any type connected to the control grid of a vacuum tube. This is not a resistor technology; it is an electronic circuit topology.

===Special varieties===
* Cermet
* Phenolic
* Tantalum
* Water resistor

==Variable resistors==
===Adjustable resistors===
A resistor may have one or more fixed tapping points so that the resistance can be changed by moving the connecting wires to different terminals. Some wirewound power resistors have a tapping point that can slide along the resistance element, allowing a larger or smaller part of the resistance to be used.

Where continuous adjustment of the resistance value during operation of equipment is required, the sliding resistance tap can be connected to a knob accessible to an operator. Such a device is called a rheostat and has two terminals.

===Potentiometers===
A potentiometer (colloquially, &quot;pot&quot;) is a three-terminal resistor with a continuously adjustable tapping point controlled by rotation of a shaft or knob or by a linear slider. The name &quot;potentiometer&quot; comes from its function as an adjustable voltage divider to provide a variable potential at the terminal connected to the tapping point. Volume control in an audio device is a common application of a potentiometer. A typical low power potentiometer &quot;(see drawing)&quot; is constructed of a flat resistance element &quot;(B)&quot; of carbon composition, metal film, or conductive plastic, with a springy phosphor bronze wiper contact &quot;(C)&quot; which moves along the surface. An alternate construction is resistance wire wound on a form, with the wiper sliding axially along the coil. These have lower resolution, since as the wiper moves the resistance changes in steps equal to the resistance of a single turn.

High-resolution multiturn potentiometers are used in precision applications. These have wire-wound resistance elements typically wound on a helical mandrel, with the wiper moving on a helical track as the control is turned, making continuous contact with the wire. Some include a conductive-plastic resistance coating over the wire to improve resolution. These typically offer ten turns of their shafts to cover their full range. They are usually set with dials that include a simple turns counter and a graduated dial, and can typically achieve three-digit resolution. Electronic analog computers used them in quantity for setting coefficients and delayed-sweep oscilloscopes of recent decades included one on their panels.

===Resistance decade boxes===
A resistance decade box or resistor substitution box is a unit containing resistors of many values, with one or more mechanical switches which allow any one of various discrete resistances offered by the box to be dialed in. Usually the resistance is accurate to high precision, ranging from laboratory/calibration grade accuracy of 20 parts per million, to field grade at 1%. Inexpensive boxes with lesser accuracy are also available. All types offer a convenient way of selecting and quickly changing a resistance in laboratory, experimental and development work without needing to attach resistors one by one, or even stock each value. The range of resistance provided, the maximum resolution, and the accuracy characterize the box. For example, one box offers resistances from 0 to 100 megohms, maximum resolution 0.1 ohm, accuracy 0.1%.

===Special devices===
There are various devices whose resistance changes with various quantities. The resistance of NTC thermistors exhibit a strong negative temperature coefficient, making them useful for measuring temperatures. Since their resistance can be large until they are allowed to heat up due to the passage of current, they are also commonly used to prevent excessive current surges when equipment is powered on. Similarly, the resistance of a humistor varies with humidity. One sort of photodetector, the photoresistor, has a resistance which varies with illumination.

The strain gauge, invented by Edward E. Simmons and Arthur C. Ruge in 1938, is a type of resistor that changes value with applied strain. A single resistor may be used, or a pair (half bridge), or four resistors connected in a Wheatstone bridge configuration. The strain resistor is bonded with adhesive to an object that is subjected to mechanical strain. With the strain gauge and a filter, amplifier, and analog/digital converter, the strain on an object can be measured.

A related but more recent invention uses a Quantum Tunnelling Composite to sense mechanical stress. It passes a current whose magnitude can vary by a factor of 1012 in response to changes in applied pressure.

==Measurement==
The value of a resistor can be measured with an ohmmeter, which may be one function of a multimeter. Usually, probes on the ends of test leads connect to the resistor. A simple ohmmeter may apply a voltage from a battery across the unknown resistor (with an internal resistor of a known value in series) producing a current which drives a meter movement. The current, in accordance with Ohm&#x27;s law, is inversely proportional to the sum of the internal resistance and the resistor being tested, resulting in an analog meter scale which is very non-linear, calibrated from infinity to 0 ohms. A digital multimeter, using active electronics, may instead pass a specified current through the test resistance. The voltage generated across the test resistance in that case is linearly proportional to its resistance, which is measured and displayed. In either case the low-resistance ranges of the meter pass much more current through the test leads than do high-resistance ranges. This allows for the voltages present to be at reasonable levels (generally below 10 volts) but still measurable.

Measuring low-value resistors, such as fractional-ohm resistors, with acceptable accuracy requires four-terminal connections. One pair of terminals applies a known, calibrated current to the resistor, while the other pair senses the voltage drop across the resistor. Some laboratory quality ohmmeters, milliohmmeters, and even some of the better digital multimeters sense using four input terminals for this purpose, which may be used with special test leads called Kelvin clips. Each of the two clips has a pair of jaws insulated from each other. One side of each clip applies the measuring current, while the other connections are only to sense the voltage drop. The resistance is again calculated using Ohm&#x27;s Law as the measured voltage divided by the applied current.

==Standards==

===Production resistors===
Resistor characteristics are quantified and reported using various national standards. In the US, MIL-STD-202 contains the relevant test methods to which other standards refer.

There are various standards specifying properties of resistors for use in equipment:
* IEC 60062 (IEC 62) / DIN 40825 / BS 1852 / IS 8186 / JIS C 5062 etc. (Resistor color code, RKM code, date code)
* EIA RS-279 / DIN 41429 (Resistor color code)
* IEC 60063 (IEC 63) / JIS C 5063 (Standard E series values)
* MIL-PRF-26
* MIL-PRF-39007 (Fixed power, established reliability)
* MIL-PRF-55342 (Surface-mount thick and thin film)
* MIL-PRF-914
* MIL-R-11 Standard Canceled
* MIL-R-39017 (Fixed, General Purpose, Established Reliability)
* MIL-PRF-32159 (zero ohm jumpers)
* UL 1412 (fusing and temperature limited resistors)

There are other United States military procurement MIL-R- standards.

===Resistance standards===
The primary standard for resistance, the &quot;mercury ohm&quot; was initially defined in 1884 in as a column of mercury 106.3 cm long and in cross-section, at . Difficulties in precisely measuring the physical constants to replicate this standard result in variations of as much as 30 ppm. From 1900 the mercury ohm was replaced with a precision machined plate of manganin. Since 1990 the international resistance standard has been based on the quantized Hall effect discovered by Klaus von Klitzing, for which he won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1985.

Resistors of extremely high precision are manufactured for calibration and laboratory use. They may have four terminals, using one pair to carry an operating current and the other pair to measure the voltage drop; this eliminates errors caused by voltage drops across the lead resistances, because no charge flows through voltage sensing leads. It is important in small value resistors (100–0.0001 ohm) where lead resistance is significant or even comparable with respect to resistance standard value.

==Resistor marking==

Axial resistor cases are usually tan, brown, blue, or green (though other colors are occasionally found as well, such as dark red or dark gray), and display three to six colored stripes that indicate resistance (and by extension tolerance), and may include bands to indicate the temperature coefficient and reliability class. In four-striped resistors, the first two stripes represent the first two digits of the resistance in ohms, the third represents a multiplier, and the fourth the tolerance (which if absent, denotes ±20%). For five- and six- striped resistors the third band is the third digit, the fourth is the multiplier and the fifth is the tolerance; a sixth stripe represents the temperature coefficient. The power rating of the resistor is usually not marked and is deduced from its size.

Surface-mount resistors are marked numerically.

Early 20th century resistors, essentially uninsulated, were dipped in paint to cover their entire body for color-coding. This base color represented the first digit. A second color of paint was applied to one end of the element to represent a second digit, and a color dot (or band) in the middle provided the third digit. The rule was &quot;body, tip, dot&quot;, providing two significant digits for value and the decimal multiplier, in that sequence. Default tolerance was ±20%. Closer-tolerance resistors had silver (±10%) or gold-colored (±5%) paint on the other end.

===Preferred values===

Early resistors were made in more or less arbitrary round numbers; a series might have 100, 125, 150, 200, 300, etc. Early power wirewound resistors, such as brown vitreous-enameled types, were made with a system of preferred values like some of those mentioned here. Resistors as manufactured are subject to a certain percentage tolerance, and it makes sense to manufacture values that correlate with the tolerance, so that the actual value of a resistor overlaps slightly with its neighbors. Wider spacing leaves gaps; narrower spacing increases manufacturing and inventory costs to provide resistors that are more or less interchangeable.

A logical scheme is to produce resistors in a range of values which increase in a geometric progression, so that each value is greater than its predecessor by a fixed multiplier or percentage, chosen to match the tolerance of the range. For example, for a tolerance of ±20% it makes sense to have each resistor about 1.5 times its predecessor, covering a decade in 6 values. More precisely, the factor used is 1.4678 ≈ formula_8, giving values of 1.47, 2.15, 3.16, 4.64, 6.81, 10 for the 1–10-decade (a decade is a range increasing by a factor of 10; 0.1–1 and 10–100 are other examples); these are rounded in practice to 1.5, 2.2, 3.3, 4.7, 6.8, 10; followed by 15, 22, 33, ... and preceded by ... 0.47, 0.68, 1. This scheme has been adopted as the E6 series of the IEC 60063 preferred number values. There are also E12, E24, E48, E96 and E192 series for components of progressively finer resolution, with 12, 24, 48, 96, and 192 different values within each decade. The actual values used are in the IEC 60063 lists of preferred numbers.

A resistor of 100 ohms ±20% would be expected to have a value between 80 and 120 ohms; its E6 neighbors are 68 (54–82) and 150 (120–180) ohms. A sensible spacing, E6 is used for ±20% components; E12 for ±10%; E24 for ±5%; E48 for ±2%, E96 for ±1%; E192 for ±0.5% or better. Resistors are manufactured in values from a few milliohms to about a gigaohm in IEC60063 ranges appropriate for their tolerance. Manufacturers may sort resistors into tolerance-classes based on measurement. Accordingly, a selection of 100 ohms resistors with a tolerance of ±10%, might not lie just around 100 ohm (but no more than 10% off) as one would expect (a bell-curve), but rather be in two groups – either between 5 and 10% too high or 5 to 10% too low (but not closer to 100 ohm than that) because any resistors the factory had measured as being less than 5% off would have been marked and sold as resistors with only ±5% tolerance or better. When designing a circuit, this may become a consideration. This process of sorting parts based on post-production measurement is known as &quot;binning&quot;, and can be applied to other components than resistors (such as speed grades for CPUs).

===SMT resistors===
Surface mounted resistors of larger sizes (metric 1608 and above) are printed with numerical values in a code related to that used on axial resistors. Standard-tolerance surface-mount technology (SMT) resistors are marked with a three-digit code, in which the first two digits are the first two significant digits of the value and the third digit is the power of ten (the number of zeroes). For example:

* 334 = 33 × 104 Ω = 330 kΩ
* 222 = 22 × 102 Ω = 2.2 kΩ
* 473 = 47 × 103 Ω = 47 kΩ
* 105 = 10 × 105 Ω = 1 MΩ

Resistances less than 100 Ω are written: 100, 220, 470. The final zero represents ten to the power zero, which is 1. For example:

* 100 = 10 × 100 Ω = 10 Ω
* 220 = 22 × 100 Ω = 22 Ω

Sometimes these values are marked as 10 or 22 to prevent a mistake.

Resistances less than 10 Ω have &#x27;R&#x27; to indicate the position of the decimal point (radix point). For example:

* 4R7 = 4.7 Ω
* R300 = 0.30 Ω
* 0R22 = 0.22 Ω
* 0R01 = 0.01 Ω

000 and 0000 sometimes appear as values on surface-mount zero-ohm links, since these have (approximately) zero resistance.

More recent surface-mount resistors are too small, physically, to permit practical markings to be applied.

===Precision resistor markings===

Many precision resistors, including surface mount and axial-lead types, are marked with a four-digit code. The first three digits are the significant figures and the fourth is the power of ten. For example:

* 1001 = 100 × 101 Ω = 1.00 kΩ
* 4992 = 499 × 102 Ω = 49.9 kΩ
* 1000 = 100 × 100 Ω = 100 Ω

Axial-lead precision resistors often use color code bands to represent this four-digit code.

==== EIA-96 marking ====

The former EIA-96 marking system now included in IEC 60062:2016 is a more compact marking system intended for physically small high-precision resistors. It uses a two-digit code plus a letter (a total of three alphanumeric characters) to indicate 1% resistance values to three significant digits. The two digits (from &quot;01&quot; to &quot;96&quot;) are a code that indicates one of the 96 &quot;positions&quot; in the standard E96 series of 1% resistor values. The uppercase letter is a code that indicates a power of ten multiplier. For example, the marking &quot;01C&quot; represents 10 kOhm; &quot;10C&quot; represents 12.4 kOhm; &quot;96C&quot; represents 97.6 kOhm.


===Industrial type designation===


Steps to find out the resistance or capacitance values:

# First two letters gives the power dissipation capacity.
# Next three digits gives the resistance value.
## First two digits are the significant values
## Third digit is the multiplier.
# Final digit gives the tolerance.

If a resistor is coded:
* EB1041: power dissipation capacity = 1/2 watts, resistance value = ±10% = between ohms and ohms.
* CB3932: power dissipation capacity = 1/4 watts, resistance value = ±20% = between and ohms.

== Common usage patterns ==

There are several common usage patterns that resistors are commonly configured in.

=== Current limiting ===

Resistors are commonly used to limit the amount of current flowing through a circuit. Many circuit components (such as LEDs) require the current flowing through them to be limited, but do not themselves limit the amount of current. Therefore, oftentimes resistors will be added to prevent overcurrent situations. Additionally, oftentimes circuits do not need the amount of current that would be otherwise flowing through them, so resistors can be added to limit the power consumption of such circuits.

=== Voltage divider ===
Oftentimes circuits need to provide various reference voltages for other circuits (such as voltage comparators). A fixed voltage can be obtained by taking two resistors in series between two other fixed voltages (such as the source voltage and ground). The terminal between the two resistors will be at a voltage that is between the two voltages, at a linear distance based on the relative resistances of the two resistors. For instance, if a 200 ohm resistor and a 400 ohm resistor are placed in series between 6 V and 0 V, the terminal between them will be at 4 V.

=== Pull-down and pull-up resistors ===
When a circuit is not connected to power, the voltage of that circuit is not zero but undefined (it can be influenced by previous voltages or the environment). A pull-up or pull-down resistor provides a voltage for a circuit when it is otherwise disconnected (such as when a button is not pushed down or a transistor is not active). A pull-up resistor connects the circuit to a high positive voltage (if the circuit requires a high positive default voltage) and a pull-down resistor connects the circuit to a low voltage or ground (if the circuit requires a low default voltage). The resistor value must be high enough so that, when the circuit is active, the voltage source it is attached to does not over influence the function of the circuit, but low enough so that it &quot;pulls&quot; quickly enough when the circuit is deactivated, and does not significantly alter the voltage from the source value.

==Electrical and thermal noise==
In amplifying faint signals, it is often necessary to minimize electronic noise, particularly in the first stage of amplification. As a dissipative element, even an ideal resistor naturally produces a randomly fluctuating voltage, or noise, across its terminals. This Johnson–Nyquist noise is a fundamental noise source which depends only upon the temperature and resistance of the resistor, and is predicted by the fluctuation–dissipation theorem. Using a larger value of resistance produces a larger voltage noise, whereas a smaller value of resistance generates more current noise, at a given temperature.

The thermal noise of a practical resistor may also be larger than the theoretical prediction and that increase is typically frequency-dependent. Excess noise of a practical resistor is observed only when current flows through it. This is specified in unit of μV/V/decade – μV of noise per volt applied across the resistor per decade of frequency. The μV/V/decade value is frequently given in dB so that a resistor with a noise index of 0 dB exhibits 1 μV (rms) of excess noise for each volt across the resistor in each frequency decade. Excess noise is thus an example of 1/&quot;f&quot; noise. Thick-film and carbon composition resistors generate more excess noise than other types at low frequencies. Wire-wound and thin-film resistors are often used for their better noise characteristics. Carbon composition resistors can exhibit a noise index of 0 dB while bulk metal foil resistors may have a noise index of −40 dB, usually making the excess noise of metal foil resistors insignificant. Thin film surface mount resistors typically have lower noise and better thermal stability than thick film surface mount resistors. Excess noise is also size-dependent: in general, excess noise is reduced as the physical size of a resistor is increased (or multiple resistors are used in parallel), as the independently fluctuating resistances of smaller components tend to average out.

While not an example of &quot;noise&quot; per se, a resistor may act as a thermocouple, producing a small DC voltage differential across it due to the thermoelectric effect if its ends are at different temperatures. This induced DC voltage can degrade the precision of instrumentation amplifiers in particular. Such voltages appear in the junctions of the resistor leads with the circuit board and with the resistor body. Common metal film resistors show such an effect at a magnitude of about 20 μV/°C. Some carbon composition resistors can exhibit thermoelectric offsets as high as 400 μV/°C, whereas specially constructed resistors can reduce this number to 0.05 μV/°C. In applications where the thermoelectric effect may become important, care has to be taken to mount the resistors horizontally to avoid temperature gradients and to mind the air flow over the board.

==Failure modes==
The failure rate of resistors in a properly designed circuit is low compared to other electronic components such as semiconductors and electrolytic capacitors. Damage to resistors most often occurs due to overheating when the average power delivered to it greatly exceeds its ability to dissipate heat (specified by the resistor&#x27;s &quot;power rating&quot;). This may be due to a fault external to the circuit but is frequently caused by the failure of another component (such as a transistor that shorts out) in the circuit connected to the resistor. Operating a resistor too close to its power rating can limit the resistor&#x27;s lifespan or cause a significant change in its resistance. A safe design generally uses overrated resistors in power applications to avoid this danger.

Low-power thin-film resistors can be damaged by long-term high-voltage stress, even below maximum specified voltage and below maximum power rating. This is often the case for the startup resistors feeding a switched-mode power supply integrated circuit.

When overheated, carbon-film resistors may decrease or increase in resistance.
Carbon film and composition resistors can fail (open circuit) if running close to their maximum dissipation. This is also possible but less likely with metal film and wirewound resistors.

There can also be failure of resistors due to mechanical stress and adverse environmental factors including humidity. If not enclosed, wirewound resistors can corrode.

Surface mount resistors have been known to fail due to the ingress of sulfur into the internal makeup of the resistor. This sulfur chemically reacts with the silver layer to produce non-conductive silver sulfide. The resistor&#x27;s impedance goes to infinity. Sulfur resistant and anti-corrosive resistors are sold into automotive, industrial, and military applications. ASTM B809 is an industry standard that tests a part&#x27;s susceptibility to sulfur.

An alternative failure mode can be encountered where large value resistors are used (hundreds of kilohms and higher). Resistors are not only specified with a maximum power dissipation, but also for a maximum voltage drop. Exceeding this voltage causes the resistor to degrade slowly reducing in resistance. The voltage dropped across large value resistors can be exceeded before the power dissipation reaches its limiting value. Since the maximum voltage specified for commonly encountered resistors is a few hundred volts, this is a problem only in applications where these voltages are encountered.

Variable resistors can also degrade in a different manner, typically involving poor contact between the wiper and the body of the resistance. This may be due to dirt or corrosion and is typically perceived as &quot;crackling&quot; as the contact resistance fluctuates; this is especially noticed as the device is adjusted. This is similar to crackling caused by poor contact in switches, and like switches, potentiometers are to some extent self-cleaning: running the wiper across the resistance may improve the contact. Potentiometers which are seldom adjusted, especially in dirty or harsh environments, are most likely to develop this problem. When self-cleaning of the contact is insufficient, improvement can usually be obtained through the use of contact cleaner (also known as &quot;tuner cleaner&quot;) spray. The crackling noise associated with turning the shaft of a dirty potentiometer in an audio circuit (such as the volume control) is greatly accentuated when an undesired DC voltage is present, often indicating the failure of a DC blocking capacitor in the circuit.

==See also==

* Circuit design
* Dummy load
* Electrical impedance
* High value resistors (electronics)
* Iron-hydrogen resistor
* Piezoresistive effect
* Shot noise
* Thermistor
* Trimmer (electronics)

==References==
==External links==

* Color Coded Resistance Calculator - University of Pennsylvania
* Resistor Types – Does It Matter? - Aiken Amps
* Difference between types of resistors - Analog Devices
* Basics of Linear Fixed Resistors - Vishay
* 4-terminal resistors – How ultra-precise resistors work - PSL
* Beginners&#x27; Guide to Potentiometers - ESP</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5321" start="2" end="10" title="Resistor" label="resistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045736" start="16" end="23" title="passivity (engineering)" label="passive"/>
<link wikidata="Q182610" start="24" end="36" title="terminal (electronics)" label="two-terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11653" start="37" end="57" title="electronic component" label="electrical component"/>
<link wikidata="Q106603432" start="74" end="95" title="electrical resistance" label="electrical resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q466758" start="210" end="225" title="Voltage divider" label="divide voltages"/>
<link wikidata="Q719550" start="227" end="231" title="Biasing" label="bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q693004" start="263" end="280" title="transmission line" label="transmission line"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="346" end="350" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q131502" start="471" end="481" title="electric generator" label="generators"/>
<link wikidata="Q132629" start="802" end="820" title="electrical network" label="electrical network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815901" start="826" end="844" title="electronic circuit" label="electronic circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="868" end="888" title="Electronics" label="electronic equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="1019" end="1037" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q518730" start="1187" end="1206" title="orders of magnitude" label="orders of magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1261" end="1284" title="Engineering tolerance#Electrical component tolerance" label="manufacturing tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4514647" start="1363" end="1380" title="schematic diagram" label="schematic diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836637" start="1506" end="1514" title="RKM code" label="RKM code"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836637" start="1525" end="1534" title="IEC 60062" label="IEC 60062"/>
<link wikidata="Q427968" start="1556" end="1573" title="decimal separator" label="decimal separator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1723" end="1735" title="marking code" label="marking code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045991" start="1742" end="1757" title="circuit diagram" label="circuit diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322175" start="1766" end="1783" title="bill of materials" label="bill of materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q193972" start="2265" end="2274" title="Electrical reactance" label="reactance"/>
<link wikidata="Q41591" start="2282" end="2296" title="Ohm&amp;#x27;s law" label="Ohm&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428" start="2341" end="2348" title="voltage" label="voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="2402" end="2409" title="Electric current" label="current"/>
<link wikidata="Q47083" start="2533" end="2536" title="ohm" label="ohm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25272" start="2635" end="2641" title="ampere" label="ampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q47083" start="2677" end="2680" title="ohm" label="ohm"/>
<link wikidata="Q9890" start="2690" end="2691" title="Ω" label="Ω"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="2700" end="2702" title="International System of Units" label="SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q106603432" start="2711" end="2732" title="electrical resistance" label="electrical resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585" start="2746" end="2761" title="Georg Simon Ohm" label="Georg Simon Ohm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25250" start="2789" end="2793" title="volt" label="volt"/>
<link wikidata="Q25272" start="2798" end="2804" title="ampere" label="ampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110301" start="3731" end="3744" title="Y-Δ transform" label="Y-Δ transform"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3749" end="3763" title="Equivalent impedance transforms#2-terminal, n-element, 3-element-kind networks" label="matrix methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q25272" start="4055" end="4062" title="Ampere" label="current"/>
<link wikidata="Q41591" start="4089" end="4103" title="Ohm&amp;#x27;s law" label="Ohm&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q898642" start="5141" end="5164" title="temperature coefficient" label="temperature coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q656685" start="5587" end="5608" title="operating temperature" label="operating temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004377" start="5781" end="5787" title="through-hole technology" label="leaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q177897" start="6108" end="6118" title="inductance" label="inductance"/>
<link wikidata="Q164399" start="6140" end="6151" title="capacitance" label="capacitance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337490" start="6271" end="6284" title="Johnson noise" label="Johnson noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q11306265" start="6312" end="6317" title="Noise (electronics)" label="noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151304" start="6361" end="6380" title="low-noise amplifier" label="low-noise amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295020" start="6391" end="6400" title="Sensitivity (electronics)" label="sensitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q898642" start="6451" end="6474" title="temperature coefficient" label="temperature coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q25342" start="7090" end="7095" title="Power (physics)" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796959" start="7332" end="7341" title="heat sink" label="heat sink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004377" start="7694" end="7706" title="Through-hole" label="Through-hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q191042" start="7960" end="7963" title="Surface-mount technology" label="SMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796959" start="8065" end="8074" title="heat sink" label="heat sink"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8527" end="8539" title="Electronic color code#Resistors" label="color-coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q851210" start="10708" end="10725" title="voltage regulator" label="voltage regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446978" start="10778" end="10791" title="field current" label="field current"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482299" start="10871" end="10888" title="carbon microphone" label="carbon microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q201717" start="11011" end="11016" title="helix" label="helix"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="11104" end="11115" title="resistivity" label="resistivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q103382" start="11119" end="11128" title="amorphous" label="amorphous"/>
<link wikidata="Q656685" start="11537" end="11558" title="operating temperature" label="operating temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="11818" end="11839" title="printed circuit board" label="printed circuit board"/>
<link wikidata="Q131611999" start="11872" end="11889" title="PCB manufacturing" label="PCB manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987617" start="12123" end="12139" title="pull-up resistor" label="pull-up resistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q191042" start="12233" end="12236" title="surface-mount technology" label="SMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q898444" start="12525" end="12535" title="sputtering" label="sputtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044964" start="12549" end="12566" title="vacuum deposition" label="vacuum deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439684" start="12771" end="12795" title="photoresist" label="photo-sensitive material"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="12840" end="12851" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055385" start="13251" end="13257" title="cermet" label="cermet"/>
<link wikidata="Q415489" start="13278" end="13294" title="tantalum nitride" label="tantalum nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q417022" start="13302" end="13317" title="Ruthenium(IV) oxide" label="ruthenium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q407879" start="13322" end="13332" title="Lead(II) oxide" label="lead oxide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13340" end="13357" title="bismuth ruthenate" label="bismuth ruthenate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622142" start="13362" end="13377" title="chromel" label="nickel chromium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13389" end="13404" title="bismuth iridate" label="bismuth iridate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457342" start="13566" end="13580" title="laser trimming" label="laser trimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q898642" start="13699" end="13704" title="Temperature coefficient" label="ppm/K"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337490" start="13732" end="13737" title="Resistor noise" label="noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q844613" start="13890" end="13898" title="sintered" label="sintered"/>
<link wikidata="Q187791" start="13966" end="13980" title="screen-printing" label="screen-printed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="14329" end="14335" title="kelvin" label="kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q979287" start="14806" end="14810" title="MELF Electronic Components" label="MELF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072385" start="15916" end="15924" title="nichrome" label="nichrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q213371" start="16144" end="16150" title="Vitreous enamel" label="enamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q844123" start="16683" end="16689" title="Portland cement" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981904" start="17062" end="17067" title="Electromagnetic coil" label="coils"/>
<link wikidata="Q988780" start="17095" end="17105" title="Electromagnetic induction" label="inductance"/>
<link wikidata="Q794683" start="17259" end="17274" title="bifilar winding" label="bifilar winding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831694" start="17390" end="17410" title="Ayrton–Perry winding" label="Ayrton–Perry winding"/>
<link wikidata="Q256928" start="17702" end="17715" title="Felix Zandman" label="Felix Zandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="17892" end="17903" title="micrometre" label="micrometers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19515" end="19528" title="Shunt (electrical)#Use in current measuring" label="ammeter shunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q898642" start="20046" end="20083" title="Temperature coefficient of resistivity" label="temperature coefficient of resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q583365" start="20090" end="20098" title="manganin" label="manganin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161795" start="20904" end="20919" title="dynamic braking" label="dynamic braking"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20924" end="20936" title="Load bank#Resistive load bank" label="load banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q34336" start="20941" end="20952" title="Diesel locomotive" label="locomotives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231614" start="21242" end="21254" title="control grid" label="control grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="21260" end="21271" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055385" start="21373" end="21379" title="Cermet" label="Cermet"/>
<link wikidata="Q145897" start="21382" end="21390" title="Phenolic resin" label="Phenolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123" start="21393" end="21401" title="Tantalum" label="Tantalum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6557476" start="21404" end="21418" title="Water resistor" label="Water resistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q187868" start="21980" end="21988" title="rheostat" label="rheostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q187868" start="22036" end="22049" title="potentiometer" label="potentiometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q466758" start="22297" end="22312" title="voltage divider" label="voltage divider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202245" start="22335" end="22344" title="potential" label="potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232867" start="22664" end="22679" title="phosphor bronze" label="phosphor bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q175973" start="24698" end="24708" title="thermistor" label="thermistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q358932" start="24958" end="24972" title="Inrush current" label="current surges"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027961" start="25034" end="25042" title="humistor" label="humistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q194120" start="25096" end="25109" title="photoresistor" label="photoresistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q610723" start="25165" end="25177" title="strain gauge" label="strain gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342708" start="25191" end="25208" title="Edward E. Simmons" label="Edward E. Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q708876" start="25213" end="25227" title="Arthur C. Ruge" label="Arthur C. Ruge"/>
<link wikidata="Q245133" start="25388" end="25405" title="Wheatstone bridge" label="Wheatstone bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q935731" start="25499" end="25516" title="Infinitesimal strain theory" label="mechanical strain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269110" start="25680" end="25708" title="Quantum Tunnelling Composite" label="Quantum Tunnelling Composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q194391" start="25911" end="25919" title="ohmmeter" label="ohmmeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q189996" start="25952" end="25962" title="multimeter" label="multimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q179472" start="26202" end="26216" title="Galvanometer" label="meter movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q41591" start="26250" end="26264" title="Ohm&amp;#x27;s law" label="Ohm&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293642" start="27056" end="27081" title="Four-terminal sensing" label="four-terminal connections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293642" start="27423" end="27435" title="Four-terminal sensing" label="Kelvin clips"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836637" start="28042" end="28051" title="IEC 60062" label="IEC 60062"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836637" start="28063" end="28072" title="DIN 40825" label="DIN 40825"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836637" start="28075" end="28082" title="BS 1852" label="BS 1852"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836637" start="28085" end="28092" title="IS 8186" label="IS 8186"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836637" start="28095" end="28105" title="JIS C 5062" label="JIS C 5062"/>
<link wikidata="Q4988919" start="28112" end="28131" title="Resistor color code" label="Resistor color code"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836637" start="28133" end="28141" title="RKM code" label="RKM code"/>
<link wikidata="Q4988919" start="28156" end="28166" title="EIA RS-279" label="EIA RS-279"/>
<link wikidata="Q4988919" start="28169" end="28178" title="DIN 41429" label="DIN 41429"/>
<link wikidata="Q36910" start="28203" end="28212" title="IEC 60063" label="IEC 60063"/>
<link wikidata="Q36910" start="28224" end="28234" title="JIS C 5063" label="JIS C 5063"/>
<link wikidata="Q911470" start="28679" end="28695" title="primary standard" label="primary standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q583365" start="29040" end="29048" title="manganin" label="manganin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047822" start="29121" end="29142" title="quantum Hall effect" label="quantized Hall effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q71024" start="29157" end="29175" title="Klaus von Klitzing" label="Klaus von Klitzing"/>
<link wikidata="Q736777" start="29290" end="29301" title="calibration" label="calibration"/>
<link wikidata="Q483242" start="29306" end="29316" title="laboratory" label="laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q47083" start="30183" end="30186" title="ohm" label="ohm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30212" end="30222" title="Multiplication#Notation and terminology" label="multiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q191042" start="30560" end="30573" title="Surface-mount" label="Surface-mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q950292" start="31536" end="31545" title="Engineering tolerance" label="tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q173523" start="31931" end="31952" title="geometric progression" label="geometric progression"/>
<link wikidata="Q36910" start="32599" end="32608" title="E6 (number series)" label="E6 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q193858" start="32616" end="32619" title="International Electrotechnical Commission" label="IEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q36247" start="32626" end="32642" title="preferred number" label="preferred number"/>
<link wikidata="Q193858" start="32851" end="32854" title="International Electrotechnical Commission" label="IEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q191042" start="34083" end="34098" title="Surface-mount technology" label="Surface mounted"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34133" end="34137" title="Surface-mount technology#Packages" label="1608"/>
<link wikidata="Q191042" start="34253" end="34283" title="surface-mount technology" label="surface-mount technology (SMT)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056761" start="34378" end="34395" title="significant digit" label="significant digit"/>
<link wikidata="Q427968" start="34944" end="34955" title="radix point" label="radix point"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069455" start="35092" end="35105" title="zero-ohm link" label="zero-ohm link"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35771" end="35785" title="IEC 60062:2016" label="IEC 60062:2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q36910" start="36152" end="36162" title="E96 series" label="E96 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q184611" start="36234" end="36246" title="power of ten" label="power of ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q11306265" start="39209" end="39225" title="electronic noise" label="electronic noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337490" start="39414" end="39435" title="Johnson–Nyquist noise" label="Johnson–Nyquist noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434158" start="39562" end="39593" title="fluctuation–dissipation theorem" label="fluctuation–dissipation theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410810" start="40328" end="40349" title="Flicker noise" label="1/&amp;quot;f&amp;quot; noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q190241" start="41210" end="41222" title="thermocouple" label="thermocouple"/>
<link wikidata="Q552456" start="41287" end="41308" title="thermoelectric effect" label="thermoelectric effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523756" start="41405" end="41430" title="instrumentation amplifier" label="instrumentation amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q587008" start="43023" end="43049" title="switched-mode power supply" label="switched-mode power supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q332329" start="44806" end="44824" title="contact resistance" label="contact resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q56278715" start="45321" end="45336" title="contact cleaner" label="contact cleaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245116" start="45667" end="45681" title="Circuit design" label="Circuit design"/>
<link wikidata="Q476428" start="45684" end="45694" title="Dummy load" label="Dummy load"/>
<link wikidata="Q179043" start="45697" end="45717" title="Electrical impedance" label="Electrical impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q25212687" start="45720" end="45754" title="High value resistors (electronics)" label="High value resistors (electronics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311228" start="45757" end="45779" title="Iron-hydrogen resistor" label="Iron-hydrogen resistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932915" start="45782" end="45803" title="Piezoresistive effect" label="Piezoresistive effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503574" start="45806" end="45816" title="Shot noise" label="Shot noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q175973" start="45819" end="45829" title="Thermistor" label="Thermistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622695" start="45832" end="45853" title="Trimmer (electronics)" label="Trimmer (electronics)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25755" wikidata="Q877848" url="?curid=25755" title="Republicanism">
<text>Republicanism is a political ideology that encompasses a range of ideas from civic virtue, political participation, harms of corruption, positives of mixed constitution, rule of law, and others. Historically, it emphasizes the idea of self-governance and ranges from the rule of a representative minority or aristocracy to popular sovereignty. It has had different definitions and interpretations which vary significantly based on historical context and methodological approach.

Republicanism may also refer to the non-ideological scientific approach to politics and governance. As the republican thinker and second president of the United States John Adams stated in the introduction to his famous &quot;A Defense of the Constitutions of Government of the United States of America&quot;, the &quot;science of politics is the science of social happiness&quot; and a republic is the form of government arrived at when the science of politics is appropriately applied to the creation of a rationally designed government.

Rather than being ideological, this approach focuses on applying a scientific methodology to the problems of governance through the rigorous study and application of past experience and experimentation in governance. This is the approach that may best be described to apply to republican thinkers such as Niccolò Machiavelli (as evident in his &quot;Discourses on Livy&quot;), John Adams, and James Madison.

The word &quot;republic&quot; derives from the Latin noun-phrase &quot;res publica&quot; (public thing), which referred to the system of government that emerged in the 6th century BCE following the expulsion of the kings from Rome by Lucius Junius Brutus and Collatinus.

This form of government in the Roman state collapsed in the latter part of the 1st century BCE, giving way to what was a monarchy in form, if not in name. Republics recurred subsequently, with, for example, Renaissance Florence or early modern Britain. The concept of a republic became a powerful force in Britain&#x27;s North American colonies, where it contributed to the American Revolution. In Europe, it gained enormous influence through the French Revolution and through the First French Republic of 1792–1804.

==Historical development==
===Classical antecedents===
====Ancient Greece====
In Ancient Greece, several philosophers and historians analysed and described elements we now recognize as classical republicanism. Traditionally, the Greek concept of &quot;politeia&quot; was rendered into Latin as res publica. Consequently, political theory until relatively recently often used republic in the general sense of &quot;regime&quot;. There is no single written expression or definition from this era that exactly corresponds with a modern understanding of the term &quot;republic&quot; but most of the essential features of the modern definition are present in the works of Plato, Aristotle and Polybius. These include theories of mixed government and of civic virtue. For example, in &quot;The Republic&quot;, Plato places great emphasis on the importance of civic virtue (aiming for the good) together with personal virtue (&#x27;just man&#x27;) on the part of the ideal rulers. Indeed, in Book V, Plato asserts that until rulers have the nature of philosophers (Socrates) or philosophers become the rulers, there can be no civic peace or happiness.

A number of Ancient Greek city-states such as Athens and Sparta have been classified as &quot;classical republics&quot;, because they featured extensive participation by the citizens in legislation and political decision-making. Aristotle considered Carthage to have been a republic as it had a political system similar to that of some of the Greek cities, notably Sparta, but avoided some of the defects that affected them.

====Ancient Rome====
Both Livy, a Roman historian, and Plutarch, who is noted for his biographies and moral essays, described how Rome had developed its legislation, notably the transition from a &quot;kingdom&quot; to a &quot;republic&quot;, by following the example of the Greeks. Some of this history, composed more than 500 years after the events, with scant written sources to rely on, may be fictitious reconstruction.

The Greek historian Polybius, writing in the mid-2nd century BCE, emphasized (in Book 6) the role played by the Roman Republic as an institutional form in the dramatic rise of Rome&#x27;s hegemony over the Mediterranean. In his writing on the constitution of the Roman Republic, Polybius described the system as being a &quot;mixed&quot; form of government. Specifically, Polybius described the Roman system as a mixture of monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy with the Roman Republic constituted in such a manner that it applied the strengths of each system to offset the weaknesses of the others. In his view, the mixed system of the Roman Republic provided the Romans with a much greater level of domestic tranquillity than would have been experienced under another form of government. Furthermore, Polybius argued, the comparative level of domestic tranquillity the Romans enjoyed allowed them to conquer the Mediterranean. Polybius exerted a great influence on Cicero as he wrote his politico-philosophical works in the 1st century BCE. In one of these works, &quot;De re publica&quot;, Cicero linked the Roman concept of &quot;res publica&quot; to the Greek &quot;politeia&quot;.

The modern term &quot;republic&quot;, despite its derivation, is not synonymous with the Roman &quot;res publica&quot;. Among the several meanings of the term &quot;res publica&quot;, it is most often translated &quot;republic&quot; where the Latin expression refers to the Roman state, and its form of government, between the era of the Kings and the era of the Emperors. This Roman Republic would, by a modern understanding of the word, still be defined as a true republic, even if not coinciding entirely. Thus, Enlightenment philosophers saw the Roman Republic as an ideal system because it included features like a systematic separation of powers.

Romans still called their state &quot;Res Publica&quot; in the era of the early emperors because, on the surface, the organization of the state had been preserved by the first emperors without significant alteration. Several offices from the Republican era, held by individuals, were combined under the control of a single person. These changes became permanent, and gradually conferred sovereignty on the Emperor.

Cicero&#x27;s description of the ideal state, in &quot;De re Publica&quot;, does not equate to a modern-day &quot;republic&quot;; it is more like enlightened absolutism. His philosophical works were influential when Enlightenment philosophers such as Voltaire developed their political concepts.

In its classical meaning, a republic was any stable well-governed political community. Both Plato and Aristotle identified three forms of government: democracy, aristocracy, and monarchy. First Plato and Aristotle, and then Polybius and Cicero, held that the ideal republic is a mixture of these three forms of government. The writers of the Renaissance embraced this notion.

Cicero expressed reservations concerning the republican form of government. While in his &quot;theoretical&quot; works he defended monarchy, or at least a mixed monarchy/oligarchy, in his own political life, he generally opposed men, like Julius Caesar, Mark Antony, and Octavian, who were trying to realise such ideals. Eventually, that opposition led to his death and Cicero can be seen as a victim of his own Republican ideals.

Tacitus, a contemporary of Plutarch, was not concerned with whether a form of government could be analysed as a &quot;republic&quot; or a &quot;monarchy&quot;. He analysed how the powers accumulated by the early Julio-Claudian dynasty were all given by a State that was still notionally a republic. Nor was the Roman Republic &quot;forced&quot; to give away these powers: it did so freely and reasonably, certainly in Augustus&#x27; case, because of his many services to the state, freeing it from civil wars and disorder.

Tacitus was one of the first to ask whether such powers were given to the head of state because the citizens wanted to give them, or whether they were given for other reasons (for example, because one had a deified ancestor). The latter case led more easily to abuses of power. In Tacitus&#x27; opinion, the trend away from a true republic was &quot;irreversible&quot; only when Tiberius established power, shortly after Augustus&#x27; death in 14 CE (much later than most historians place the start of the Imperial form of government in Rome). By this time, too many principles defining some powers as &quot;untouchable&quot; had been implemented.

===Renaissance republicanism===
In Europe, republicanism was revived in the late Middle Ages when a number of states, which arose from medieval communes, embraced a republican system of government. These were generally small but wealthy trading states in which the merchant class had risen to prominence. Haakonssen notes that by the Renaissance, Europe was divided, such that those states controlled by a landed elite were monarchies, and those controlled by a commercial elite were republics. The latter included the Italian city-states of Florence, Genoa, and Venice and members of the Hanseatic League. One notable exception was Dithmarschen, a group of largely autonomous villages, which confederated in a peasants&#x27; republic. Building upon concepts of medieval feudalism, Renaissance scholars used the ideas of the ancient world to advance their view of an ideal government. Thus the republicanism developed during the Renaissance is known as &#x27;classical republicanism&#x27; because it relied on classical models. This terminology was developed by Zera Fink in the 1940s, but some modern scholars, such as Brugger, consider it confuses the &quot;classical republic&quot; with the system of government used in the ancient world. &#x27;Early modern republicanism&#x27; has been proposed as an alternative term. It is also sometimes called civic humanism. Beyond simply a non-monarchy, early modern thinkers conceived of an &quot;ideal&quot; republic, in which mixed government was an important element, and the notion that virtue and the common good were central to good government. Republicanism also developed its own distinct view of liberty.
Renaissance authors who spoke highly of republics were rarely critical of monarchies. While Niccolò Machiavelli&#x27;s &quot;Discourses on Livy&quot; is the period&#x27;s key work on republics, he also wrote the treatise &quot;The Prince&quot;, which is better remembered and more widely read, on how best to run a monarchy. The early modern writers did not see the republican model as universally applicable; most thought that it could be successful only in very small and highly urbanized city-states. Jean Bodin in &quot;Six Books of the Commonwealth&quot; (1576) identified monarchy with republic.

Classical writers like Tacitus, and Renaissance writers like Machiavelli tried to avoid an outspoken preference for one government system or another. Enlightenment philosophers, on the other hand, expressed a clear opinion. Thomas More, writing before the Age of Enlightenment, was too outspoken for the reigning king&#x27;s taste, even though he coded his political preferences in a utopian allegory.

In England a type of republicanism evolved that was not wholly opposed to monarchy; thinkers such as Thomas More, John Fisher and Sir Thomas Smith saw a monarchy, firmly constrained by law, as compatible with republicanism.

====Dutch Republic====
Anti-monarchism became more strident in the Dutch Republic during and after the Eighty Years&#x27; War, which began in 1568. This anti-monarchism was more propaganda than a political philosophy; most of the anti-monarchist works appeared in the form of widely distributed pamphlets. This evolved into a systematic critique of monarchy, written by men such as the brothers Johan and Peter de la Court. They saw all monarchies as illegitimate tyrannies that were inherently corrupt. These authors were more concerned with preventing the position of Stadholder from evolving into a monarchy, than with attacking their former rulers. Dutch republicanism also influenced French Huguenots during the Wars of Religion. In the other states of early modern Europe republicanism was more moderate.

====Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth====
In the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, republicanism was the influential ideology. After the establishment of the Commonwealth of Two Nations, republicans supported the status quo, of having a very weak monarch, and opposed those who thought a stronger monarchy was needed. These mostly Polish republicans, such as Łukasz Górnicki, Andrzej Wolan, and Stanisław Konarski, were well read in classical and Renaissance texts and firmly believed that their state was a republic on the Roman model, and started to call their state the Rzeczpospolita. Atypically, Polish–Lithuanian republicanism was not the ideology of the commercial class, but rather of the landed nobility, which would lose power if the monarchy were expanded. This resulted in an oligarchy of the great landed magnates.

===Enlightenment republicanism===
====Caribbean====
Victor Hugues, Jean-Baptiste Raymond de Lacrosse and Nicolas Xavier de Ricard were prominent supporters of republicanism for various Caribbean islands. Edwin Sandys, William Sayle and George Tucker all supported the islands becoming republics, particularly Bermuda. Julien Fédon and Joachim Philip led the republican Fédon&#x27;s rebellion between 2 March 1795 and 19 June 1796, an uprising against British rule in Grenada.

====Corsica====
The first of the Enlightenment republics established in Europe during the 18th century occurred in the small Mediterranean island of Corsica. Although perhaps an unlikely place to act as a laboratory for such political experiments, Corsica combined a number of factors that made it unique: a tradition of village democracy; varied cultural influences from the Italian city-states, Spanish empire and Kingdom of France which left it open to the ideas of the Italian Renaissance, Spanish humanism and French Enlightenment; and a geo-political position between these three competing powers which led to frequent power vacuums in which new regimes could be set up, testing out the fashionable new ideas of the age.

From the 1720s the island had been experiencing a series of short-lived but ongoing rebellions against its current sovereign, the Italian city-state of Genoa. During the initial period (1729–36) these merely sought to restore the control of the Spanish Empire; when this proved impossible, an independent Kingdom of Corsica (1736–40) was proclaimed, following the Enlightenment ideal of a written constitutional monarchy. But the perception grew that the monarchy had colluded with the invading power, a more radical group of reformers led by the Pasquale Paoli pushed for political overhaul, in the form of a constitutional and parliamentary republic inspired by the popular ideas of the Enlightenment.

Its governing philosophy was both inspired by the prominent thinkers of the day, notably the French philosophers Montesquieu and Voltaire and the Swiss theorist Jean-Jacques Rousseau. Not only did it include a permanent national parliament with fixed-term legislatures and regular elections, but, more radically for the time, it introduced universal male suffrage, and it is thought to be the first constitution in the world to grant women the right to vote, female suffrage did exist for heads of the family. It also extended Enlightened principles to other spheres, including administrative reform, the foundation of a national university at Corte, and the establishment of a popular standing army.

The Corsican Republic lasted for fifteen years, from 1755 to 1769, eventually falling to a combination of Genoese and French forces and was incorporated as a province of the Kingdom of France. But the episode resonated across Europe as an early example of Enlightened constitutional republicanism, with many of the most prominent political commentators of the day recognising it to be an experiment in a new type of popular and democratic government. Its influence was particularly notable among the French Enlightenment philosophers: Rousseau&#x27;s famous work On the Social Contract (1762: chapter 10, book II) declared, in its discussion on the conditions necessary for a functional popular sovereignty, that &quot;&quot;There is still one European country capable of making its own laws: the island of Corsica. valour and persistency with which that brave people has regained and defended its liberty well deserves that some wise man should teach it how to preserve what it has won. I have a feeling that some day that little island will astonish Europe&quot;.&quot;; indeed Rousseau volunteered to do precisely that, offering a draft constitution for Paoli&#x27;se use. Similarly, Voltaire affirmed in his &quot;Précis du siècle de Louis XV&quot; (1769: chapter LX) that &quot;Bravery may be found in many places, but such bravery only among free peoples&quot;. But the influence of the Corsican Republic as an example of a sovereign people fighting for liberty and enshrining this constitutionally in the form of an Enlightened republic was even greater among the Radicals of Great Britain and North America, where it was popularised via An Account of Corsica, by the Scottish essayist James Boswell. The Corsican Republic went on to influence the American revolutionaries ten years later: the Sons of Liberty, initiators of the American Revolution, would declare Pascal Paoli to be a direct inspiration for their own struggle against the British; the son of Ebenezer Mackintosh was named Pascal Paoli Mackintosh in his honour, and no fewer than five American counties are named Paoli for the same reason. 

====England====
Oliver Cromwell set up a Christian republic called the Commonwealth of England (1649–1660) which he ruled after the overthrow of King Charles I. James Harrington was then a leading philosopher of republicanism. John Milton was another important Republican thinker at this time, expressing his views in political tracts as well as through poetry and prose. In his epic poem &quot;Paradise Lost&quot;, for instance, Milton uses Satan&#x27;s fall to suggest that unfit monarchs should be brought to justice, and that such issues extend beyond the constraints of one nation. As Christopher N. Warren argues, Milton offers &quot;a language to critique imperialism, to question the legitimacy of dictators, to defend free international discourse, to fight unjust property relations, and to forge new political bonds across national lines.&quot; This form of international Miltonic republicanism has been influential on later thinkers including 19th-century radicals Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, according to Warren and other historians.

The collapse of the Commonwealth of England in 1660 and the restoration of the monarchy under Charles II discredited republicanism among England&#x27;s ruling circles. Nevertheless, they welcomed the liberalism, and emphasis on rights, of John Locke, which played a major role in the Glorious Revolution of 1688. Even so, republicanism flourished in the &quot;country&quot; party of the early 18th century (commonwealthmen), which denounced the corruption of the &quot;court&quot; party, producing a political theory that heavily influenced the American colonists. In general, the English ruling classes of the 18th century vehemently opposed republicanism, typified by the attacks on John Wilkes, and especially on the American Revolution and the French Revolution.

====French and Swiss thought====
French and Swiss Enlightenment thinkers, such as Voltaire, Baron Charles de Montesquieu and later Jean-Jacques Rousseau, expanded upon and altered the ideas of what an ideal republic should be: some of their new ideas were scarcely traceable to antiquity or the Renaissance thinkers. Concepts they contributed, or heavily elaborated, were social contract, positive law, and mixed government. They also borrowed from, and distinguished republicanism from, the ideas of liberalism that were developing at the same time.

Liberalism and republicanism were frequently conflated during this period, because they both opposed absolute monarchy. Modern scholars see them as two distinct streams that both contributed to the democratic ideals of the modern world. An important distinction is that, while republicanism stressed the importance of civic virtue and the common good, liberalism was based on economics and individualism. It is clearest in the matter of private property, which, according to some, can be maintained only under the protection of established positive law.

Jules Ferry, Prime Minister of France from 1880 to 1885, followed both these schools of thought. He eventually enacted the Ferry Laws, which he intended to overturn the Falloux Laws by embracing the anti-clerical thinking of the &quot;Philosophes&quot;. These laws ended the Catholic Church&#x27;s involvement in many government institutions in late 19th-century France, including schools.

====The Thirteen British Colonies in North America====
In recent years a debate has developed over the role of republicanism in the American Revolution and in the British radicalism of the 18th century. For many decades the consensus was that liberalism, especially that of John Locke, was paramount and that republicanism had a distinctly secondary role.

The new interpretations were pioneered by J.G.A. Pocock, who argued in &quot;The Machiavellian Moment&quot; (1975) that, at least in the early 18th century, republican ideas were just as important as liberal ones. Pocock&#x27;s view is now widely accepted. Bernard Bailyn and Gordon Wood pioneered the argument that the American founding fathers were more influenced by republicanism than they were by liberalism. Cornell University professor Isaac Kramnick, on the other hand, argues that Americans have always been highly individualistic and therefore Lockean. Joyce Appleby has argued similarly for the Lockean influence on America.

In the decades before the American Revolution (1776), the intellectual and political leaders of the colonies studied history intently, looking for models of good government. They especially followed the development of republican ideas in England. Pocock explained the intellectual sources in America:

The Whig canon and the neo-Harringtonians, John Milton, James Harrington and Sidney, Trenchard, Gordon and Bolingbroke, together with the Greek, Roman, and Renaissance masters of the tradition as far as Montesquieu, formed the authoritative literature of this culture; and its values and concepts were those with which we have grown familiar: a civic and patriot ideal in which the personality was founded in property, perfected in citizenship but perpetually threatened by corruption; government figuring paradoxically as the principal source of corruption and operating through such means as patronage, faction, standing armies (opposed to the ideal of the militia), established churches (opposed to the Puritan and deist modes of American religion) and the promotion of a monied interest – though the formulation of this last concept was somewhat hindered by the keen desire for readily available paper credit common in colonies of settlement. A neoclassical politics provided both the ethos of the elites and the rhetoric of the upwardly mobile, and accounts for the singular cultural and intellectual homogeneity of the Founding Fathers and their generation.

The commitment of most Americans to these republican values made the American Revolution inevitable. Britain was increasingly seen as corrupt and hostile to republicanism, and as a threat to the established liberties the Americans enjoyed.

Leopold von Ranke in 1848 claimed that American republicanism played a crucial role in the development of European liberalism:

By abandoning English constitutionalism and creating a new republic based on the rights of the individual, the North Americans introduced a new force in the world. Ideas spread most rapidly when they have found adequate concrete expression. Thus republicanism entered our Romanic/Germanic world... Up to this point, the conviction had prevailed in Europe that monarchy best served the interests of the nation. Now the idea spread that the nation should govern itself. But only after a state had actually been formed on the basis of the theory of representation did the full significance of this idea become clear. All later revolutionary movements have this same goal... This was the complete reversal of a principle. Until then, a king who ruled by the grace of God had been the center around which everything turned. Now the idea emerged that power should come from below... These two principles are like two opposite poles, and it is the conflict between them that determines the course of the modern world. In Europe the conflict between them had not yet taken on concrete form; with the French Revolution it did.

====&quot;Républicanisme&quot;====

Republicanism, especially that of Rousseau, played a central role in the French Revolution and foreshadowed modern republicanism. The revolutionaries, after overthrowing the French monarchy in the 1790s, began by setting up a republic; Napoleon converted it into an Empire with a new aristocracy. In the 1830s Belgium adopted some of the innovations of the progressive political philosophers of the Enlightenment.

&quot;Républicanisme&quot; is a French version of modern republicanism. It is a form of social contract, deduced from Jean-Jacques Rousseau&#x27;s idea of a general will. Each citizen is engaged in a direct relationship with the state, removing the need for identity politics based on local, religious, or racial identification.

&quot;Républicanisme&quot;, in theory, makes anti-discrimination laws unnecessary, though some critics may argue that in republics also, colour-blind laws serve to perpetuate discrimination.

====Ireland====

Inspired by the American and French Revolutions, the Society of United Irishmen was founded in 1791 in Belfast and Dublin. The inaugural meeting of the United Irishmen in Belfast on 18 October 1791 approved a declaration of the society&#x27;s objectives. It identified the central grievance that Ireland had no national government: &quot;...we are ruled by Englishmen, and the servants of Englishmen, whose object is the interest of another country, whose instrument is corruption, and whose strength is the weakness of Ireland...&quot; They adopted three central positions: (i) to seek out a cordial union among all the people of Ireland, to maintain that balance essential to preserve liberties and extend commerce; (ii) that the sole constitutional mode by which English influence can be opposed, is by a complete and radical reform of the representation of the people in Parliament; (iii) that no reform is practicable or efficacious, or just which shall not include Irishmen of every religious persuasion. The declaration, then, urged constitutional reform, union among Irish people and the removal of all religious disqualifications.

The movement was influenced, at least in part, by the French Revolution. Public interest, already strongly aroused, was brought to a pitch by the publication in 1790 of Edmund Burke&#x27;s &quot;Reflections on the Revolution in France&quot;, and Thomas Paine&#x27;s response, &quot;Rights of Man&quot;, in February 1791. Theobald Wolfe Tone wrote later that, &quot;This controversy, and the gigantic event which gave rise to it, changed in an instant the politics of Ireland.&quot; Paine himself was aware of this commenting on sales of Part I of &quot;Rights of Man&quot; in November 1791, only eight months after publication of the first edition, he informed a friend that in England &quot;almost sixteen thousand has gone off – and in Ireland above forty thousand&quot;. Paine may have been inclined to talk up sales of his works but what is striking in this context is that Paine believed that Irish sales were so far ahead of English ones before Part II had appeared. On 5 June 1792, Thomas Paine, author of the &quot;Rights of Man&quot; was proposed for honorary membership of the Dublin Society of the United Irishmen.

The fall of the Bastille was to be celebrated in Belfast on 14 July 1791 by a Volunteer meeting. At the request of Thomas Russell, Tone drafted suitable resolutions for the occasion, including one favouring the inclusion of Catholics in any reforms. In a covering letter to Russell, Tone wrote, &quot;I have not said one word that looks like a wish for separation, though I give it to you and your friends as my most decided opinion that such an event would be a regeneration of their country&quot;. By 1795, Tone&#x27;s republicanism and that of the society had openly crystallized when he tells us: &quot;I remember particularly two days thae we passed on Cave Hill. On the first Russell, Neilson, Simms, McCracken and one or two more of us, on the summit of McArt&#x27;s fort, took a solemn obligation...never to desist in our efforts until we had subverted the authority of England over our country and asserted her independence.&quot;

The culmination was an uprising against British rule in Ireland lasting from May to September 1798 – the Irish Rebellion of 1798 – with military support from revolutionary France in August and again October 1798. After the failure of the rising of 1798 the United Irishman, John Daly Burk, an émigré in the United States in his &quot;The History of the Late War in Ireland&quot; written in 1799, was most emphatic in its identification of the Irish, French and American causes.

==Modern republicanism==

During the Enlightenment, anti-monarchism extended beyond the civic humanism of the Renaissance. Classical republicanism, still supported by philosophers such as Rousseau and Montesquieu, was only one of several theories seeking to limit the power of monarchies rather than directly opposing them. Liberalism and socialism departed from classical republicanism and fueled the development of the more modern republicanism.

=== Brazil ===

Brazilian historiography generally identifies republican thought with the movement that was formally organized in the Empire of Brazil during the 1870s to 1880s, but republicanism was already present in the country since the First Reign (1822–1831) and the regency period (1831–1840). During Brazil&#x27;s early years after its independence, the country saw the emergence of a republican discourse among the writings of figures such as Cipriano Barata, Frei Caneca and João Soares Lisboa, but republican ideology better developed as a political current after the emergence of the so-called radical liberal faction in the crisis of the final years of the First Reign.

During the First Reign, three groups emerged on the country&#x27;s political scene: the moderate liberals, the radical liberals and the &quot;caramurus&quot;. The moderates defended political-institutional reforms such as decentralization, without, however, giving up the monarchical system. Their main doctrinal references were Locke, Montesquieu, Guizot and Benjamin Constant. The radicals, in turn, formed a heterogeneous group with almost no representation within the imperial bureaucracy. They were on the left of the political spectrum, along Jacobin lines, and defended broad reforms such as the abolition of the monarchy and the establishment of a republic, federalism, the extinction of the Moderating Power, the end of life tenure in the Senate, the separation between Church and State, relative social equality, the extension of political and civil rights to all free segments of society, including women, the staunch opposition to slavery, displaying a nationalist, xenophobic and anti-Portuguese discourse.

In 1870 a group of radical liberals, convinced of the impossibility of achieving their desired reforms within the Brazilian monarchical system, met and founded the Republican Party. From its founding until 1889, the party operated in an erratic and geographically diverse manner. The republican movement was strongest in the Court and in São Paulo, but other smaller foci also emerged in Minas Gerais, Pará, Pernambuco and Rio Grande do Sul. Only in São Paulo, however, did the movement become a true organized and disciplined party capable of electoral competition.

===Italy===


In the history of Italy there are several so-called &quot;republican&quot; governments that have followed one another over time. Examples are the ancient Roman Republic and the medieval maritime republics. From Cicero to Niccolò Machiavelli, Italian philosophers have imagined the foundations of political science and republicanism. But it was Giuseppe Mazzini who revived the republican idea in Italy in the 19th century.

An Italian nationalist in the historical radical tradition and a proponent of a republicanism of social-democratic inspiration, Mazzini helped define the modern European movement for popular democracy in a republican state. Mazzini&#x27;s thoughts had a very considerable influence on the Italian and European republican movements, in the Constitution of Italy, about Europeanism and more nuanced on many politicians of a later period, among them American president Woodrow Wilson, British prime minister David Lloyd George, Mahatma Gandhi, Israeli prime minister Golda Meir and Indian prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru. Mazzini formulated a concept known as &quot;thought and action&quot; in which thought and action must be joined together and every thought must be followed by action, therefore rejecting intellectualism and the notion of divorcing theory from practice.

In July 1831, in exile in Marseille, Giuseppe Mazzini founded the Young Italy movement, which aimed to transform Italy into a unitary democratic republic, according to the principles of freedom, independence and unity, but also to oust the monarchic regimes pre-existing the unification, including the Kingdom of Sardinia. The foundation of the Young Italy constitutes a key moment of the Italian Risorgimento. The philosopher Carlo Cattaneo promoted a secular and republican Italy in the extension of Mazzini&#x27;s ideas, but organized as a federal republic.

The political projects of Mazzini and Cattaneo were thwarted by the action of the Piedmontese Prime Minister Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour, and Giuseppe Garibaldi. The latter set aside his republican ideas to favor Italian unity. After having obtained the conquest of the whole of southern Italy during the Expedition of the Thousand, Garibaldi handed over the conquered territories to the king of Sardinia Victor Emmanuel II, which were annexed to the Kingdom of Sardinia after a plebiscite. This earned him heavy criticism from numerous republicans who accused him of treason. While a laborious administrative unification began, a first Italian parliament was elected and, on 17 March 1861, Victor Emmanuel II was proclaimed king of Italy.

In the political panorama of the time there was a republican political movement which had its martyrs, such as the soldier Pietro Barsanti. Barsanti was a supporter of republican ideas, and was a soldier in the Royal Italian Army with the rank of corporal. He was sentenced to death and shot in 1870 for having favored an insurrectional attempt against the Savoy monarchy and is therefore considered the first martyr of the modern Italian Republic and a symbol of republican ideals in Italy.

The Republicans took part in the elections to the Italian Parliament, and in 1853 they formed the Action Party around Giuseppe Mazzini. Although in exile, Mazzini was elected in 1866, but refused to take his seat in parliament. Carlo Cattaneo was elected deputy in 1860 and 1867, but refused so as not to have to swear loyalty to the House of Savoy. The problem of the oath of loyalty to the monarchy, necessary to be elected, was the subject of controversy within the republican forces. In 1873 Felice Cavallotti, one of the most committed Italian politicians against the monarchy, preceded his oath with a declaration in which he reaffirmed his republican beliefs.

In October 1922, the nomination of Benito Mussolini as prime minister by King Victor Emmanuel III, following the march on Rome, paved the way for the establishment of the dictatorship. With the implementation of fascist laws (Royal Decree of 6 November 1926), all political parties operating on Italian territory were dissolved, with the exception of the National Fascist Party. The Kingdom of Italy entered World War II on 10 June 1940. Hostilities ended on 29 April 1945, when the German forces in Italy surrendered.

The aftermath of World War II left Italy also with an anger against the monarchy for its endorsement of the Fascist regime for the previous twenty years. These frustrations contributed to a revival of the Italian republican movement. Italy became a republic after the 1946 Italian institutional referendum held on 2 June, a day celebrated since as &quot;Festa della Repubblica&quot;. It was the first time that the whole Italian Peninsula was under a form of republican governance since the end of the ancient Roman Republic.

===United States===

The values and ideals of republicanism are foundational in the constitution and history of the United States. As the United States constitution prohibits granting titles of nobility, &quot;republicanism&quot; in this context does not refer to a political movement to abolish such a social class, as it does in countries such as the UK, Australia, and the Netherlands. Instead, it refers to the core values that citizenry in a republic have, or ought to have. Political scientists and historians have described these central values as &quot;liberty&quot; and &quot;inalienable individual rights&quot;; recognizing the sovereignty of the people as the source of all authority in law; rejecting monarchy, aristocracy, and hereditary political power; virtue and faithfulness in the performance of civic duties; and vilification of corruption. These values are based on those of Ancient Greco-Roman, Renaissance, and English models and ideas.

Republicanism became the dominant political value of Americans during and after the American Revolution. The Founding Fathers were strong advocates of republican values, especially Thomas Jefferson, Samuel Adams, Patrick Henry, Thomas Paine, Benjamin Franklin, John Adams, James Madison and Alexander Hamilton. However, in 1854, social movements started to harness values of abolitionism and free labour. These burgeoning radical traditions in America became epitomized in the early formation of the Republican Party, known as &quot;red republicanism.&quot; The efforts were primarily led by political leaders such as Alvan E. Bovay, Thaddeus Stevens, and Abraham Lincoln.

===France===

Discredited after the Second World War, French radicals split into a left-wing party – the Radical Party of the Left, an associate of the Socialist Party – and the Radical Party &quot;valoisien&quot;, an associate party of the conservative Union for a Popular Movement (UMP) and its Gaullist predecessors. Italian radicals also maintained close links with republicanism, as well as with socialism, with the &quot;Partito radicale&quot; founded in 1955, which became the Transnational Radical Party in 1989.

Increasingly, after the fall of communism in 1989 and the collapse of the Marxist interpretation of the French Revolution, France increasingly turned to republicanism to define its national identity. Charles de Gaulle, presenting himself as the military savior of France in the 1940s, and the political savior in the 1950s, refashioned the meaning of republicanism. Both left and right enshrined him in the Republican pantheon.

===Turkey===
In 1923 after the fall of the Ottoman Empire an inherited aristocracy and sultanate suppressed republican ideas until the successful republican revolution of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk in the 1920s. Republicanism remains one of the six principles of Kemalism. Kemalism, as it was implemented by Mustafa Kemal Atatürk after the declaration of Republic in 1923, was defined by sweeping political, social, cultural and religious reforms designed to separate the new Turkish state from its Ottoman predecessor and embrace a Western-style modernized lifestyle, including the establishment of secularism/laicism, state support of the sciences, free education, gender equality, economic statism and many more. Most of those policies were first introduced to and implemented in Turkey during Atatürk&#x27;s presidency through his reforms.

Many of the root ideas of Kemalism began during the late Ottoman Empire under various reforms to avoid the imminent collapse of the Empire, beginning chiefly in the early 19th-century Tanzimat reforms. The mid-century Young Ottomans attempted to create the ideology of Ottoman nationalism, or Ottomanism, to quell the rising ethnic nationalism in the Empire and introduce limited democracy for the first time while maintaining Islamist influences. In the early 20th century, the Young Turks abandoned Ottoman nationalism in favor of early Turkish nationalism, while adopting a secular political outlook. After the demise of the Ottoman Empire, Atatürk, influenced by both the Young Ottomans and the Young Turks, as well as by their successes and failures, led the declaration of the Republic of Turkey in 1923, borrowing from the earlier movements&#x27; ideas of secularism and Turkish nationalism, while implementing free education and other reforms that have been enshrined by later leaders into guidelines for governing Turkey.

===Latin America===

Republicanism helped inspire movements for independence in former Spanish colonies of Latin America in the early 19th century, and republican ideals and political designs were influential in the new Latin American republics. Diplomats and international jurists in Latin America, such as Andrés Bello, shaped a tradition of &quot;republican internationalism&quot; that connected domestic republican ideals and practices with the region&#x27;s emerging place in international society.

Many key political figures in the region identified as republicans, including Simón Bolívar, José María Samper, Francisco Bilbao, and Juan Egaña. Several of these figures produced essays, pamphlets, and collections of speeches that drew upon and adapted the broader tradition of republican political thought.

===United Kingdom===

Dissatisfaction with British rule led to a longer period of agitation in the early 19th century and failed republican revolutions in Canada in the late 1830s and Ireland in 1848. This led to the Treason Felony Act in 1848 which made it illegal to advocate for republicanism. Another &quot;significant incarnation&quot; of republicanism broke out in the late 19th century when Queen Victoria went into mourning and largely disappeared from public view after the death of her husband, Prince Albert. This led to questions about whether or not the institution should continue, with politicians speaking in support of abolition. This ended when Victoria returned to public duties later in the century and regained significant public support. More recently, in the early 21st century, increasing dissatisfaction with the House of Windsor, especially after the death of Elizabeth II in 2022, has led to public support for the monarchy reaching historical lows. As time goes on monarchy has improved its positions, against expectations of many republicans.

===Spain===

There has existed in Spain a persistent trend of republican thought, especially throughout the 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries, that has manifested itself in diverse political parties and movements over the entire course of the history of Spain. While these movements have shared the objective of establishing a republic, during these three centuries there have surged distinct schools of thought on the form republicans would want to give to the Spanish State: unitary or federal. The roots of Spanish republicanism arose out of liberal thought in the wake of the French Revolution. The first manifestations of republicanism occurred during the Peninsular War, in which Spain and nearby regions fought for independence from Napoleon, 1808–1814. During the reign of Ferdinand VII (1813–1833) there were several liberalist military pronunciamientos, but it was not until the reign of Isabella II (1833–1868) that the first clearly republican and anti-monarchist movements appeared.

There is a renewed interest in republicanism in Spain after two earlier attempts: the First Spanish Republic (1873–1874) and the Second Spanish Republic (1931–1939). Movements such as &quot;&quot;, Citizens for the Republic in Spanish, have emerged, and parties like United Left and the Republican Left of Catalonia increasingly refer to republicanism. In a survey conducted in 2007 reported that 69% of the population prefer the monarchy to continue, compared with 22% opting for a republic. In a 2008 survey, 58% of Spanish citizens were indifferent, 16% favored a republic, 16% were monarchists, and 7% claimed they were &quot;Juancarlistas&quot; (supporters of continued monarchy under King Juan Carlos I, without a common position for the fate of the monarchy after his death). In recent years, there has been a tie between Monarchists and Republicans.

==Theory==
=== Neo-republicanism ===
Neorepublicanism is the effort by current scholars to draw on a classical republican tradition in the development of an attractive public philosophy intended for contemporary purposes. Neorepublicanism emerges as an alternative postsocialist critique of market society from the left.

Prominent theorists in this movement are Philip Pettit and Cass Sunstein, who have each written several works defining republicanism and how it differs from liberalism. Michael Sandel, a late convert to republicanism from communitarianism, advocates replacing or supplementing liberalism with republicanism, as outlined in his &quot;Democracy&#x27;s Discontent: America in Search of a Public Philosophy&quot;.

Contemporary work from a neorepublican include jurist K. Sabeel Rahman&#x27;s book &quot;Democracy Against Domination&quot;, which seeks to create a neorepublican framework for economic regulation grounded in the thought of Louis Brandeis and John Dewey and popular control, in contrast to both New Deal-style managerialism and neoliberal deregulation. Philosopher Elizabeth Anderson&#x27;s &quot;Private Government&quot; traces the history of republican critiques of private power, arguing that the classical free market policies of the 18th and 19th centuries intended to help workers only lead to their domination by employers. In &quot;From Slavery to the Cooperative Commonwealth&quot;, political scientist Alex Gourevitch examines a strain of late 19th century American republicanism known as labour republicanism that was the producerist labour union The Knights of Labor, and how republican concepts were used in service of workers rights, but also with a strong critique of the role of that union in supporting the Chinese Exclusion Act.

===Democracy===

In the late 18th century there was convergence of democracy and republicanism. Republicanism is a system that replaces or accompanies inherited rule. There is an emphasis on liberty, and a rejection of corruption. It strongly influenced the American Revolution and the French Revolution in the 1770s and 1790s, respectively. Republicans, in these two examples, tended to reject inherited elites and aristocracies, but left open two questions: whether a republic, to restrain unchecked majority rule, should have an unelected upper chamber—perhaps with members appointed as meritorious experts—and whether it should have a constitutional monarch.

Though conceptually separate from democracy, republicanism included the key principles of rule by consent of the governed and sovereignty of the people. In effect, republicanism held that kings and aristocracies were not the real rulers, but rather the whole people were. Exactly &quot;how&quot; the people were to rule was an issue of democracy: republicanism itself did not specify a means. In the United States, the solution was the creation of political parties that reflected the votes of the people and controlled the government (see Republicanism in the United States). In Federalist No. 10, James Madison rejected &quot;pure democracy&quot; in favour of representative democracy, which he called &quot;a republic&quot;. There were similar debates in many other democratizing nations.

In contemporary usage, the term &quot;democracy&quot; refers to a government chosen by the people, whether it is direct or representative. Today the term &quot;republic&quot; usually refers to representative democracy with an elected head of state, such as a president, who serves for a limited term; in contrast to states with a hereditary monarch as a head of state, even if these states also are representative democracies, with an elected or appointed head of government such as a prime minister.

The Founding Fathers of the United States rarely praised and often criticized (direct) democracy, which they equated with mob rule; James Madison argued that what distinguished a &quot;democracy&quot; from a &quot;republic&quot; was that the former became weaker as it got larger and suffered more violently from the effects of faction, whereas a republic could get stronger as it got larger and combatted faction by its very structure. What was critical to American values, John Adams insisted, was that the government should be &quot;bound by fixed laws, which the people have a voice in making, and a right to defend.&quot; Thomas Jefferson warned that &quot;an elective despotism is not the government we fought for.&quot; Professors Richard Ellis of Willamette University and Michael Nelson of Rhodes College argue that much constitutional thought, from Madison to Lincoln and beyond, has focused on &quot;the problem of majority tyranny.&quot; They conclude, &quot;The principles of republican government embedded in the Constitution represent an effort by the framers to ensure that the inalienable rights of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness would not be trampled by majorities.&quot;

===Constitutional monarchs and upper chambers===
Some countries (such as the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, the Scandinavian countries, and Japan) turned powerful monarchs into constitutional ones with limited, or eventually merely symbolic, powers. Often the monarchy was abolished along with the aristocratic system, whether or not they were replaced with democratic institutions (such as in France, China, Iran, Russia, Germany, Austria, Hungary, Italy, Greece, Turkey and Egypt). In Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Papua New Guinea, and some other countries the monarch, or its representative, is given supreme executive power, but by convention acts only on the advice of his or her ministers. Many nations had elite upper houses of legislatures, the members of which often had lifetime tenure, but eventually these houses lost much power (as the UK House of Lords), or else became elective and remained powerful.

==See also==

* Abolition of monarchy
* Christian republic
* Criticism of monarchy
* Democratic republic
* Federal Council (Switzerland)
* Islamic republic
* Kemalism
* People&#x27;s republic
* Primus inter pares
* Republican Party
** GOP (&quot;Grand Old Party&quot;)
* Secular republic
* Tacitean studies – differing interpretations whether Tacitus defended &quot;republicanism&quot; (&quot;red Tacitists&quot;) or the contrary (&quot;black Tacitists&quot;).
* Venizelism
*Category:Republicanism by country
== References ==
==Further reading==

===General===
* Becker, Peter, Jürgen Heideking and James A. Henretta, eds. &quot;Republicanism and Liberalism in America and the German States, 1750–1850&quot;. Cambridge University Press. 2002.
* Deudney, Daniel. 2007. &quot;Bounding Power: Republican Security Theory from the Polis to the Global Village&quot;. Princeton University Press.
*Everdell, William R., &quot;From State to Free-State: The Meaning of the word Republic from Jean Bodin to John Adams&quot; 7th International Society for Eighteenth-Century Studies conference, Budapest, 7/31/87; &quot;Valley Forge Journal&quot; (June 1991); http://dhm.pdp6.org/archives/wre-republics.html
* Hammersley, Rachel, &quot;Republicanism an introduction&quot; (2020) Cambridge: Polity
* Pocock, J. G. A. &quot;The Machiavellian Moment&quot; (1975).
* Pocock, J. G. A. &quot;The Machiavellian Moment Revisited: a Study in History and Ideology.: &quot;Journal of Modern History&quot; 1981 53(1): 49–72. Fulltext: in Jstor. Summary of Pocock&#x27;s influential ideas that traces the Machiavellian belief in and emphasis upon Greco-Roman ideals of unspecialized civic virtue and liberty from 15th century Florence through 17th century England and Scotland to 18th century America. Pocock argues that thinkers who shared these ideals tended to believe that the function of property was to maintain an individual&#x27;s independence as a precondition of his virtue. Therefore they were disposed to attack the new commercial and financial regime that was beginning to develop.
* Pettit, Philip. &quot;Republicanism: A Theory of Freedom and Government&quot; Oxford UP, 1997, .
* Robbins, Caroline, &quot;The Eighteenth-Century Commonwealthman Studies in the Transmission, Development, and Circumstance of English Liberal Thought from the Restoration of Charles II Until the War with the Thirteen Colonies (1959)&quot;
*Snyder, R. Claire. &quot;Citizen-Soldiers and Manly Warriors: Military Service and Gender in the Civic Republican Tradition&quot; (1999) online review.
* Viroli, Maurizio. &quot;Republicanism&quot; (2002), New York, Hill and Wang.

===Europe===
* Berenson, Edward, et al. eds. &quot;The French Republic: History, Values, Debates&quot; (2011) essays by 38 scholars from France, Britain and US covering topics since the 1790s
* Bock, Gisela; Skinner, Quentin; and Viroli, Maurizio, ed. &quot;Machiavelli and Republicanism&quot;. Cambridge U. Press, 1990. 316 pp.
* Brugger, Bill. &quot;Republican Theory in Political Thought: Virtuous or Virtual?&quot; St. Martin&#x27;s Press, 1999.
* Everdell, William R., &quot;The End of Kings: A History of Republics and Republicans&quot;, NY: The Free Press, 1983; 2nd ed., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000 (condensed at http://dhm.pdp6.org/archives/wre-republics.html).
* Fink, Zera. &quot;The Classical Republicans: An Essay in the Recovery of a Pattern of Thought in Seventeenth-Century England&quot;. Northwestern University Press, 1962.
* Foote, Geoffrey. &quot;The Republican Transformation of Modern British Politics&quot; Palgrave Macmillan, 2006.
* Martin van Gelderen &amp; Quentin Skinner, eds., &quot;Republicanism: A Shared European Heritage, v 1: Republicanism and Constitutionalism in Early Modern Europe; vol 2: The Value of Republicanism in Early Modern Europe&quot; Cambridge U.P., 2002.
* Haakonssen, Knud. &quot;Republicanism.&quot; &quot;A Companion to Contemporary Political Philosophy&quot;. Robert E. Goodin and Philip Pettit. eds. Blackwell, 1995.
* Kramnick, Isaac. &quot;Republicanism and Bourgeois Radicalism: Political Ideology in Late Eighteenth-Century England and America&quot;. Cornell University Press, 1990.
* Mark McKenna, &quot;The Traditions of Australian Republicanism&quot; (1996)
* Maynor, John W. &quot;Republicanism in the Modern World&quot;. Cambridge: Polity, 2003.
* Moggach, Douglas. &quot;Republican Rigorism and Emancipation in Bruno Bauer&quot;, &quot;The New Hegelians&quot;, edited by Douglas Moggach, Cambridge University Press, 2006. (Looks at German Republicanism with contrasts and criticisms of Quentin Skinner and Philip Pettit).
* Robbins, Caroline. &quot;The Eighteenth-Century Commonwealthman: Studies in the Transmission, Development, and Circumstance of English Liberal Thought from the Restoration of Charles II until the War with the Thirteen Colonies&quot; (1959, 2004). table of contents online .

===United States===

* Appleby, Joyce &quot;Liberalism and Republicanism in the Historical Imagination&quot;. 1992.
* Bailyn, Bernard. &quot;The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution&quot;. Harvard University Press, 1967.
* Banning, Lance. &quot;The Jeffersonian persuasion: evolution of a party ideology&quot; (1978) online
* Colbourn, Trevor. &quot;The Lamp of Experience: Whig History and the Intellectual Origins of the American Revolution&quot;. 1965. online version 
* Everdell, William R., &quot;The End of Kings: A History of Republics and Republicans&quot;, NY: The Free Press, 1983; 2nd ed., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000.
* Gish, Dustin, and Daniel Klinghard. &quot;Thomas Jefferson and the Science of Republican Government: A Political Biography of Notes on the State of Virginia&quot; (Cambridge University Press, 2017) excerpt.
* Kerber, Linda K. &quot;Intellectual History of Women: Essays by Linda K. Kerber&quot;. 1997.
* Kerber, Linda K. &quot;Women of the Republic: Intellect and Ideology in Revolutionary America&quot;. 1997.
* Klein, Milton, et al., eds., &quot;The Republican Synthesis Revisited&quot;. Essays in Honor of George A. Billias. 1992.
* Kloppenberg, James T. &quot;The Virtues of Liberalism&quot;. 1998.
* Norton, Mary Beth. &quot;Liberty&#x27;s Daughters: The Revolutionary Experience of American Women, 1750–1800&quot;. 1996.
* Greene, Jack, and J. R. Pole, eds. &quot;Companion to the American Revolution&quot;. 2004. (many articles look at republicanism, esp. Shalhope, Robert E. &quot;Republicanism&quot; pp. 668–673).
* Rodgers, Daniel T. &quot;Republicanism: the Career of a Concept&quot;, &quot;Journal of American History&quot;. 1992. in JSTOR.
* Shalhope, Robert E. &quot;Toward a Republican Synthesis: The Emergence of an Understanding of Republicanism in American Historiography&quot;, &quot;William and Mary Quarterly&quot;, 29 (Jan. 1972), 49–80 in JSTOR, (an influential article).
* Shalhope, Robert E. &quot;Republicanism and Early American Historiography&quot;, &quot;William and Mary Quarterly&quot;, 39 (Apr. 1982), 334–356 in JSTOR.
* Vetterli, Richard and Bryner, Gary, &quot;Public Virtue and the Roots of American Government&quot;, BYU Studies Quarterly, Vol. 27, No. 3, July 1987.
* Volk, Kyle G. &quot;Moral Minorities and the Making of American Democracy&quot;. New York: Oxford University Press, 2014.
* Wood, Gordon S. &quot;The Creation of the American Republic 1776–1787&quot;. 1969.
* Wood, Gordon S. &quot;The Radicalism of the American Revolution&quot;. 1993.

==External links==
* 
* Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry
* Emergence of the Roman Republic:
** &quot;Parallel Lives&quot; by Plutarch, particularly:
*** (From the translation in 4 volumes, available at Project Gutenberg:) Plutarch&#x27;s Lives, Volume I (of 4)
*** More particularly following &quot;Lives&quot; and &quot;Comparisons&quot; (D is Dryden translation; G is Gutenberg; P is Perseus Project; L is LacusCurtius):</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="0" end="13" title="Republicanism" label="Republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="19" end="37" title="political ideology" label="political ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974906" start="77" end="89" title="civic virtue" label="civic virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773152" start="91" end="114" title="political participation" label="political participation"/>
<link wikidata="Q366" start="125" end="135" title="corruption" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q361916" start="150" end="168" title="mixed constitution" label="mixed constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="170" end="181" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="235" end="250" title="self-governance" label="self-governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="308" end="319" title="aristocracy" label="aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q285950" start="323" end="342" title="popular sovereignty" label="popular sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="648" end="658" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q104872553" start="706" end="782" title="A Defense of the Constitutions of Government of the United States of America" label="A Defense of the Constitutions of Government of the United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="1326" end="1345" title="Niccolò Machiavelli" label="Niccolò Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q924424" start="1371" end="1389" title="Discourses on Livy" label="Discourses on Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="1414" end="1427" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994847" start="1501" end="1512" title="res publica" label="res publica"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931679" start="1624" end="1660" title="Overthrow of the Roman monarchy" label="the expulsion of the kings from Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q223440" start="1664" end="1684" title="Lucius Junius Brutus" label="Lucius Junius Brutus"/>
<link wikidata="Q353188" start="1689" end="1699" title="Lucius Tarquinius Collatinus" label="Collatinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="1733" end="1744" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman state"/>
<link wikidata="Q148540" start="1909" end="1929" title="Republic of Florence" label="Renaissance Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q330362" start="1933" end="1953" title="Commonwealth of England" label="early modern Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="2023" end="2036" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="2076" end="2095" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="2149" end="2166" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="2183" end="2204" title="French First Republic" label="First French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="2301" end="2315" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128354" start="2405" end="2428" title="classical republicanism" label="classical republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q547921" start="2472" end="2480" title="politeia" label="politeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="2888" end="2893" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="2895" end="2904" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q131169" start="2909" end="2917" title="Polybius" label="Polybius"/>
<link wikidata="Q361916" start="2945" end="2961" title="mixed government" label="mixed government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974906" start="2969" end="2981" title="civic virtue" label="civic virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q123397" start="3005" end="3017" title="Republic (Plato)" label="The Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="3393" end="3404" title="city-states" label="city-states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="3413" end="3419" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="3424" end="3430" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128354" start="3461" end="3479" title="classical republic" label="classical republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="3617" end="3625" title="Ancient Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="3819" end="3823" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="3848" end="3856" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q131169" start="4239" end="4247" title="Polybius" label="Polybius"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="4331" end="4345" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="5185" end="5191" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q656161" start="5290" end="5303" title="De re publica" label="De re publica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994847" start="5507" end="5518" title="res publica" label="res publica"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="5921" end="5934" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="6037" end="6057" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q219934" start="6622" end="6644" title="enlightened absolutism" label="enlightened absolutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="6727" end="6735" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="6865" end="6870" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="6875" end="6884" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="6923" end="6932" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="6934" end="6945" title="aristocracy" label="aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="6951" end="6959" title="monarchy" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q361916" start="7052" end="7059" title="Mixed government" label="mixture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="7389" end="7402" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="7404" end="7415" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="7421" end="7429" title="Augustus" label="Octavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="7582" end="7589" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192841" start="7794" end="7816" title="Julio-Claudian dynasty" label="Julio-Claudian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="8000" end="8008" title="Caesar Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8465" start="8080" end="8089" title="civil war" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="8180" end="8193" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271557" start="8313" end="8329" title="imperial cult" label="deified ancestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="8485" end="8493" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="8837" end="8848" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107861" start="8891" end="8907" title="medieval commune" label="medieval commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="9298" end="9306" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="9308" end="9313" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="9319" end="9325" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="9345" end="9361" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947" start="9389" end="9401" title="Dithmarschen" label="Dithmarschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="9527" end="9536" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="9538" end="9549" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128354" start="10107" end="10121" title="civic humanism" label="civic humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q361916" start="10228" end="10244" title="mixed government" label="mixed government"/>
<link wikidata="Q157811" start="10291" end="10297" title="virtue" label="virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q13534337" start="10306" end="10317" title="common good" label="common good"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979" start="10405" end="10412" title="liberty" label="liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="10506" end="10525" title="Niccolò Machiavelli" label="Niccolò Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q924424" start="10539" end="10557" title="Discourses on Livy" label="Discourses on Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131719" start="10641" end="10651" title="The Prince" label="The Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q190944" start="10918" end="10928" title="Jean Bodin" label="Jean Bodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="11040" end="11047" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="11241" end="11252" title="Thomas More" label="Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525572" start="11550" end="11566" title="Thomas Smith (diplomat)" label="Sir Thomas Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q216669" start="11673" end="11683" title="monarchism" label="monarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="11712" end="11726" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="11748" end="11770" title="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q190399" start="11940" end="11948" title="pamphlet" label="pamphlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960743" start="12040" end="12045" title="Johan de la Court" label="Johan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960743" start="12050" end="12067" title="Peter de la Court" label="Peter de la Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q325380" start="12215" end="12225" title="Stadholder" label="Stadholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q21024749" start="12298" end="12317" title="Republicanism in the Netherlands" label="Dutch republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="12341" end="12350" title="Huguenots" label="Huguenots"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="12362" end="12378" title="French Wars of Religion" label="Wars of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="12503" end="12533" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q345583" start="12811" end="12826" title="Łukasz Górnicki" label="Łukasz Górnicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474713" start="12828" end="12841" title="Andrzej Wolan" label="Andrzej Wolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q314261" start="12847" end="12865" title="Stanisław Konarski" label="Stanisław Konarski"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153902" start="13025" end="13039" title="Rzeczpospolita" label="Rzeczpospolita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553709" start="13333" end="13346" title="Victor Hugues" label="Victor Hugues"/>
<link wikidata="Q3164396" start="13348" end="13381" title="Jean-Baptiste Raymond de Lacrosse" label="Jean-Baptiste Raymond de Lacrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q15967769" start="13386" end="13410" title="Nicolas Xavier de Ricard" label="Nicolas Xavier de Ricard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346806" start="13485" end="13497" title="Edwin Sandys (died 1629)" label="Edwin Sandys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568934" start="13499" end="13512" title="William Sayle" label="William Sayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508382" start="13517" end="13530" title="George Tucker (American politician)" label="George Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="13590" end="13597" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200347" start="13599" end="13611" title="Julien Fédon" label="Julien Fédon"/>
<link wikidata="Q106298552" start="13616" end="13630" title="Joachim Philip" label="Joachim Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511513" start="13650" end="13672" title="Fédon&amp;#x27;s rebellion" label="Fédon&amp;#x27;s rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="13732" end="13739" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q769" start="13748" end="13755" title="Grenada" label="Grenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="13907" end="13914" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="14155" end="14169" title="Spanish empire" label="Spanish empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="14174" end="14191" title="Kingdom of France" label="Kingdom of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="14239" end="14250" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="14260" end="14268" title="humanism" label="humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="14273" end="14293" title="French Enlightenment" label="French Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="14638" end="14643" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q83444" start="14791" end="14809" title="Kingdom of Corsica" label="Kingdom of Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="14883" end="14906" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q152346" start="15033" end="15047" title="Pasquale Paoli" label="Pasquale Paoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895489" start="15531" end="15554" title="universal male suffrage" label="universal male suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q205204" start="15650" end="15665" title="female suffrage" label="female suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q335841" start="15821" end="15840" title="University of Corsica Pasquale Paoli" label="university at Corte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821974" start="15869" end="15890" title="Levée en masse" label="popular standing army"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="17476" end="17489" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="17494" end="17507" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821450" start="17538" end="17559" title="An Account of Corsica" label="An Account of Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q335060" start="17586" end="17599" title="James Boswell" label="James Boswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q31306" start="17694" end="17709" title="Sons of Liberty" label="Sons of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="17729" end="17748" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q18331181" start="17859" end="17878" title="Ebenezer Mackintosh" label="Ebenezer Mackintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="18024" end="18039" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456379" start="18049" end="18067" title="Christian republic" label="Christian republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q330362" start="18079" end="18102" title="Commonwealth of England" label="Commonwealth of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="18158" end="18167" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q969183" start="18169" end="18185" title="James Harrington (author)" label="James Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="18235" end="18246" title="John Milton" label="John Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6248881" start="18326" end="18342" title="John Milton&amp;#x27;s politics" label="political tracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q28754" start="18403" end="18416" title="Paradise Lost" label="Paradise Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="18984" end="18993" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q34787" start="18998" end="19014" title="Friedrich Engels" label="Friedrich Engels"/>
<link wikidata="Q330362" start="19079" end="19102" title="Commonwealth of England" label="Commonwealth of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="19119" end="19130" title="English Restoration" label="restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="19153" end="19163" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="19259" end="19269" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="19298" end="19308" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="19343" end="19362" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153889" start="19466" end="19481" title="commonwealthmen" label="commonwealthmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q333127" start="19744" end="19755" title="John Wilkes" label="John Wilkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="19779" end="19798" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="19807" end="19824" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="19909" end="19917" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="19919" end="19947" title="Charles de Secondat, Baron de Montesquieu" label="Baron Charles de Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="19958" end="19979" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Jean-Jacques Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326430" start="20199" end="20214" title="social contract" label="social contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q914661" start="20216" end="20228" title="positive law" label="positive law"/>
<link wikidata="Q361916" start="20234" end="20250" title="mixed government" label="mixed government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="20328" end="20338" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974906" start="20697" end="20709" title="civic virtue" label="civic virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q13534337" start="20718" end="20729" title="common good" label="common good"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="20769" end="20782" title="individualism" label="individualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q914661" start="20919" end="20931" title="positive law" label="positive law"/>
<link wikidata="Q959708" start="20934" end="20945" title="Jules Ferry" label="Jules Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q999206" start="21057" end="21067" title="Ferry Laws" label="Ferry Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258177" start="21103" end="21115" title="Falloux Laws" label="Falloux Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="21457" end="21476" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="21568" end="21578" title="classical liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="21599" end="21609" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336397" start="21724" end="21737" title="J.G.A. Pocock" label="J.G.A. Pocock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749273" start="21759" end="21783" title="The Machiavellian Moment" label="The Machiavellian Moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q822286" start="21939" end="21953" title="Bernard Bailyn" label="Bernard Bailyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585778" start="21958" end="21969" title="Gordon S. Wood" label="Gordon Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076618" start="22125" end="22139" title="Isaac Kramnick" label="Isaac Kramnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297380" start="22245" end="22258" title="Joyce Appleby" label="Joyce Appleby"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="22664" end="22675" title="John Milton" label="John Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q969183" start="22677" end="22693" title="James Harrington (author)" label="James Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034181" start="22698" end="22704" title="Algernon Sydney" label="Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182619" start="22706" end="22715" title="John Trenchard (writer)" label="Trenchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790107" start="22717" end="22723" title="Thomas Gordon (writer)" label="Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q332470" start="22728" end="22739" title="Henry St John, 1st Viscount Bolingbroke" label="Bolingbroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="22824" end="22835" title="Charles de Secondat, baron de Montesquieu" label="Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="23855" end="23874" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q77184" start="24027" end="24044" title="Leopold von Ranke" label="Leopold von Ranke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="25344" end="25352" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="25383" end="25400" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326430" start="25813" end="25828" title="social contract" label="social contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="25843" end="25864" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Jean-Jacques Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759670" start="25882" end="25894" title="general will" label="general will"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="25901" end="25908" title="citizen" label="citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="25954" end="25959" title="State (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914650" start="25983" end="26000" title="identity politics" label="identity politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148591" start="26192" end="26208" title="Color blindness (race)" label="colour-blind law"/>
<link wikidata="Q535030" start="26317" end="26343" title="Society of United Irishmen" label="Society of United Irishmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="27574" end="27586" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287584" start="27600" end="27639" title="Reflections on the Revolution in France" label="Reflections on the Revolution in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q979108" start="27687" end="27700" title="Rights of Man" label="Rights of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q437962" start="27726" end="27745" title="Theobald Wolfe Tone" label="Theobald Wolfe Tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q126462" start="28394" end="28406" title="Thomas Paine" label="Thomas Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865480" start="28548" end="28556" title="Bastille" label="Bastille"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793689" start="28647" end="28661" title="Thomas Russell (rebel)" label="Thomas Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16767601" start="29513" end="29536" title="British rule in Ireland" label="British rule in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q944941" start="29578" end="29601" title="Irish Rebellion of 1798" label="Irish Rebellion of 1798"/>
<link wikidata="Q216669" start="30009" end="30019" title="monarchism" label="monarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="30140" end="30148" title="Rousseau" label="Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="30153" end="30164" title="Montesquieu" label="Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="30276" end="30286" title="Liberalism" label="Liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="30291" end="30300" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128354" start="30315" end="30338" title="classical republicanism" label="classical republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q109235476" start="30378" end="30398" title="modern republicanism" label="modern republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q217230" start="30535" end="30551" title="Empire of Brazil" label="Empire of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841187" start="30642" end="30653" title="First reign (Empire of Brazil)" label="First Reign"/>
<link wikidata="Q10348842" start="30674" end="30688" title="Regency period (Empire of Brazil)" label="regency period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548600" start="30745" end="30757" title="Independence of Brazil" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121310" start="30853" end="30868" title="Cipriano Barata" label="Cipriano Barata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791077" start="30870" end="30881" title="Frei Caneca" label="Frei Caneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q157324" start="31434" end="31440" title="François Guizot" label="Guizot"/>
<link wikidata="Q123089" start="31445" end="31462" title="Benjamin Constant" label="Benjamin Constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q86725197" start="31785" end="31801" title="Moderating power (Empire of Brazil)" label="Moderating Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q48878009" start="31833" end="31839" title="General Assembly (Brazil)" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649877" start="32028" end="32035" title="Slavery in Brazil" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006264" start="32050" end="32061" title="Brazilian nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016378" start="32078" end="32093" title="Lusophobia" label="anti-Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q658161" start="32431" end="32436" title="Neutral Municipality" label="Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q10354757" start="32444" end="32453" title="São Paulo Province" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q39109" start="32494" end="32506" title="Minas Gerais" label="Minas Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141441" start="32508" end="32512" title="Pará Province" label="Pará"/>
<link wikidata="Q40942" start="32514" end="32524" title="Pernambuco" label="Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q40030" start="32529" end="32546" title="Rio Grande do Sul" label="Rio Grande do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791" start="32695" end="32711" title="history of Italy" label="history of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="32842" end="32856" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q62825" start="32874" end="32892" title="maritime republics" label="maritime republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="32899" end="32905" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="32909" end="32928" title="Niccolò Machiavelli" label="Niccolò Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q187336" start="33032" end="33048" title="Giuseppe Mazzini" label="Giuseppe Mazzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093359" start="33115" end="33134" title="Italian nationalist" label="Italian nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q913401" start="33142" end="33160" title="historical radical" label="historical radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="33209" end="33226" title="social-democratic" label="social-democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907480" start="33295" end="33312" title="popular democracy" label="popular democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q719967" start="33451" end="33472" title="Constitution of Italy" label="Constitution of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377153" start="33480" end="33491" title="Europeanism" label="Europeanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="33578" end="33592" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="33617" end="33635" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="33637" end="33651" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42992" start="33676" end="33686" title="Golda Meir" label="Golda Meir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="33713" end="33729" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q920870" start="33918" end="33933" title="intellectualism" label="intellectualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="34011" end="34020" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q938903" start="34051" end="34062" title="Young Italy" label="Young Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="34287" end="34306" title="Kingdom of Sardinia (1720–1861)" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="34382" end="34394" title="Risorgimento" label="Risorgimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042024" start="34412" end="34426" title="Carlo Cattaneo" label="Carlo Cattaneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="34528" end="34535" title="Federalism" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q166092" start="34656" end="34686" title="Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour" label="Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="34692" end="34710" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q207989" start="34829" end="34843" title="southern Italy" label="southern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q228284" start="34855" end="34881" title="Expedition of the Thousand" label="Expedition of the Thousand"/>
<link wikidata="Q168691" start="34955" end="34973" title="Victor Emmanuel II" label="Victor Emmanuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365546" start="35181" end="35205" title="Parliament of the Kingdom of Italy" label="first Italian parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922436" start="35264" end="35288" title="Proclamation of the Kingdom of Italy" label="proclaimed king of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3903682" start="35414" end="35429" title="Pietro Barsanti" label="Pietro Barsanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257793" start="35502" end="35520" title="Royal Italian Army" label="Royal Italian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="35648" end="35662" title="House of Savoy" label="Savoy monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="35722" end="35738" title="Italian Republic" label="Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871529" start="35882" end="35894" title="Action Party (Italy, 1853)" label="Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q187336" start="35902" end="35918" title="Giuseppe Mazzini" label="Giuseppe Mazzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042024" start="36012" end="36026" title="Carlo Cattaneo" label="Carlo Cattaneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="36118" end="36132" title="House of Savoy" label="House of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250278" start="36280" end="36297" title="Felice Cavallotti" label="Felice Cavallotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="36487" end="36503" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q150642" start="36530" end="36549" title="Victor Emmanuel III" label="Victor Emmanuel III"/>
<link wikidata="Q468823" start="36565" end="36578" title="march on Rome" label="march on Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q139596" start="36807" end="36829" title="National Fascist Party" label="National Fascist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="36835" end="36851" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="36860" end="36872" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q668645" start="36926" end="36969" title="Surrender of Caserta" label="when the German forces in Italy surrendered"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="37080" end="37094" title="Fascist Italy (1922–1943)" label="Fascist regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260521" start="37240" end="37277" title="1946 Italian institutional referendum" label="1946 Italian institutional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q802461" start="37326" end="37348" title="Festa della Repubblica" label="Festa della Repubblica"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="37393" end="37410" title="Italian Peninsula" label="Italian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="37482" end="37496" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="37579" end="37595" title="The Constitution of the United States" label="the constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q131110" start="37600" end="37628" title="history of the United States" label="history of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="37693" end="37701" title="nobility" label="nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="37802" end="37814" title="social class" label="social class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059094" start="37852" end="37854" title="Republicanism in the United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201697" start="37856" end="37865" title="Republicanism in Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21024749" start="37875" end="37886" title="Republicanism in the Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="37946" end="37954" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979" start="38060" end="38067" title="liberty" label="liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q29677" start="38084" end="38113" title="Natural rights and legal rights" label="inalienable individual rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304859" start="38137" end="38146" title="sovereign" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="38212" end="38220" title="monarchy" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="38222" end="38233" title="aristocracy" label="aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="38347" end="38357" title="Political corruption" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q937284" start="38402" end="38413" title="Greco-Roman world" label="Greco-Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="38415" end="38426" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333767" start="38432" end="38446" title="Rights of Englishmen" label="English models"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="38543" end="38562" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="38568" end="38584" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="38640" end="38656" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q212963" start="38658" end="38670" title="Samuel Adams" label="Samuel Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q311885" start="38672" end="38685" title="Patrick Henry" label="Patrick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q126462" start="38687" end="38699" title="Thomas Paine" label="Thomas Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="38701" end="38718" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="38720" end="38730" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="38732" end="38745" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="38750" end="38768" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="38834" end="38846" title="abolitionism" label="abolitionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="38959" end="38975" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q448253" start="39077" end="39091" title="Alvan E. Bovay" label="Alvan E. Bovay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353767" start="39093" end="39109" title="Thaddeus Stevens" label="Thaddeus Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="39115" end="39130" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="39169" end="39185" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q427965" start="39238" end="39263" title="Radical Party of the Left" label="Radical Party of the Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q170972" start="39285" end="39300" title="Socialist Party (France)" label="Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542710" start="39311" end="39346" title="Radical Party (France)" label="Radical Party &amp;quot;valoisien&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q173152" start="39387" end="39415" title="Union for a Popular Movement" label="Union for a Popular Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q770215" start="39430" end="39438" title="Gaullist Party" label="Gaullist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="39534" end="39543" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704736" start="39560" end="39576" title="Radical Party (Italy)" label="Partito radicale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896805" start="39617" end="39644" title="Transnational Radical Party" label="Transnational Radical Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="39855" end="39872" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837704" start="40115" end="40119" title="Fall of the Ottoman Empire" label="fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="40127" end="40141" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="40255" end="40276" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030041" start="40313" end="40338" title="Six Arrows" label="one of the six principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q269443" start="40342" end="40350" title="Kemalism" label="Kemalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="40387" end="40408" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q803181" start="40419" end="40450" title="Republic Day (Turkey)" label="declaration of Republic in 1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="40578" end="40585" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177034" start="40679" end="40697" title="Secularism in Turkey" label="secularism/laicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q113453" start="40746" end="40761" title="gender equality" label="gender equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q322294" start="40763" end="40779" title="statism" label="economic statism"/>
<link wikidata="Q780048" start="40910" end="40921" title="Atatürk&amp;#x27;s reforms" label="his reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="40981" end="40995" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837704" start="41040" end="41062" title="Dissolution of the Ottoman Empire" label="collapse of the Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q330961" start="41108" end="41116" title="Tanzimat" label="Tanzimat"/>
<link wikidata="Q934741" start="41142" end="41156" title="Young Ottomans" label="Young Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q120304" start="41217" end="41227" title="Ottomanism" label="Ottomanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335949" start="41242" end="41267" title="Rise of nationalism in the Ottoman Empire" label="rising ethnic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83896" start="41403" end="41414" title="Young Turks" label="Young Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568928" start="41463" end="41482" title="Turkish nationalism" label="Turkish nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="42063" end="42076" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q439195" start="42264" end="42276" title="Andrés Bello" label="Andrés Bello"/>
<link wikidata="Q8605" start="42539" end="42552" title="Simón Bolívar" label="Simón Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186456" start="42554" end="42571" title="José María Samper" label="José María Samper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081816" start="42573" end="42589" title="Francisco Bilbao" label="Francisco Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q325660" start="42595" end="42605" title="Juan Egaña" label="Juan Egaña"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560445" start="42926" end="42950" title="Rebellions of 1837–1838" label="Canada in the late 1830s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321690" start="42955" end="42970" title="Young Ireland rebellion" label="Ireland in 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q25682" start="42988" end="43006" title="Treason Felony Act 1848" label="Treason Felony Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="43169" end="43183" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q152245" start="43276" end="43289" title="Albert, Prince Consort" label="Prince Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971037" start="43573" end="43599" title="British Social Attitudes Survey" label="increasing dissatisfaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q81589" start="43609" end="43625" title="House of Windsor" label="House of Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q113846055" start="43648" end="43669" title="Death and state funeral of Elizabeth II" label="death of Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781" start="44084" end="44100" title="history of Spain" label="history of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="44311" end="44316" title="Sovereign state" label="State"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="44318" end="44325" title="Unitary state" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q512187" start="44329" end="44336" title="Federal republic" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="44421" end="44438" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="44502" end="44516" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="44581" end="44589" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q186256" start="44622" end="44635" title="Ferdinand VII of Spain" label="Ferdinand VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112892" start="44687" end="44702" title="pronunciamiento" label="pronunciamiento"/>
<link wikidata="Q183085" start="44739" end="44750" title="Isabella II of Spain" label="Isabella II"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="44886" end="44891" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q497777" start="44924" end="44946" title="First Spanish Republic" label="First Spanish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="44967" end="44990" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Second Spanish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="45065" end="45072" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q623740" start="45105" end="45116" title="United Left (Spain)" label="United Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q150068" start="45125" end="45153" title="Republican Left of Catalonia" label="Republican Left of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943" start="45533" end="45546" title="Juan Carlos I of Spain" label="Juan Carlos I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237041" start="46060" end="46073" title="Philip Pettit" label="Philip Pettit"/>
<link wikidata="Q956164" start="46078" end="46091" title="Cass Sunstein" label="Cass Sunstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q381044" start="46188" end="46202" title="Michael Sandel" label="Michael Sandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q324530" start="46241" end="46257" title="communitarianism" label="communitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985231" start="46484" end="46500" title="K. Sabeel Rahman" label="K. Sabeel Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500849" start="46607" end="46626" title="economic regulation" label="economic regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q520840" start="46654" end="46668" title="Louis Brandeis" label="Louis Brandeis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131805" start="46673" end="46683" title="John Dewey" label="John Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q285950" start="46688" end="46703" title="popular sovereignty" label="popular control"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="46725" end="46733" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q282750" start="46740" end="46753" title="managerialism" label="managerialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="46758" end="46768" title="neoliberal" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q902410" start="46769" end="46781" title="deregulation" label="deregulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="46940" end="46951" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247692" start="47263" end="47274" title="producerism" label="producerist"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="47275" end="47287" title="labour union" label="labour union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416650" start="47288" end="47308" title="The Knights of Labor" label="The Knights of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915476" start="47362" end="47376" title="workers rights" label="workers rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073716" start="47454" end="47475" title="Chinese Exclusion Act" label="Chinese Exclusion Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="47736" end="47755" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="47764" end="47781" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q637846" start="48020" end="48033" title="upper chamber" label="upper chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="48117" end="48139" title="constitutional monarch" label="constitutional monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162861" start="48240" end="48263" title="consent of the governed" label="consent of the governed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453498" start="48590" end="48607" title="First Party System" label="political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277720" start="48682" end="48716" title="Republicanism in the United States" label="Republicanism in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049689" start="48722" end="48739" title="Federalist No. 10" label="Federalist No. 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="48741" end="48754" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064441" start="48911" end="48924" title="Democratization" label="democratizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="49048" end="49054" title="Direct democracy" label="direct"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="49058" end="49072" title="Representative democracy" label="representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="49095" end="49103" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="49169" end="49182" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q30461" start="49194" end="49203" title="President (government title)" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="49276" end="49283" title="monarch" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="49391" end="49409" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="49420" end="49434" title="Prime Minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="49441" end="49478" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Fathers of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q191031" start="49559" end="49567" title="Ochlocracy" label="mob rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="49569" end="49582" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="49912" end="49922" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="50064" end="50080" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q930291" start="50192" end="50213" title="Willamette University" label="Willamette University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321046" start="50236" end="50250" title="Rhodes College" label="Rhodes College"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="51519" end="51533" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995869" start="51600" end="51621" title="Abolition of monarchy" label="Abolition of monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456379" start="51624" end="51642" title="Christian republic" label="Christian republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186811" start="51645" end="51666" title="Criticism of monarchy" label="Criticism of monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255892" start="51669" end="51688" title="Democratic republic" label="Democratic republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30917" start="51691" end="51720" title="Federal Council (Switzerland)" label="Federal Council (Switzerland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q672729" start="51723" end="51739" title="Islamic republic" label="Islamic republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q269443" start="51742" end="51750" title="Kemalism" label="Kemalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q465613" start="51753" end="51775" title="People&amp;#x27;s republic" label="People&amp;#x27;s republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q309477" start="51778" end="51796" title="Primus inter pares" label="Primus inter pares"/>
<link wikidata="Q223603" start="51799" end="51815" title="Republican Party (disambiguation)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="51819" end="51822" title="GOP" label="GOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q859563" start="51855" end="51871" title="Secular republic" label="Secular republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q252786" start="51874" end="51890" title="Tacitean studies" label="Tacitean studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564160" start="52047" end="52057" title="Venizelism" label="Venizelism"/>
<link wikidata="" start="52059" end="52092" title=":Category:Republicanism by country" label="Category:Republicanism by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008708" start="54678" end="54698" title="William Everdell" label="Everdell, William R."/>
<link wikidata="Q465807" start="55225" end="55240" title="Quentin Skinner" label="Quentin Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301821" start="56078" end="56093" title="Douglas Moggach" label="Douglas Moggach"/>
<link wikidata="Q842337" start="59166" end="59180" title="Parallel Lives" label="Parallel Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="59190" end="59198" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673" start="59267" end="59284" title="Project Gutenberg" label="Project Gutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q213355" start="59410" end="59416" title="John Dryden" label="Dryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673" start="59435" end="59444" title="Project Gutenberg" label="Gutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q639661" start="59451" end="59466" title="Perseus Project" label="Perseus Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q652779" start="59473" end="59485" title="LacusCurtius" label="LacusCurtius"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25756" wikidata="Q877796" url="?curid=25756" title="Repetitive strain injury">
<text>A repetitive strain injury (RSI) is an injury to part of the musculoskeletal or nervous system caused by repetitive use, vibrations, compression or long periods in a fixed position. Other common names include repetitive stress injury, repetitive stress disorders, cumulative trauma disorders (CTDs), and overuse syndrome.

== Signs and symptoms ==
Some examples of symptoms experienced by patients with RSI are aching, pulsing pain, tingling and extremity weakness, initially presenting with intermittent discomfort and then with a higher degree of frequency.

===Definition===
Repetitive strain injury (RSI) and associative trauma orders are umbrella terms used to refer to several discrete conditions that can be associated with repetitive tasks, forceful exertions, vibrations, mechanical compression, sustained or awkward positions, or repetitive eccentric contractions. The exact terminology is controversial, but the terms now used by the United States Department of Labor and the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) are musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) and work-related musculoskeletal disorders (WMDs).

Examples of conditions that may sometimes be attributed to such causes include tendinosis (or less often tendinitis), carpal tunnel syndrome, cubital tunnel syndrome, De Quervain syndrome, thoracic outlet syndrome, intersection syndrome, golfer&#x27;s elbow (medial epicondylitis), tennis elbow (lateral epicondylitis), trigger finger (so-called stenosing tenosynovitis), radial tunnel syndrome, ulnar tunnel syndrome, and focal dystonia.

A general worldwide increase since the 1970s in RSIs of the arms, hands, neck, and shoulder has been attributed to the widespread use in the workplace of keyboard entry devices, such as typewriters and computers, which require long periods of repetitive motions in a fixed posture. Specific sources of discomfort have been popularly referred to by terms such as Blackberry thumb, PlayStation thumb, Rubik&#x27;s wrist or &quot;cuber&#x27;s thumb&quot;, stylus finger, and raver&#x27;s wrist, and Emacs pinky. Extreme temperatures have also been reported as risk factor for RSI.

== Risk factors ==
===Occupational risk factors===
Workers in certain fields are at risk of repetitive strains. Most occupational injuries are musculoskeletal disorders, and many of these are caused by cumulative trauma rather than a single event. Miners and poultry workers, for example, must make repeated motions which can cause tendon, muscular, and skeletal injuries. Jobs that involve repeated motion patterns or prolonged posture within a work cycle, or both, may be repetitive. Young athletes are predisposed to RSIs due to an underdeveloped musculoskeletal system.

===Psychosocial factors===
Factors such as personality differences to work-place organization problems. Certain workers may negatively perceive their work organization due to excessive work rate, long work hours, limited job control, and low social support. Previous studies shown elevated urinary catecholamines (stress-related chemicals) in workers with RSI. Pain related to RSI may evolve into chronic pain syndrome particularly for workers who do not have supports from co-workers and supervisors.

===Non-occupational factors===
Age and gender are important risk factors for RSIs. The risk of RSI increases with age. Women are more likely affected than men because of their smaller frame, lower muscle mass and strength, and endocrine influences. In addition, lifestyle choices such as smoking and alcohol consumption are recognizable risk factors for RSI. Recent scientific findings indicate that obesity and diabetes may predispose an individual to RSIs by creating a chronic low grade inflammatory response that prevents the body from effectively healing damaged tissues.

==Diagnosis==
RSIs are assessed using a number of objective clinical measures. These include effort-based tests such as grip and pinch strength, diagnostic tests such as Finkelstein&#x27;s test for De Quervain&#x27;s tendinitis, Phalen&#x27;s contortion, Tinel&#x27;s percussion for carpal tunnel syndrome, and nerve conduction velocity tests that show nerve compression in the wrist. Various imaging techniques can also be used to show nerve compression such as x-ray for the wrist, and MRI for the thoracic outlet and cervico-brachial areas. Utilization of routine imaging  is useful in early detection and treatment of overuse injuries in at risk populations, which is important in preventing long term adverse effects.

==Treatment==

There are no quick fixes for repetitive strain injuries. Early diagnosis is critical to limiting damage. For upper limb RSIs, occupational therapists can create interventions that include teaching the correct approaches to functional task movements in order to minimize the risk of injury. The RICE (Rest, Ice, Compression, Elevation) treatment is used as the first treatment for many muscle strains, ligament sprains, or other bruises and injuries. RICE is used immediately after an injury happens and for the first 24 to 48 hours after the injury. These modalities can help reduce the swelling and pain. Commonly prescribed treatments for early-stage RSIs include analgesics, myofeedback, biofeedback, physical therapy, relaxation, intermittent vacuum therapy and ultrasound therapy. Low-grade RSIs can sometimes resolve themselves if treatments begin shortly after the onset of symptoms. However, some RSIs may require more aggressive intervention including surgery and can persist for years.

Although there are no &quot;quick fixes&quot; for RSI, there are effective approaches to its treatment and prevention. One is that of ergonomics, the changing of one&#x27;s environment (especially workplace equipment) to minimize repetitive strain.

A 2006 Canadian study found exercise in leisure time was strongly associated with decreased risk of developing an RSI. Doctors sometimes recommend that those with RSI engage in specific strengthening exercises, for example to improve sitting posture, reduce excessive kyphosis, and potentially thoracic outlet syndrome. Modifications of posture and arm use are often recommended.

== History ==

Although seemingly a modern phenomenon, RSIs have long been documented in the medical literature. In 1700, the Italian physician Bernardino Ramazzini first described RSI in more than 20 categories of industrial workers in Italy, including musicians and clerks. Carpal tunnel syndrome was first identified by the British surgeon James Paget in 1854. The April 1875 issue of &quot;The Graphic&quot; describes &quot;telegraphic paralysis.&quot;

The Swiss surgeon Fritz de Quervain first identified De Quervain&#x27;s tendinitis in Swiss factory workers in 1895. The French neurologist Jules Tinel (1879–1952) developed his percussion test for compression of the median nerve in 1900. The American surgeon George Phalen improved the understanding of the etiology of carpal tunnel syndrome with his clinical experience of several hundred patients during the 1950s and 1960s.

==See also==
* Computer vision syndrome
* Ergonomic keyboard
* List of repetitive strain injury software
* Maltron
* Microsoft ergonomic keyboards

== Citations ==
== External links ==
* Musculoskeletal disorders from the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work (EU-OSHA)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7418975" start="0" end="1" title="Sansari" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="Q877796" start="2" end="26" title="Repetitive strain injury" label="repetitive strain injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q877796" start="28" end="31" title="Repetitive strain injury" label="RSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q726543" start="61" end="76" title="musculoskeletal" label="musculoskeletal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="80" end="94" title="nervous system" label="nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q877796" start="209" end="233" title="Repetitive strain injury" label="repetitive stress injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q877796" start="235" end="262" title="Repetitive strain injury" label="repetitive stress disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q877796" start="264" end="291" title="Repetitive strain injury" label="cumulative trauma disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q877796" start="293" end="297" title="Repetitive strain injury" label="CTDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q877796" start="304" end="320" title="Repetitive strain injury" label="overuse syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q43201039" start="643" end="656" title="umbrella term" label="umbrella term"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332180" start="851" end="873" title="Eccentric training" label="eccentric contractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116663" start="1052" end="1076" title="musculoskeletal disorder" label="musculoskeletal disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034588" start="1089" end="1127" title="work-related musculoskeletal disorders" label="work-related musculoskeletal disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682583" start="1216" end="1226" title="tendinosis" label="tendinosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682583" start="1242" end="1252" title="tendinitis" label="tendinitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q332293" start="1255" end="1277" title="carpal tunnel syndrome" label="carpal tunnel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11611457" start="1279" end="1302" title="cubital tunnel syndrome" label="cubital tunnel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q517202" start="1304" end="1324" title="De Quervain syndrome" label="De Quervain syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q665207" start="1326" end="1350" title="thoracic outlet syndrome" label="thoracic outlet syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6056727" start="1352" end="1373" title="intersection syndrome" label="intersection syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457358" start="1375" end="1394" title="golfer&amp;#x27;s elbow" label="golfer&amp;#x27;s elbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q736776" start="1419" end="1431" title="tennis elbow" label="tennis elbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093127" start="1457" end="1471" title="trigger finger" label="trigger finger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961656" start="1509" end="1531" title="radial tunnel syndrome" label="radial tunnel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q786262" start="1533" end="1554" title="ulnar tunnel syndrome" label="ulnar tunnel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428695" start="1560" end="1574" title="focal dystonia" label="focal dystonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q517202" start="1939" end="1955" title="Blackberry thumb" label="Blackberry thumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q189722" start="2073" end="2078" title="Emacs" label="Emacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q24965499" start="2178" end="2203" title="Ergonomic hazard" label="Occupational risk factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116663" start="2299" end="2324" title="musculoskeletal disorders" label="musculoskeletal disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q24172934" start="2952" end="2963" title="Job control (workplace)" label="job control"/>
<link wikidata="Q271663" start="3029" end="3042" title="catecholamine" label="catecholamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088113" start="3128" end="3149" title="chronic pain syndrome" label="chronic pain syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11078" start="3461" end="3470" title="endocrine" label="endocrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q662860" start="3522" end="3529" title="smoking" label="smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="3534" end="3553" title="alcohol consumption" label="alcohol consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q476130" start="3982" end="4005" title="Finkelstein&amp;#x27;s test" label="Finkelstein&amp;#x27;s test"/>
<link wikidata="Q517202" start="4010" end="4039" title="De Quervain syndrome" label="De Quervain&amp;#x27;s tendinitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q778868" start="4041" end="4065" title="Phalen maneuver" label="Phalen&amp;#x27;s contortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623043" start="4067" end="4090" title="Tinel&amp;#x27;s sign" label="Tinel&amp;#x27;s percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154774" start="4123" end="4148" title="electrophysiological" label="nerve conduction velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335" start="4275" end="4280" title="radiological" label="x-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="4300" end="4303" title="magnetic resonance imaging" label="MRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q631193" start="4677" end="4699" title="occupational therapist" label="occupational therapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115133" start="4845" end="4849" title="RICE (medicine)" label="RICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q173235" start="5217" end="5227" title="analgesics" label="analgesics"/>
<link wikidata="Q864329" start="5242" end="5253" title="biofeedback" label="biofeedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="5255" end="5271" title="physical therapy" label="physical therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077621" start="5285" end="5312" title="Intermittent_vacuum_therapy" label="intermittent vacuum therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="5317" end="5327" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750812" start="5682" end="5692" title="human factors and ergonomics" label="ergonomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q478389" start="6066" end="6074" title="kyphosis" label="kyphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q665207" start="6092" end="6116" title="thoracic outlet syndrome" label="thoracic outlet syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q442783" start="6323" end="6343" title="Bernardino Ramazzini" label="Bernardino Ramazzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q332293" start="6455" end="6477" title="Carpal tunnel syndrome" label="Carpal tunnel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q429207" start="6522" end="6533" title="James Paget" label="James Paget"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521113" start="6573" end="6584" title="The Graphic" label="The Graphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q124216" start="6641" end="6646" title="Swiss people" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q116807" start="6655" end="6672" title="Fritz de Quervain" label="Fritz de Quervain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682583" start="6709" end="6719" title="tendinitis" label="tendinitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306045" start="6777" end="6788" title="Jules Tinel" label="Jules Tinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623043" start="6815" end="6830" title="Tinel&amp;#x27;s sign" label="percussion test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508066" start="6897" end="6910" title="George S. Phalen" label="George Phalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q332293" start="6957" end="6979" title="carpal tunnel syndrome" label="carpal tunnel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196503" start="7081" end="7105" title="Computer vision syndrome" label="Computer vision syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385826" start="7108" end="7126" title="Ergonomic keyboard" label="Ergonomic keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636432" start="7129" end="7170" title="List of repetitive strain injury software" label="List of repetitive strain injury software"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744936" start="7173" end="7180" title="Maltron" label="Maltron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840176" start="7183" end="7212" title="Microsoft ergonomic keyboards" label="Microsoft ergonomic keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q571118" start="7335" end="7342" title="EU-OSHA" label="EU-OSHA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25757" wikidata="Q545375" url="?curid=25757" title="Robertson Davies">
<text>William Robertson Davies (28 August 1913 – 2 December 1995) was a Canadian novelist, playwright, critic, journalist, and professor. He was one of Canada&#x27;s best known and most popular authors and one of its most distinguished &quot;men of letters&quot;, a term Davies gladly accepted for himself. Davies was the founding Master of Massey College, a graduate residential college associated with the University of Toronto.

==Biography==

===Early life===
Davies was born in Thamesville, Ontario, the third son of William Rupert Davies and Florence Sheppard McKay. Growing up, Davies was surrounded by books and lively language. His father, a member of the Canadian Senate from 1942 to his death in 1967, was a newspaperman from Welshpool, Wales, and both parents were voracious readers. He followed in their footsteps and read everything he could. He also participated in theatrical productions as a child, where he developed a lifelong interest in drama.

He spent his formative years in Renfrew, Ontario (and renamed it as &quot;Blairlogie&quot;, in his novel &quot;What&#x27;s Bred in the Bone&quot;); many of the novel&#x27;s characters are named after families he knew there. He attended Upper Canada College in Toronto from 1926 to 1932 and while there attended services at the Church of St. Mary Magdalene. He would later leave the Presbyterian Church and join Anglicanism over objections to Calvinist theology. Davies later used his experience of the ceremonial of High Mass at St. Mary Magdalene&#x27;s in his novel &quot;The Cunning Man&quot;.

After Upper Canada College, he studied at Queen&#x27;s University at Kingston, Ontario, from 1932 until 1935. According to the &quot;Queen&#x27;s University Journal&quot; Davies enrolled as a special student not working towards a degree, because he was unable to pass the mathematics component of Queen&#x27;s entrance exam. At Queen&#x27;s he wrote for the student paper, &quot;The Queen&#x27;s Journal&quot;, where he wrote a literary column. He left Canada to study at Balliol College, Oxford, where he received a BLitt degree in 1938. The next year he published his thesis, &quot;Shakespeare&#x27;s Boy Actors&quot;, and embarked on an acting career outside London. In 1940, he played small roles and did literary work for the director at the Old Vic Repertory Company in London. Also that year, Davies married Australian Brenda Mathews, whom he had met at Oxford, and who was then working as stage manager for the theatre. They spent their honeymoon in the Welsh countryside at Fronfraith Hall, Abermule, Montgomery, the family house owned by Rupert Davies.

Davies&#x27;s early life provided him with themes and material to which he would often return in his later work, including the theme of Canadians returning to England to finish their education, and the theatre.

===Middle years===
Davies and his new bride returned to Canada in 1940, where he took the position of literary editor at &quot;Saturday Night&quot; magazine. Two years later, he became editor of the &quot;Peterborough Examiner&quot; in the small city of Peterborough, Ontario, northeast of Toronto. Again he was able to mine his experiences here for many of the characters and situations which later appeared in his plays and novels.

Davies, along with family members William Rupert Davies and Arthur Davies, purchased several media outlets. Along with the &quot;Examiner&quot; newspaper, they owned the &quot;Kingston Whig-Standard&quot; newspaper, CHEX-AM, CKWS-AM, CHEX-TV, and CKWS-TV.

During his tenure as editor of the &quot;Examiner&quot;, which lasted from 1942 to 1955 (he subsequently served as publisher from 1955 to 1965), Davies published a total of 18 books, produced several of his own plays, and wrote articles for various journals. Davies set out his theory of acting in his &quot;Shakespeare for Young Players&quot; (1947), and then put theory into practice when he wrote &quot;Eros at Breakfast&quot;, a one-act play which was named best Canadian play of the year by the 1948 Dominion Drama Festival.

&quot;Eros at Breakfast&quot; was followed by &quot;Fortune, My Foe&quot; in 1949 and &quot;At My Heart&#x27;s Core&quot;, a three-act play, in 1950. Meanwhile, Davies was writing humorous essays in the &quot;Examiner&quot; under the pseudonym Samuel Marchbanks. Some of these were collected and published in &quot;The Diary of Samuel Marchbanks&quot; (1947), &quot;The Table Talk of Samuel Marchbanks&quot; (1949), and later in &quot;Samuel Marchbanks&#x27; Almanack&quot; (1967). An omnibus edition of the three Marchbanks books, with new notes by the author, was published under the title &quot;The Papers of Samuel Marchbanks&quot; in 1985.

During the 1950s, Davies played a major role in launching the Stratford Shakespearean Festival of Canada. He served on the Festival&#x27;s board of governors, and collaborated with the Festival&#x27;s director, Sir Tyrone Guthrie, in publishing three books about the Festival&#x27;s early years.

Although his first love was drama and he had achieved some success with his occasional humorous essays, Davies found his greatest success in fiction. His first three novels, which later became known as The Salterton Trilogy, were &quot;Tempest-Tost&quot; (1951, originally conceived as a play), &quot;Leaven of Malice&quot; (1954, also the basis of the unsuccessful play &quot;Love and Libel&quot;) which won the Stephen Leacock Award for Humour, and &quot;A Mixture of Frailties&quot; (1958). These novels explored the difficulty of sustaining a cultural life in Canada, and life on a small-town newspaper, subjects of which Davies had first-hand knowledge. In a 1959 essay on Nabokov&#x27;s Lolita, he wrote that she was a corrupt child taking advantage of a weak adult.

===1960s===
In 1960, Davies joined Trinity College at the University of Toronto, where he would teach literature until 1981. The following year he published a collection of essays on literature, &quot;A Voice From the Attic&quot;, and was awarded the Lorne Pierce Medal for his literary achievements.

In 1963, he became the Master of Massey College, the University of Toronto&#x27;s new graduate college. During his stint as Master, he initiated a tradition of writing and telling ghost stories at the yearly Christmas celebrations. These stories were later collected in the book &quot;High Spirits&quot; (1982).

===1970s===

Davies drew on his interest in Jungian psychology to create &quot;Fifth Business&quot; (1970), a novel that relies heavily on Davies&#x27;s own experiences, his love of myth and magic, and his knowledge of small-town mores. The narrator, like Davies, is of immigrant Canadian background, with a father who runs the town paper. The book&#x27;s characters act in roles that roughly correspond to Jungian archetypes according to Davies&#x27;s belief in the predominance of spirit over the things of the world.

Davies built on the success of &quot;Fifth Business&quot; with two more novels: &quot;The Manticore&quot; (1972), a novel cast largely in the form of a Jungian analysis (for which he received that year&#x27;s Governor General&#x27;s Literary Award), and &quot;World of Wonders&quot; (1975). Together these three books came to be known as &quot;The Deptford Trilogy&quot;.

===1980s and 1990s===
When Davies retired from his position at the university, his seventh novel, a satire of academic life, &quot;The Rebel Angels&quot; (1981), was published, followed by &quot;What&#x27;s Bred in the Bone&quot; (1985) which was short-listed for the Booker Prize for fiction in 1986. &quot;The Lyre of Orpheus&quot; (1988) follows these two books in what became known as &quot;The Cornish Trilogy&quot;.

During his retirement from academe he continued to write novels which further established him as a major figure in the literary world: &quot;Murther and Walking Spirits&quot; (1991) and &quot;The Cunning Man&quot; (1994). A third novel in what would have been a further trilogy – the Toronto Trilogy – was in progress at the time of Davies&#x27;s death. He also realized a long-held dream when he penned the libretto to Randolph Peters&#x27; opera: &quot;The Golden Ass&quot;, based on &quot;The Metamorphoses&quot; of Lucius Apuleius, just like that written by one of the characters in Davies&#x27;s 1958 &quot;A Mixture of Frailties&quot;. The opera was performed by the Canadian Opera Company at the Hummingbird Centre in Toronto, in April 1999, several years after Davies&#x27;s death.

In its obituary, &quot;The Times&quot; wrote: &quot;Davies encompassed all the great elements of life ... His novels combined deep seriousness and psychological inquiry with fantasy and exuberant mirth.&quot; He remained close friends with John Kenneth Galbraith, attending Galbraith&#x27;s eighty-fifth birthday party in Boston in 1993, and became so close a friend and colleague of the American novelist John Irving that Irving gave one of the scripture readings at Davies&#x27;s funeral in the chapel of Trinity College, Toronto. He also wrote in support of Salman Rushdie when the latter was threatened by a &quot;fatwā&quot; from Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini of Iran in reaction to supposed anti-Islam expression in his novel &quot;The Satanic Verses&quot;.

==Personal life==

Davies was married to Brenda Ethel Davies (1917–2013) in 1940 and survived by four grandchildren and three great-grandchildren from his three daughters Miranda Davies, Rosamond Bailey and author Jennifer Surridge.

Davies never learned to drive. His wife Brenda routinely drove him to events and other excursions.

==Awards and recognition==
*Won the Dominion Drama Festival Award for best Canadian play in 1948 for &quot;Eros at Breakfast&quot;.
*Won the Stephen Leacock Award for Humour in 1955 for &quot;Leaven of Malice&quot;.
*Won the Lorne Pierce Medal for his literary achievements in 1961.
*Won the Governor-General&#x27;s Literary Award in the English language fiction category in 1972 for &quot;The Manticore&quot;.
*Short-listed for the Booker Prize for Fiction in 1986 for &quot;What&#x27;s Bred in the Bone&quot;.
*Honorary Doctor of Letters, University of Oxford, 1991.
*First Canadian to become an Honorary Member of the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters.
*Companion of the Order of Canada.
*Park in Toronto named after him in 2007.

==Works==
===Novels===
* The Salterton Trilogy
** &quot;Tempest-Tost&quot; (1951)
** &quot;Leaven of Malice&quot; (1954)
** &quot;A Mixture of Frailties&quot; (1958)
* The Deptford Trilogy
**&quot;Fifth Business&quot; (1970)
**&quot;The Manticore&quot; (1972)
**&quot;World of Wonders&quot; (1975)
* The Cornish Trilogy
**&quot;The Rebel Angels&quot; (1981)
**&quot;What&#x27;s Bred in the Bone&quot; (1985)
**&quot;The Lyre of Orpheus&quot; (1988)
* The &quot;Toronto Trilogy&quot; (incomplete)
**&quot;Murther and Walking Spirits&quot; (1991)
**&quot;The Cunning Man&quot; (1994)

===Essays===
Fictional essays
*&quot;The Diary of Samuel Marchbanks&quot; (1947)
*&quot;The Table Talk of Samuel Marchbanks&quot; (1949)
*&quot;Samuel Marchbanks&#x27; Almanack&quot; (1967)
edited by the author into:
*&quot;The Papers of Samuel Marchbanks&quot; (1985)

Criticism
*&quot;Shakespeare&#x27;s Boy Actors&quot; (1939) (as W. Robertson Davies)
*&quot;Shakespeare for Young Players: A Junior Course&quot; (1942)
*&quot;Renown at Stratford&quot; (1953) (with Tyrone Guthrie)
*&quot;Twice Have the Trumpets Sounded&quot; (1954) (with Tyrone Guthrie)
*&quot;Thrice the Brindled Cat Hath Mew&#x27;d&quot; (1955) (with Tyrone Guthrie)
*&quot;A Voice From the Attic&quot; (1960) also published as &quot;The Personal Art&quot;
*&quot;A Feast of Stephen&quot; (1970)
*&quot;Stephen Leacock&quot; (1970)
*&quot;One Half of Robertson Davies&quot; (1977)
*&quot;The Enthusiasms of Robertson Davies&quot; (1979; revised 1990) (edited by Judith Skelton Grant)
*&quot;The Well-Tempered Critic&quot; (1981) (edited by Judith Skelton Grant)
*&quot;The Mirror of Nature&quot; (1983)
*&quot;Reading and Writing&quot; (1993) (two essays, later collected in &quot;The Merry Heart&quot;)
*&quot;The Merry Heart&quot; (1996)
*&quot;Happy Alchemy&quot; (1997) (edited by Jennifer Surridge and Brenda Davies)

===Plays===
*&quot;Overlaid&quot; (1948)
*&quot;Eros at Breakfast&quot; (1948)
*&quot;Hope Deferred&quot; (1948)
*&quot;King Phoenix&quot; (1948)
*&quot;At the Gates of the Righteous&quot; (1949)
*&quot;Fortune My Foe&quot; (1949)
*&quot;The Voice of the People&quot; (1949)
*&quot;At My Heart&#x27;s Core&quot; (1950)
*&quot;A Masque of Aesop&quot; (1952)
*&quot;Hunting Stuart&quot; (1955)
*&quot;A Jig for the Gypsy&quot; (1955)
*&quot;General Confession&quot; (1956)
*&quot;A Masque of Mr. Punch&quot; (1963)
*&quot;Question Time&quot; (1975)
*&quot;Brothers in the Black Art&quot; (1981)

===Short story collection===
*&quot;High Spirits&quot; (1982)

===Libretti===
*&quot;Doctor Canon&#x27;s Cure&quot; (1982)
*&quot;Jezebel&quot; (1993)
*&quot;The Golden Ass&quot; (1999)

===Letters and diaries===
*&quot;For Your Eye Alone&quot; (2000) (edited by Judith Skelton Grant)
*&quot;Discoveries&quot; (2002) (edited by Judith Skelton Grant)
*&quot;A Celtic Temperament: Robertson Davies as Diarist&quot; (2015) (edited by Jennifer Surridge and Ramsay Derry)

===Collections===
*&quot;Conversations with Robertson Davies&quot; (1989) (Edited by J. Madison Davis)
*&quot;The Quotable Robertson Davies: The Wit and Wisdom of the Master&quot; (2005) (collected by James Channing Shaw)
*&quot;The Merry Heart: Reflections on Reading Writing, and the World of Books&quot; (New York: Viking, 1997). 

==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==
*
*Robertson Davies&#x27; Personal Library (Queen&#x27;s University at Kingston)
* Robertson Davies fonds (R4939) at Library and Archives Canada



 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q545375" start="0" end="24" title="Robertson Davies" label="William Robertson Davies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="236" end="250" title="Intellectual#Man of Letters" label="men of letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q635788" start="325" end="331" title="Master (college)" label="Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983620" start="335" end="349" title="Massey College, Toronto" label="Massey College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680291" start="362" end="381" title="residential college" label="residential college"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="402" end="423" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380274" start="516" end="537" title="William Rupert Davies" label="William Rupert Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024911" start="731" end="740" title="Welshpool" label="Welshpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="742" end="747" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143987" start="992" end="1008" title="Renfrew, Ontario" label="Renfrew, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542352" start="1196" end="1216" title="Upper Canada College" label="Upper Canada College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117294" start="1287" end="1315" title="Church of St. Mary Magdalene (Toronto)" label="Church of St. Mary Magdalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586082" start="1342" end="1361" title="Presbyterian Church in Canada" label="Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q540782" start="1371" end="1382" title="Anglican Church of Canada" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="1402" end="1411" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420038" start="1600" end="1623" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s University, Canada" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q202973" start="1627" end="1635" title="Kingston, Ontario" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1691" end="1722" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s University Journal" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s University Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758964" start="1937" end="1961" title="The Queen&amp;#x27;s Journal" label="The Queen&amp;#x27;s Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q805285" start="2030" end="2053" title="Balliol College, Oxford" label="Balliol College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2142" end="2171" title="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s Boy Actors" label="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s Boy Actors"/>
<link wikidata="Q868806" start="2305" end="2330" title="Old Vic" label="Old Vic Repertory Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960663" start="2384" end="2398" title="Brenda Davies" label="Brenda Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q18523854" start="2455" end="2468" title="Stage management" label="stage manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q18159961" start="2541" end="2556" title="Fronfraith Hall" label="Fronfraith Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404980" start="2558" end="2566" title="Abermule" label="Abermule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311946" start="2568" end="2578" title="Montgomery, Powys" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q194105" start="2945" end="2951" title="editing" label="editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426662" start="2961" end="2975" title="Saturday Night (magazine)" label="Saturday Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178004" start="3039" end="3060" title="Peterborough Examiner" label="Peterborough Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q776930" start="3088" end="3100" title="Peterborough, Ontario" label="Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q928635" start="3445" end="3467" title="Kingston Whig-Standard" label="Kingston Whig-Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012526" start="3485" end="3492" title="CKRU (AM)" label="CHEX-AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012607" start="3494" end="3501" title="CKWS-AM" label="CKWS-AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011112" start="3503" end="3510" title="CHEX-TV" label="CHEX-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012608" start="3516" end="3523" title="CKWS-TV" label="CKWS-TV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3834" end="3863" title="Shakespeare for Young Players" label="Shakespeare for Young Players"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3932" end="3949" title="Eros at Breakfast" label="Eros at Breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291047" start="4031" end="4054" title="Dominion Drama Festival" label="Dominion Drama Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4109" end="4124" title="Fortune, My Foe" label="Fortune, My Foe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412104" start="4301" end="4318" title="Samuel Marchbanks" label="Samuel Marchbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730110" start="4372" end="4402" title="The Diary of Samuel Marchbanks" label="The Diary of Samuel Marchbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767871" start="4423" end="4458" title="The Table Talk of Samuel Marchbanks" label="The Table Talk of Samuel Marchbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412105" start="4492" end="4524" title="Samuel Marchbanks&amp;#x27; Almanack" label="Samuel Marchbanks&amp;#x27; Almanack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756037" start="4655" end="4686" title="The Papers of Samuel Marchbanks" label="The Papers of Samuel Marchbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q367149" start="4765" end="4807" title="Stratford Festival of Canada" label="Stratford Shakespearean Festival of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q330059" start="4918" end="4932" title="Tyrone Guthrie" label="Tyrone Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762133" start="5202" end="5223" title="The Salterton Trilogy" label="The Salterton Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698352" start="5236" end="5248" title="Tempest-Tost" label="Tempest-Tost"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386635" start="5301" end="5317" title="Leaven of Malice" label="Leaven of Malice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609770" start="5413" end="5445" title="Stephen Leacock Award" label="Stephen Leacock Award for Humour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658301" start="5457" end="5479" title="A Mixture of Frailties" label="A Mixture of Frailties"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551685" start="5809" end="5824" title="University of Trinity College" label="Trinity College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660503" start="5975" end="5997" title="A Voice From the Attic" label="A Voice From the Attic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332225" start="6025" end="6043" title="Lorne Pierce Medal" label="Lorne Pierce Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983620" start="6109" end="6123" title="Massey College, Toronto" label="Massey College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519335" start="6256" end="6269" title="ghost story" label="ghost stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757088" start="6361" end="6373" title="High Spirits (short story collection)" label="High Spirits"/>
<link wikidata="Q245179" start="6433" end="6451" title="Jungian psychology" label="Jungian psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447489" start="6468" end="6482" title="Fifth Business" label="Fifth Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="6571" end="6575" title="Mythology" label="myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097785" start="6580" end="6585" title="magic and religion" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115221" start="6619" end="6624" title="mores" label="mores"/>
<link wikidata="Q131714" start="6804" end="6814" title="archetypes" label="archetypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750230" start="6996" end="7009" title="The Manticore" label="The Manticore"/>
<link wikidata="Q245179" start="7062" end="7078" title="Jungian analysis" label="Jungian analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q283256" start="7119" end="7157" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Literary Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036648" start="7170" end="7186" title="World of Wonders (novel)" label="World of Wonders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729761" start="7254" end="7274" title="The Deptford Trilogy" label="The Deptford Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759745" start="7414" end="7430" title="The Rebel Angels" label="The Rebel Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990745" start="7478" end="7506" title="What&amp;#x27;s Bred in the Bone" label="What&amp;#x27;s Bred in the Bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q160082" start="7551" end="7563" title="Booker Prize" label="Booker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749234" start="7591" end="7610" title="The Lyre of Orpheus (novel)" label="The Lyre of Orpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727642" start="7678" end="7697" title="The Cornish Trilogy" label="The Cornish Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16387175" start="7847" end="7874" title="Murther and Walking Spirits" label="Murther and Walking Spirits"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728404" start="7898" end="7913" title="The Cunning Man" label="The Cunning Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="8114" end="8122" title="libretto" label="libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291854" start="8126" end="8141" title="Randolph Peters" label="Randolph Peters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8161" end="8175" title="The Golden Ass (opera)" label="The Golden Ass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044767" start="8198" end="8215" title="The Golden Ass" label="The Metamorphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q170512" start="8225" end="8240" title="Apuleius" label="Lucius Apuleius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915268" start="8379" end="8401" title="Canadian Opera Company" label="Canadian Opera Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302468" start="8409" end="8427" title="Hummingbird Centre" label="Hummingbird Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="8520" end="8529" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q186042" start="8737" end="8759" title="John Kenneth Galbraith" label="John Kenneth Galbraith"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="8819" end="8825" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q310379" start="8903" end="8914" title="John Irving" label="John Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551685" start="9004" end="9028" title="Trinity College, Toronto" label="Trinity College, Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q44306" start="9058" end="9072" title="Salman Rushdie" label="Salman Rushdie"/>
<link wikidata="Q179274" start="9115" end="9120" title="fatwā" label="fatwā"/>
<link wikidata="Q184402" start="9132" end="9141" title="Ayatollah" label="Ayatollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q38823" start="9142" end="9159" title="Ruhollah Khomeini" label="Ruhollah Khomeini"/>
<link wikidata="Q191288" start="9233" end="9251" title="The Satanic Verses" label="The Satanic Verses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9474" end="9491" title="Jennifer Surridge" label="Jennifer Surridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405805" start="9886" end="9956" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award for English-language fiction" label="Governor-General&amp;#x27;s Literary Award in the English language fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="10135" end="10155" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="10215" end="10265" title="American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters" label="American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q99700" start="10285" end="10300" title="Order of Canada" label="Order of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762133" start="10370" end="10391" title="The Salterton Trilogy" label="The Salterton Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698352" start="10401" end="10413" title="Tempest-Tost" label="Tempest-Tost"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386635" start="10436" end="10452" title="Leaven of Malice" label="Leaven of Malice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658301" start="10475" end="10497" title="A Mixture of Frailties" label="A Mixture of Frailties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729761" start="10513" end="10533" title="The Deptford Trilogy" label="The Deptford Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447489" start="10542" end="10556" title="Fifth Business" label="Fifth Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750230" start="10578" end="10591" title="The Manticore" label="The Manticore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036648" start="10613" end="10629" title="World of Wonders (novel)" label="World of Wonders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727642" start="10645" end="10664" title="The Cornish Trilogy" label="The Cornish Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759745" start="10673" end="10689" title="The Rebel Angels" label="The Rebel Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990745" start="10711" end="10739" title="What&amp;#x27;s Bred in the Bone" label="What&amp;#x27;s Bred in the Bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749234" start="10761" end="10780" title="The Lyre of Orpheus (novel)" label="The Lyre of Orpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16387175" start="10849" end="10876" title="Murther and Walking Spirits" label="Murther and Walking Spirits"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728404" start="10898" end="10913" title="The Cunning Man" label="The Cunning Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730110" start="10965" end="10995" title="The Diary of Samuel Marchbanks" label="The Diary of Samuel Marchbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767871" start="11016" end="11051" title="The Table Talk of Samuel Marchbanks" label="The Table Talk of Samuel Marchbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412105" start="11072" end="11104" title="Samuel Marchbanks&amp;#x27; Almanack" label="Samuel Marchbanks&amp;#x27; Almanack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756037" start="11152" end="11183" title="The Papers of Samuel Marchbanks" label="The Papers of Samuel Marchbanks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11215" end="11244" title="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s Boy Actors" label="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s Boy Actors"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11290" end="11336" title="Shakespeare for Young Players: A Junior Course" label="Shakespeare for Young Players: A Junior Course"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11357" end="11376" title="Renown at Stratford" label="Renown at Stratford"/>
<link wikidata="Q330059" start="11396" end="11410" title="Tyrone Guthrie" label="Tyrone Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11419" end="11450" title="Twice Have the Trumpets Sounded" label="Twice Have the Trumpets Sounded"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11493" end="11532" title="Thrice the Brindled Cat Hath Mew&amp;#x27;d" label="Thrice the Brindled Cat Hath Mew&amp;#x27;d"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660503" start="11575" end="11597" title="A Voice From the Attic" label="A Voice From the Attic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11665" end="11683" title="A Feast of Stephen" label="A Feast of Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11704" end="11719" title="Stephen Leacock (criticism)" label="Stephen Leacock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11740" end="11768" title="One Half of Robertson Davies" label="One Half of Robertson Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303679" start="11863" end="11883" title="Judith Skelton Grant" label="Judith Skelton Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774198" start="11892" end="11916" title="The Well-Tempered Critic (Davies)" label="The Well-Tempered Critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303679" start="11941" end="11961" title="Judith Skelton Grant" label="Judith Skelton Grant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11970" end="11990" title="The Mirror of Nature" label="The Mirror of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q48970530" start="12011" end="12030" title="Reading and Writing" label="Reading and Writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q545375" start="12112" end="12127" title="The Merry Heart" label="The Merry Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5652463" start="12148" end="12161" title="Happy Alchemy" label="Happy Alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12186" end="12203" title="Jennifer Surridge" label="Jennifer Surridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960663" start="12208" end="12221" title="Brenda Davies" label="Brenda Davies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12243" end="12251" title="Overlaid" label="Overlaid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12272" end="12289" title="Eros at Breakfast" label="Eros at Breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q26220576" start="12310" end="12323" title="Hope Deferred" label="Hope Deferred"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12377" end="12406" title="At the Gates of the Righteous" label="At the Gates of the Righteous"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12427" end="12441" title="Fortune My Foe" label="Fortune My Foe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12462" end="12485" title="The Voice of the People (play)" label="The Voice of the People"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12506" end="12529" title="At My Heart&amp;#x27;s Core" label="At My Heart&amp;#x27;s Core"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12550" end="12567" title="A Masque of Aesop" label="A Masque of Aesop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12588" end="12602" title="Hunting Stuart" label="Hunting Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12623" end="12642" title="A Jig for the Gypsy" label="A Jig for the Gypsy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12663" end="12681" title="General Confession (play)" label="General Confession"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12702" end="12723" title="A Masque of Mr. Punch" label="A Masque of Mr. Punch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12744" end="12757" title="Question Time (play)" label="Question Time"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12778" end="12803" title="Brothers in the Black Art" label="Brothers in the Black Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757088" start="12854" end="12866" title="High Spirits (short story collection)" label="High Spirits"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12903" end="12927" title="Doctor Canon&amp;#x27;s Cure (opera)" label="Doctor Canon&amp;#x27;s Cure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12948" end="12955" title="Jezebel (oratorio)" label="Jezebel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12976" end="12990" title="The Golden Ass (opera)" label="The Golden Ass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466967" start="13038" end="13056" title="For Your Eye Alone" label="For Your Eye Alone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303679" start="13081" end="13101" title="Judith Skelton Grant" label="Judith Skelton Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303679" start="13146" end="13166" title="Judith Skelton Grant" label="Judith Skelton Grant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13396" end="13459" title="The Quotable Robertson Davies" label="The Quotable Robertson Davies: The Wit and Wisdom of the Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q913250" start="13794" end="13821" title="Library and Archives Canada" label="Library and Archives Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25758" wikidata="Q11053" url="?curid=25758" title="RNA">
<text>Ribonucleic acid (RNA) is a polymeric molecule that is essential for most biological functions, either by performing the function itself (non-coding RNA) or by forming a template for the production of proteins (messenger RNA). RNA and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) are nucleic acids. The nucleic acids constitute one of the four major macromolecules essential for all known forms of life. RNA is assembled as a chain of nucleotides. Cellular organisms use messenger RNA (mRNA) to convey genetic information (using the nitrogenous bases of guanine, uracil, adenine, and cytosine, denoted by the letters G, U, A, and C) that directs synthesis of specific proteins. Many viruses encode their genetic information using an RNA genome.

Some RNA molecules play an active role within cells by catalyzing biological reactions, controlling gene expression, or sensing and communicating responses to cellular signals. One of these active processes is protein synthesis, a universal function in which RNA molecules direct the synthesis of proteins on ribosomes. This process uses transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules to deliver amino acids to the ribosome, where ribosomal RNA (rRNA) then links amino acids together to form coded proteins.

It has become widely accepted in science that early in the history of life on Earth, prior to the evolution of DNA and possibly of protein-based enzymes as well, an &quot;RNA world&quot; existed in which RNA served as both living organisms&#x27; storage method for genetic information—a role fulfilled today by DNA, except in the case of RNA viruses—and potentially performed catalytic functions in cells—a function performed today by protein enzymes, with the notable and important exception of the ribosome, which is a ribozyme.

== Chemical structure of RNA==
===Basic chemical composition===

Each nucleotide in RNA contains a ribose sugar, with carbons numbered 1&#x27; through 5&#x27;. A base is attached to the 1&#x27; position, in general, adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), or uracil (U). Adenine and guanine are purines, and cytosine and uracil are pyrimidines. A phosphate group is attached to the 3&#x27; position of one ribose and the 5&#x27; position of the next. The phosphate groups have a negative charge each, making RNA a charged molecule (polyanion). The bases form hydrogen bonds between cytosine and guanine, between adenine and uracil and between guanine and uracil. However, other interactions are possible, such as a group of adenine bases binding to each other in a bulge,
or the GNRA tetraloop that has a guanine–adenine base-pair.

===Differences between DNA and RNA===

The chemical structure of RNA is very similar to that of DNA, but differs in three primary ways:
* Unlike double-stranded DNA, RNA is usually a single-stranded molecule (ssRNA) in many of its biological roles and consists of much shorter chains of nucleotides. However, double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) can form and (moreover) a single RNA molecule can, by complementary base pairing, form intrastrand double helixes, as in tRNA.
* While the sugar-phosphate &quot;backbone&quot; of DNA contains &quot;deoxyribose&quot;, RNA contains &quot;ribose&quot; instead. Ribose has a hydroxyl group attached to the pentose ring in the 2&#x27; position, whereas deoxyribose does not. The hydroxyl groups in the ribose backbone make RNA more chemically labile than DNA by lowering the activation energy of hydrolysis.
* The complementary base to adenine in DNA is thymine, whereas in RNA, it is uracil, which is an unmethylated form of thymine.
Like DNA, most biologically active RNAs, including mRNA, tRNA, rRNA, snRNAs, and other non-coding RNAs, contain self-complementary sequences that allow parts of the RNA to fold and pair with itself to form double helices. Analysis of these RNAs has revealed that they are highly structured. Unlike DNA, their structures do not consist of long double helices, but rather collections of short helices packed together into structures akin to proteins.

In this fashion, RNAs can achieve chemical catalysis (like enzymes). For instance, determination of the structure of the ribosome—an RNA-protein complex that catalyzes the assembly of proteins—revealed that its active site is composed entirely of RNA.
An important structural component of RNA that distinguishes it from DNA is the presence of a hydroxyl group at the 2&#x27; position of the ribose sugar. The presence of this functional group causes the helix to mostly take the A-form geometry, although in single strand dinucleotide contexts, RNA can rarely also adopt the B-form most commonly observed in DNA. The A-form geometry results in a very deep and narrow major groove and a shallow and wide minor groove. A second consequence of the presence of the 2&#x27;-hydroxyl group is that in conformationally flexible regions of an RNA molecule (that is, not involved in formation of a double helix), it can chemically attack the adjacent phosphodiester bond to cleave the backbone.

===Secondary and tertiary structures===
The functional form of single-stranded RNA molecules, just like proteins, frequently requires a specific spatial tertiary structure. The scaffold for this structure is provided by secondary structural elements that are hydrogen bonds within the molecule. This leads to several recognizable &quot;domains&quot; of secondary structure like hairpin loops, bulges, and internal loops. In order to create, i.e., design, RNA for any given secondary structure, two or three bases would not be enough, but four bases are enough. This is likely why nature has &quot;chosen&quot; a four base alphabet: fewer than four would not allow the creation of all structures, while more than four bases are not necessary to do so. Since RNA is charged, metal ions such as Mg2+ are needed to stabilise many secondary and tertiary structures.

The naturally occurring enantiomer of RNA is -RNA composed of -ribonucleotides. All chirality centers are located in the -ribose. By the use of -ribose or rather -ribonucleotides, -RNA can be synthesized. -RNA is much more stable against degradation by RNase.

Like other structured biopolymers such as proteins, one can define topology of a folded RNA molecule. This is often done based on arrangement of intra-chain contacts within a folded RNA, termed as circuit topology.

===Chemical modifications===

RNA is transcribed with only four bases (adenine, cytosine, guanine and uracil), but these bases and attached sugars can be modified in numerous ways as the RNAs mature. Pseudouridine (Ψ), in which the linkage between uracil and ribose is changed from a C–N bond to a C–C bond, and ribothymidine (T) are found in various places (the most notable ones being in the TΨC loop of tRNA). Another notable modified base is hypoxanthine, a deaminated adenine base whose nucleoside is called inosine (I). Inosine plays a key role in the wobble hypothesis of the genetic code.

There are more than 100 other naturally occurring modified nucleosides. The greatest structural diversity of modifications can be found in tRNA, while pseudouridine and nucleosides with 2&#x27;-O-methylribose often present in rRNA are the most common. The specific roles of many of these modifications in RNA are not fully understood. However, it is notable that, in ribosomal RNA, many of the post-transcriptional modifications occur in highly functional regions, such as the peptidyl transferase center and the subunit interface, implying that they are important for normal function.

==Types of RNA==

Messenger RNA (mRNA) is the type of RNA that carries information from DNA to the ribosome, the sites of protein synthesis (translation) in the cell cytoplasm. The coding sequence of the mRNA determines the amino acid sequence in the protein that is produced. However, many RNAs do not code for protein (about 97% of the transcriptional output is non-protein-coding in eukaryotes).

These so-called non-coding RNAs (&quot;ncRNA&quot;) can be encoded by their own genes (RNA genes), but can also derive from mRNA introns. The most prominent examples of non-coding RNAs are transfer RNA (tRNA) and ribosomal RNA (rRNA), both of which are involved in the process of translation. There are also non-coding RNAs involved in gene regulation, RNA processing and other roles. Certain RNAs are able to catalyse chemical reactions such as cutting and ligating other RNA molecules, and the catalysis of peptide bond formation in the ribosome; these are known as ribozymes.

According to the length of RNA chain, RNA includes small RNA and long RNA. Usually, small RNAs are shorter than 200 nt in length, and long RNAs are greater than 200 nt long. Long RNAs, also called large RNAs, mainly include long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) and mRNA. Small RNAs mainly include 5.8S ribosomal RNA (rRNA), 5S rRNA, transfer RNA (tRNA), microRNA (miRNA), small interfering RNA (siRNA), small nucleolar RNA (snoRNAs), Piwi-interacting RNA (piRNA), tRNA-derived small RNA (tsRNA) and small rDNA-derived RNA (srRNA).
There are certain exceptions as in the case of the 5S rRNA of the members of the genus Halococcus (Archaea), which have an insertion, thus increasing its size.

===RNAs involved in protein synthesis===
Messenger RNA (mRNA) carries information about a protein sequence to the ribosomes, the protein synthesis factories in the cell. It is coded so that every three nucleotides (a codon) corresponds to one amino acid. In eukaryotic cells, once precursor mRNA (pre-mRNA) has been transcribed from DNA, it is processed to mature mRNA. This removes its introns—non-coding sections of the pre-mRNA. The mRNA is then exported from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, where it is bound to ribosomes and translated into its corresponding protein form with the help of tRNA. In prokaryotic cells, which do not have nucleus and cytoplasm compartments, mRNA can bind to ribosomes while it is being transcribed from DNA. After a certain amount of time, the message degrades into its component nucleotides with the assistance of ribonucleases.

Transfer RNA (tRNA) is a small RNA chain of about 80 nucleotides that transfers a specific amino acid to a growing polypeptide chain at the ribosomal site of protein synthesis during translation. It has sites for amino acid attachment and an anticodon region for codon recognition that binds to a specific sequence on the messenger RNA chain through hydrogen bonding.

Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is the catalytic component of the ribosomes. The rRNA is the component of the ribosome that hosts translation. Eukaryotic ribosomes contain four different rRNA molecules: 18S, 5.8S, 28S and 5S rRNA. Three of the rRNA molecules are synthesized in the nucleolus, and one is synthesized elsewhere. In the cytoplasm, ribosomal RNA and protein combine to form a nucleoprotein called a ribosome. The ribosome binds mRNA and carries out protein synthesis. Several ribosomes may be attached to a single mRNA at any time. Nearly all the RNA found in a typical eukaryotic cell is rRNA.

Transfer-messenger RNA (tmRNA) is found in many bacteria and plastids. It tags proteins encoded by mRNAs that lack stop codons for degradation and prevents the ribosome from stalling.

=== Regulatory RNA ===

The earliest known regulators of gene expression were proteins known as repressors and activators – regulators with specific short binding sites within enhancer regions near the genes to be regulated.  Later studies have shown that RNAs also regulate genes. There are several kinds of RNA-dependent processes in eukaryotes regulating the expression of genes at various points, such as RNAi repressing genes post-transcriptionally, long non-coding RNAs shutting down blocks of chromatin epigenetically, and enhancer RNAs inducing increased gene expression. Bacteria and archaea have also been shown to use regulatory RNA systems such as bacterial small RNAs and CRISPR. Fire and Mello were awarded the 2006 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for discovering microRNAs (miRNAs), specific short RNA molecules that can base-pair with mRNAs.

==== MicroRNA (miRNA) and small interfering RNA (siRNA) ====
Post-transcriptional expression levels of many genes can be controlled by RNA interference, in which miRNAs, specific short RNA molecules, pair with mRNA regions and target them for degradation. This antisense-based process involves steps that first process the RNA so that it can base-pair with a region of its target mRNAs. Once the base pairing occurs, other proteins direct the mRNA to be destroyed by nucleases.

==== Long non-coding RNAs ====
Next to be linked to regulation were Xist and other long noncoding RNAs associated with X chromosome inactivation.  Their roles, at first mysterious, were shown by Jeannie T. Lee and others to be the silencing of blocks of chromatin via recruitment of Polycomb complex so that messenger RNA could not be transcribed from them. Additional lncRNAs, currently defined as RNAs of more than 200 base pairs that do not appear to have coding potential, have been found associated with regulation of stem cell pluripotency and cell division.

==== Enhancer RNAs ====
The third major group of regulatory RNAs is called enhancer RNAs.  It is not clear at present whether they are a unique category of RNAs of various lengths or constitute a distinct subset of lncRNAs.  In any case, they are transcribed from enhancers, which are known regulatory sites in the DNA near genes they regulate.  They up-regulate the transcription of the gene(s) under control of the enhancer from which they are transcribed.

=== Small RNA in prokaryotes ===
====Small RNA====
At first, regulatory RNA was thought to be a eukaryotic phenomenon, a part of the explanation for why so much more transcription in higher organisms was seen than had been predicted. But as soon as researchers began to look for possible RNA regulators in bacteria, they turned up there as well, termed as small RNA (sRNA). Currently, the ubiquitous nature of systems of RNA regulation of genes has been discussed as support for the RNA World theory. There are indications that the enterobacterial sRNAs are involved in various cellular processes and seem to have significant role in stress responses such as membrane stress, starvation stress, phosphosugar stress and DNA damage. Also, it has been suggested that sRNAs have been evolved to have important role in stress responses because of their kinetic properties that allow for rapid response and stabilisation of the physiological state. Bacterial small RNAs generally act via antisense pairing with mRNA to down-regulate its translation, either by affecting stability or affecting cis-binding ability. Riboswitches have also been discovered. They are cis-acting regulatory RNA sequences acting allosterically. They change shape when they bind metabolites so that they gain or lose the ability to bind chromatin to regulate expression of genes.

====CRISPR RNA====
Archaea also have systems of regulatory RNA. The CRISPR system, recently being used to edit DNA &quot;in situ&quot;, acts via regulatory RNAs in archaea and bacteria to provide protection against virus invaders.

==RNA synthesis and processing==
===Synthesis===
Synthesis of RNA typically occurs in the cell nucleus and is usually catalyzed by an enzyme—RNA polymerase—using DNA as a template, a process known as transcription. Initiation of transcription begins with the binding of the enzyme to a promoter sequence in the DNA (usually found &quot;upstream&quot; of a gene). The DNA double helix is unwound by the helicase activity of the enzyme. The enzyme then progresses along the template strand in the 3’ to 5’ direction, synthesizing a complementary RNA molecule with elongation occurring in the 5’ to 3’ direction. The DNA sequence also dictates where termination of RNA synthesis will occur.

Primary transcript RNAs are often modified by enzymes after transcription. For example, a poly(A) tail and a 5&#x27; cap are added to eukaryotic pre-mRNA and introns are removed by the spliceosome.

There are also a number of RNA-dependent RNA polymerases that use RNA as their template for synthesis of a new strand of RNA. For instance, a number of RNA viruses (such as poliovirus) use this type of enzyme to replicate their genetic material. Also, RNA-dependent RNA polymerase is part of the RNA interference pathway in many organisms.

=== RNA processing ===

Many RNAs are involved in modifying other RNAs.
Introns are spliced out of pre-mRNA by spliceosomes, which contain several small nuclear RNAs (snRNA), or the introns can be ribozymes that are spliced by themselves.
RNA can also be altered by having its nucleotides modified to nucleotides other than A, C, G and U.
In eukaryotes, modifications of RNA nucleotides are in general directed by small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNA; 60–300 nt), found in the nucleolus and cajal bodies. snoRNAs associate with enzymes and guide them to a spot on an RNA by basepairing to that RNA. These enzymes then perform the nucleotide modification. rRNAs and tRNAs are extensively modified, but snRNAs and mRNAs can also be the target of base modification. RNA can also be methylated.
==RNA in genetics==
===RNA genomes===
Like DNA, RNA can carry genetic information. RNA viruses have genomes composed of RNA that encodes a number of proteins. The viral genome is replicated by some of those proteins, while other proteins protect the genome as the virus particle moves to a new host cell. Viroids are another group of pathogens, but they consist only of RNA, do not encode any protein and are replicated by a host plant cell&#x27;s polymerase.

===Reverse transcription===
Reverse transcribing viruses replicate their genomes by reverse transcribing DNA copies from their RNA; these DNA copies are then transcribed to new RNA. Retrotransposons also spread by copying DNA and RNA from one another, and telomerase contains an RNA that is used as template for building the ends of eukaryotic chromosomes.

=== Double-stranded RNA ===

Double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) is RNA with two complementary strands, similar to the DNA found in all cells, but with the replacement of thymine by uracil and the adding of one oxygen atom. dsRNA forms the genetic material of some viruses (double-stranded RNA viruses). Double-stranded RNA, such as viral RNA or siRNA, can trigger RNA interference in eukaryotes, as well as interferon response in vertebrates. In eukaryotes, double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) plays a role in the activation of the innate immune system against viral infections.

=== Circular RNA ===
In the late 1970s, it was shown that there is a single stranded covalently closed, i.e. circular form of RNA expressed throughout the animal and plant kingdom (see circRNA). circRNAs are thought to arise via a &quot;back-splice&quot; reaction where the spliceosome joins a upstream 3&#x27; acceptor to a downstream 5&#x27; donor splice site. So far the function of circRNAs is largely unknown, although for few examples a microRNA sponging activity has been demonstrated.

==Key discoveries in RNA biology==
Research on RNA has led to many important biological discoveries and numerous Nobel Prizes. Nucleic acids were discovered in 1868 by Friedrich Miescher, who called the material &#x27;nuclein&#x27; since it was found in the nucleus. It was later discovered that prokaryotic cells, which do not have a nucleus, also contain nucleic acids. The role of RNA in protein synthesis was suspected already in 1939. Severo Ochoa won the 1959 Nobel Prize in Medicine (shared with Arthur Kornberg) after he discovered an enzyme that can synthesize RNA in the laboratory. However, the enzyme discovered by Ochoa (polynucleotide phosphorylase) was later shown to be responsible for RNA degradation, not RNA synthesis. In 1956 Alex Rich and David Davies hybridized two separate strands of RNA to form the first crystal of RNA whose structure could be determined by X-ray crystallography.

The sequence of the 77 nucleotides of a yeast tRNA was found by Robert W. Holley in 1965, winning Holley the 1968 Nobel Prize in Medicine (shared with Har Gobind Khorana and Marshall Nirenberg).

In the early 1970s, retroviruses and reverse transcriptase were discovered, showing for the first time that enzymes could copy RNA into DNA (the opposite of the usual route for transmission of genetic information). For this work, David Baltimore, Renato Dulbecco and Howard Temin were awarded a Nobel Prize in 1975.
In 1976, Walter Fiers and his team determined the first complete nucleotide sequence of an RNA virus genome, that of bacteriophage MS2.

In 1977, introns and RNA splicing were discovered in both mammalian viruses and in cellular genes, resulting in a 1993 Nobel to Philip Sharp and Richard Roberts.
Catalytic RNA molecules (ribozymes) were discovered in the early 1980s, leading to a 1989 Nobel award to Thomas Cech and Sidney Altman. In 1990, it was found in &quot;Petunia&quot; that introduced genes can silence similar genes of the plant&#x27;s own, now known to be a result of RNA interference.

At about the same time, 22 nt long RNAs, now called microRNAs, were found to have a role in the development of &quot;C. elegans&quot;.
Studies on RNA interference earned a Nobel Prize for Andrew Fire and Craig Mello in 2006, and another Nobel for studies on the transcription of RNA to Roger Kornberg in the same year. The discovery of gene regulatory RNAs has led to attempts to develop drugs made of RNA, such as siRNA, to silence genes. Adding to the Nobel prizes for research on RNA, in 2009 it was awarded for the elucidation of the atomic structure of the ribosome to Venki Ramakrishnan, Thomas A. Steitz, and Ada Yonath. In 2023 the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was awarded to Katalin Karikó and Drew Weissman for their discoveries concerning modified nucleosides that enabled the development of effective mRNA vaccines against COVID-19.
=== Relevance for prebiotic chemistry and abiogenesis ===
In 1968, Carl Woese hypothesized that RNA might be catalytic and suggested that the earliest forms of life (self-replicating molecules) could have relied on RNA both to carry genetic information and to catalyze biochemical reactions—an RNA world. In May 2022, scientists discovered that RNA can form spontaneously on prebiotic basalt lava glass, presumed to have been abundant on the early Earth.

In March 2015, DNA and RNA nucleobases, including uracil, cytosine and thymine, were reportedly formed in the laboratory under outer space conditions, using starter chemicals such as pyrimidine, an organic compound commonly found in meteorites. Pyrimidine, like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), is one of the most carbon-rich compounds found in the universe and may have been formed in red giants or in interstellar dust and gas clouds. In July 2022, astronomers reported massive amounts of prebiotic molecules, including possible RNA precursors, in the galactic center of the Milky Way Galaxy.

== Medical applications ==
RNA, initially deemed unsuitable for therapeutics due to its short half-life, has been made useful through advances in stabilization. Therapeutic applications arise as RNA folds into complex conformations and binds proteins, nucleic acids, and small molecules to form catalytic centers. RNA-based vaccines are thought to be easier to produce than traditional vaccines derived from killed or altered pathogens, because it can take months or years to grow and study a pathogen and determine which molecular parts to extract, inactivate, and use in a vaccine. Small molecules with conventional therapeutic properties can target RNA and DNA structures, thereby treating novel diseases. However, research is scarce on small molecules targeting RNA and approved drugs for human illness. Ribavirin, branaplam, and ataluren are currently available medications that stabilize double-stranded RNA structures and control splicing in a variety of disorders. 

Protein-coding mRNAs have emerged as new therapeutic candidates, with RNA replacement being particularly beneficial for brief but torrential protein expression. In vitro transcribed mRNAs (IVT-mRNA) have been used to deliver proteins for bone regeneration, pluripotency, and heart function in animal models. SiRNAs, short RNA molecules, play a crucial role in innate defense against viruses and chromatin structure. They can be artificially introduced to silence specific genes, making them valuable for gene function studies, therapeutic target validation, and drug development.

mRNA vaccines have emerged as an important new class of vaccines, using mRNA to manufacture proteins which provoke an immune response. Their first successful large-scale application came in the form of COVID-19 vaccines during the COVID-19 pandemic.

== See also ==
* Biomolecular structure
* RNA virus
* DNA
* History of RNA Biology
* List of RNA Biologists
* RNA Society
* Macromolecule
* RNA-based evolution
* Aptamer
* RNA origami
* Transcriptome
* RNA world hypothesis
== References ==
== External links ==
* RNA World website Link collection (structures, sequences, tools, journals)
* Nucleic Acid Database Images of DNA, RNA, and complexes.
* Anna Marie Pyle&#x27;s Seminar: RNA Structure, Function, and Recognition </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="0" end="16" title="RNA" label="Ribonucleic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="18" end="21" title="RNA" label="RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="28" end="35" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q427087" start="138" end="152" title="non-coding RNA" label="non-coding RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="211" end="224" title="messenger RNA" label="messenger RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="235" end="256" title="deoxyribonucleic acid" label="deoxyribonucleic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q123619" start="267" end="279" title="nucleic acid" label="nucleic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q178593" start="333" end="346" title="macromolecule" label="macromolecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="381" end="385" title="life" label="life"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="418" end="428" title="nucleotide" label="nucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="454" end="467" title="messenger RNA" label="messenger RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q422960" start="516" end="533" title="nucleobase" label="nitrogenous bases"/>
<link wikidata="Q169313" start="537" end="544" title="guanine" label="guanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q182990" start="546" end="552" title="uracil" label="uracil"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277" start="554" end="561" title="adenine" label="adenine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178425" start="567" end="575" title="cytosine" label="cytosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="666" end="671" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="720" end="726" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="829" end="844" title="gene expression" label="gene expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q211935" start="939" end="956" title="Protein biosynthesis" label="protein synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42244" start="1038" end="1046" title="ribosome" label="ribosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="1067" end="1079" title="transfer RNA" label="transfer RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="1108" end="1118" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q42244" start="1127" end="1135" title="ribosome" label="ribosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q215980" start="1143" end="1156" title="ribosomal RNA" label="ribosomal RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098275" start="1280" end="1304" title="history of life on Earth" label="history of life on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="1366" end="1372" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q407525" start="1392" end="1401" title="RNA world" label="RNA world"/>
<link wikidata="Q863908" start="1486" end="1505" title="genetic information" label="genetic information"/>
<link wikidata="Q751911" start="1559" end="1568" title="RNA virus" label="RNA virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q205858" start="1742" end="1750" title="ribozyme" label="ribozyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="1823" end="1833" title="nucleotide" label="nucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q59817493" start="1852" end="1858" title="ribose" label="ribose"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277" start="1969" end="1976" title="adenine" label="adenine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178425" start="1982" end="1990" title="cytosine" label="cytosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q169313" start="1996" end="2003" title="guanine" label="guanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q182990" start="2012" end="2018" title="uracil" label="uracil"/>
<link wikidata="Q188261" start="2048" end="2054" title="purine" label="purine"/>
<link wikidata="Q207722" start="2085" end="2095" title="pyrimidine" label="pyrimidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="2100" end="2109" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q169324" start="2312" end="2325" title="hydrogen bond" label="hydrogen bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546848" start="2537" end="2546" title="tetraloop" label="tetraloop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="2682" end="2685" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2895" end="2914" title="RNA#Double-stranded RNA" label="double-stranded RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="3044" end="3048" title="Transfer RNA" label="tRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q192454" start="3121" end="3132" title="deoxyribose" label="deoxyribose"/>
<link wikidata="Q59817493" start="3159" end="3165" title="ribose" label="ribose"/>
<link wikidata="Q104116" start="3194" end="3202" title="Hydroxy group" label="hydroxyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068222" start="3245" end="3252" title="nucleic acid nomenclature" label="2&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630168" start="3361" end="3367" title="Lability" label="labile"/>
<link wikidata="Q190474" start="3393" end="3410" title="activation energy" label="activation energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="3414" end="3424" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277" start="3454" end="3461" title="adenine" label="adenine"/>
<link wikidata="Q171973" start="3472" end="3479" title="thymine" label="thymine"/>
<link wikidata="Q182990" start="3503" end="3509" title="uracil" label="uracil"/>
<link wikidata="Q518328" start="3523" end="3535" title="methylation" label="unmethylated"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="3604" end="3608" title="mRNA" label="mRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="3610" end="3614" title="tRNA" label="tRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q215980" start="3616" end="3620" title="rRNA" label="rRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q284578" start="3622" end="3627" title="snRNA" label="snRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q427087" start="3640" end="3654" title="non-coding RNA" label="non-coding RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="4046" end="4055" title="catalysis" label="catalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q419245" start="4136" end="4155" title="Ribonucleoprotein" label="RNA-protein complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q104116" start="4348" end="4356" title="hydroxyl" label="hydroxyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q59817493" start="4394" end="4406" title="Ribose" label="ribose sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360205" start="4482" end="4497" title="A-DNA" label="A-form geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823894" start="5143" end="5161" title="RNA Tertiary Structure" label="tertiary structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q904984" start="5210" end="5230" title="secondary structure" label="secondary structural"/>
<link wikidata="Q418900" start="5368" end="5380" title="hairpin loop" label="hairpin loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351776" start="5395" end="5408" title="internal loop" label="internal loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="5782" end="5786" title="Magnesium" label="Mg2+"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823894" start="5830" end="5849" title="RNA Tertiary Structure" label="tertiary structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q494483" start="5876" end="5886" title="enantiomer" label="enantiomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q422523" start="6105" end="6110" title="ribonuclease" label="RNase"/>
<link wikidata="Q422649" start="6135" end="6145" title="biopolymer" label="biopolymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205998" start="6310" end="6326" title="circuit topology" label="circuit topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q420445" start="6529" end="6542" title="Pseudouridine" label="Pseudouridine"/>
<link wikidata="Q425078" start="6641" end="6654" title="5-methyluridine" label="ribothymidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="6735" end="6739" title="tRNA" label="tRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q410305" start="6775" end="6787" title="hypoxanthine" label="hypoxanthine"/>
<link wikidata="Q28734" start="6821" end="6831" title="nucleoside" label="nucleoside"/>
<link wikidata="Q422564" start="6842" end="6849" title="inosine" label="inosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141556" start="6887" end="6904" title="wobble hypothesis" label="wobble hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="6912" end="6924" title="genetic code" label="genetic code"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="7066" end="7070" title="tRNA" label="tRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596727" start="7113" end="7135" title="2&amp;#x27;-O-methylation" label="2&amp;#x27;-O-methylribose"/>
<link wikidata="Q42244" start="7613" end="7621" title="ribosome" label="ribosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="7655" end="7666" title="Translation (biology)" label="translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="7738" end="7748" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="7765" end="7772" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q427087" start="7930" end="7944" title="non-coding RNA" label="non-coding RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q207551" start="8043" end="8049" title="intron" label="intron"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="8103" end="8115" title="transfer RNA" label="transfer RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q215980" start="8127" end="8140" title="ribosomal RNA" label="ribosomal RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q417379" start="8267" end="8281" title="RNA processing" label="RNA processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="8324" end="8332" title="catalysis" label="catalyse"/>
<link wikidata="Q410221" start="8372" end="8380" title="ligase" label="ligating"/>
<link wikidata="Q33293" start="8423" end="8435" title="peptide bond" label="peptide bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q42244" start="8453" end="8461" title="ribosome" label="ribosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q205858" start="8482" end="8490" title="ribozyme" label="ribozyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q24287527" start="8545" end="8554" title="small RNA" label="small RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q24287527" start="8578" end="8587" title="small RNA" label="small RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="8610" end="8612" title="Nucleotide" label="nt"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="8659" end="8661" title="Nucleotide" label="nt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15087973" start="8718" end="8737" title="long non-coding RNA" label="long non-coding RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="8751" end="8755" title="mRNA" label="mRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q215980" start="8788" end="8801" title="ribosomal RNA" label="ribosomal RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q10846137" start="8810" end="8817" title="5S rRNA" label="5S rRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="8819" end="8831" title="transfer RNA" label="transfer RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q310899" start="8840" end="8848" title="microRNA" label="microRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q203221" start="8858" end="8879" title="small interfering RNA" label="small interfering RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q284416" start="8889" end="8908" title="small nucleolar RNA" label="small nucleolar RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367421" start="8920" end="8940" title="Piwi-interacting RNA" label="Piwi-interacting RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q10846137" start="9068" end="9075" title="5S rRNA" label="5S rRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643365" start="9104" end="9114" title="Halococcus" label="Halococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872" start="9116" end="9123" title="Archaea" label="Archaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="9219" end="9232" title="Messenger RNA" label="Messenger RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q42244" start="9292" end="9300" title="ribosome" label="ribosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="9354" end="9359" title="genetic code" label="coded"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="9395" end="9400" title="codon" label="codon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="9436" end="9446" title="eukaryotic" label="eukaryotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207551" start="9565" end="9571" title="intron" label="intron"/>
<link wikidata="Q79899" start="9660" end="9669" title="cytoplasm" label="cytoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="9706" end="9716" title="Translation (biology)" label="translated"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="9770" end="9774" title="tRNA" label="tRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q422523" start="10026" end="10038" title="ribonuclease" label="ribonuclease"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="10042" end="10054" title="Transfer RNA" label="Transfer RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="10095" end="10105" title="nucleotide" label="nucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="10157" end="10168" title="polypeptide" label="polypeptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="10284" end="10293" title="anticodon" label="anticodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="10305" end="10310" title="codon" label="codon"/>
<link wikidata="Q215980" start="10411" end="10424" title="Ribosomal RNA" label="Ribosomal RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q30869" start="10682" end="10691" title="nucleolus" label="nucleolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q285904" start="11009" end="11031" title="tmRNA" label="Transfer-messenger RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="11057" end="11065" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q165963" start="11070" end="11077" title="plastid" label="plastid"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="11251" end="11266" title="gene expression" label="gene expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q425218" start="11290" end="11299" title="repressor" label="repressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q174576" start="11305" end="11315" title="Activator (genetics)" label="activators"/>
<link wikidata="Q913367" start="11370" end="11378" title="Enhancer (genetics)" label="enhancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q201993" start="11603" end="11607" title="RNA interference" label="RNAi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455913" start="11625" end="11647" title="Post-transcriptional regulation" label="post-transcriptionally"/>
<link wikidata="Q15087973" start="11649" end="11668" title="long non-coding RNA" label="long non-coding RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q180951" start="11694" end="11703" title="chromatin" label="chromatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26939" start="11704" end="11718" title="epigenetically" label="epigenetically"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119097" start="11724" end="11736" title="enhancer RNA" label="enhancer RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q19081" start="11774" end="11794" title="Prokaryote" label="Bacteria and archaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822799" start="11854" end="11873" title="bacterial small RNA" label="bacterial small RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q412563" start="11879" end="11885" title="CRISPR" label="CRISPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="11924" end="11961" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q310899" start="11978" end="11986" title="microRNA" label="microRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201993" start="12194" end="12210" title="RNA interference" label="RNA interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q310899" start="12221" end="12226" title="miRNA" label="miRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q423832" start="12320" end="12329" title="Antisense RNA" label="antisense"/>
<link wikidata="Q145911" start="12401" end="12410" title="Base pair" label="base-pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q422529" start="12526" end="12534" title="nuclease" label="nuclease"/>
<link wikidata="Q18032385" start="12606" end="12610" title="XIST" label="Xist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15087973" start="12621" end="12639" title="long noncoding RNA" label="long noncoding RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q898914" start="12657" end="12682" title="X chromosome inactivation" label="X chromosome inactivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30068211" start="12733" end="12747" title="Jeannie T. Lee" label="Jeannie T. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277185" start="12769" end="12778" title="RNA silencing" label="silencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4082046" start="12821" end="12829" title="Polycomb-group proteins" label="Polycomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q48196" start="13061" end="13070" title="stem cell" label="stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q862600" start="13071" end="13083" title="pluripotency" label="pluripotency"/>
<link wikidata="Q188909" start="13088" end="13101" title="cell division" label="cell division"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119097" start="13179" end="13191" title="enhancer RNA" label="enhancer RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q913367" start="13368" end="13377" title="enhancers" label="enhancers"/>
<link wikidata="Q407525" start="14047" end="14056" title="RNA World" label="RNA World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822799" start="14507" end="14526" title="Bacterial small RNA" label="Bacterial small RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q423832" start="14546" end="14555" title="Antisense RNA" label="antisense"/>
<link wikidata="Q418840" start="14672" end="14682" title="Riboswitch" label="Riboswitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q845326" start="14764" end="14778" title="Allosteric regulation" label="allosterically"/>
<link wikidata="Q407595" start="14813" end="14823" title="metabolite" label="metabolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q272631" start="15288" end="15302" title="RNA polymerase" label="RNA polymerase"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="15347" end="15360" title="Transcription (genetics)" label="transcription"/>
<link wikidata="Q224093" start="15433" end="15441" title="promoter (biology)" label="promoter"/>
<link wikidata="Q138864" start="15549" end="15557" title="helicase" label="helicase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243183" start="15836" end="15854" title="Primary transcript" label="Primary transcript"/>
<link wikidata="Q417379" start="15870" end="15878" title="Post-transcriptional modification" label="modified"/>
<link wikidata="Q412148" start="15926" end="15938" title="poly(A) tail" label="poly(A) tail"/>
<link wikidata="Q238406" start="15945" end="15956" title="5&amp;#x27; cap" label="5&amp;#x27; cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243183" start="15981" end="15989" title="pre-mRNA" label="pre-mRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q207551" start="15994" end="16000" title="intron" label="intron"/>
<link wikidata="Q915868" start="16021" end="16032" title="spliceosome" label="spliceosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919111" start="16062" end="16090" title="RNA-dependent RNA polymerase" label="RNA-dependent RNA polymerase"/>
<link wikidata="Q92190862" start="16187" end="16198" title="Orthornavirae" label="RNA viruses"/>
<link wikidata="Q201993" start="16331" end="16347" title="RNA interference" label="RNA interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q207551" start="16448" end="16454" title="Intron" label="Intron"/>
<link wikidata="Q237218" start="16460" end="16467" title="Splicing (genetics)" label="spliced"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243183" start="16475" end="16483" title="pre-mRNA" label="pre-mRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q915868" start="16487" end="16498" title="spliceosome" label="spliceosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q284578" start="16523" end="16540" title="small nuclear RNA" label="small nuclear RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q190012" start="16700" end="16701" title="adenosine" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="Q422538" start="16703" end="16704" title="cytidine" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q422462" start="16706" end="16707" title="guanosine" label="G"/>
<link wikidata="Q422573" start="16712" end="16713" title="uridine" label="U"/>
<link wikidata="Q284416" start="16790" end="16809" title="small nucleolar RNA" label="small nucleolar RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q30869" start="16845" end="16854" title="nucleolus" label="nucleolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234345" start="16859" end="16871" title="Cajal body" label="cajal bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q751911" start="17242" end="17251" title="RNA virus" label="RNA virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="17259" end="17265" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q209917" start="17464" end="17470" title="Viroid" label="Viroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q28774" start="17704" end="17724" title="Reverse transcription" label="reverse transcribing"/>
<link wikidata="Q413988" start="17802" end="17817" title="Retrotransposon" label="Retrotransposon"/>
<link wikidata="Q331839" start="17876" end="17886" title="telomerase" label="telomerase"/>
<link wikidata="Q18031947" start="17899" end="17927" title="Telomerase RNA component" label="RNA that is used as template"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408689" start="17953" end="17975" title="Eukaryotic chromosome structure" label="eukaryotic chromosomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819370" start="18007" end="18026" title="Double-stranded RNA" label="Double-stranded RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="18235" end="18240" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307900" start="18244" end="18271" title="double-stranded RNA viruses" label="double-stranded RNA viruses"/>
<link wikidata="Q203221" start="18316" end="18321" title="siRNA" label="siRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201993" start="18335" end="18351" title="RNA interference" label="RNA interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="18355" end="18364" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q188269" start="18378" end="18388" title="interferon" label="interferon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="18401" end="18411" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q428253" start="18495" end="18515" title="innate immune system" label="innate immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q17113455" start="18728" end="18735" title="Circular RNA" label="circRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q915868" start="18817" end="18828" title="spliceosome" label="spliceosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="19150" end="19161" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q123619" start="19164" end="19176" title="Nucleic acid" label="Nucleic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q116072" start="19205" end="19223" title="Friedrich Miescher" label="Friedrich Miescher"/>
<link wikidata="Q40260" start="19295" end="19302" title="Cell nucleus" label="nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19081" start="19333" end="19344" title="Prokaryote" label="prokaryotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q233957" start="19477" end="19489" title="Severo Ochoa" label="Severo Ochoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="19503" end="19526" title="Nobel Prize in Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q295678" start="19540" end="19555" title="Arthur Kornberg" label="Arthur Kornberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q24780839" start="19671" end="19699" title="polynucleotide phosphorylase" label="polynucleotide phosphorylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q108891" start="20009" end="20025" title="Robert W. Holley" label="Robert W. Holley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450499" start="20054" end="20082" title="List of Nobel laureates in Physiology or Medicine" label="1968 Nobel Prize in Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q107462" start="20096" end="20114" title="Har Gobind Khorana" label="Har Gobind Khorana"/>
<link wikidata="Q110060" start="20119" end="20137" title="Marshall Nirenberg" label="Marshall Nirenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q189308" start="20161" end="20171" title="retrovirus" label="retrovirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28774" start="20178" end="20199" title="reverse transcriptase" label="reverse transcriptase"/>
<link wikidata="Q234949" start="20371" end="20386" title="David Baltimore" label="David Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q109553" start="20388" end="20403" title="Renato Dulbecco" label="Renato Dulbecco"/>
<link wikidata="Q243536" start="20408" end="20420" title="Howard Temin" label="Howard Temin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068397" start="20466" end="20478" title="Walter Fiers" label="Walter Fiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840020" start="20574" end="20591" title="bacteriophage MS2" label="bacteriophage MS2"/>
<link wikidata="Q207551" start="20603" end="20609" title="intron" label="intron"/>
<link wikidata="Q237218" start="20615" end="20627" title="RNA splicing" label="RNA splicing"/>
<link wikidata="Q312977" start="20722" end="20734" title="Philip A. Sharp" label="Philip Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q309816" start="20739" end="20754" title="Richard J. Roberts" label="Richard Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q205858" start="20781" end="20789" title="ribozyme" label="ribozyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q135180" start="20861" end="20872" title="Thomas Cech" label="Thomas Cech"/>
<link wikidata="Q102266" start="20877" end="20890" title="Sidney Altman" label="Sidney Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q161103" start="20923" end="20930" title="Petunia" label="Petunia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201993" start="21038" end="21054" title="RNA interference" label="RNA interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q310899" start="21109" end="21117" title="microRNA" label="microRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q213713" start="21153" end="21164" title="developmental biology" label="development"/>
<link wikidata="Q91703" start="21174" end="21184" title="Caenorhabditis elegans" label="C. elegans"/>
<link wikidata="Q202152" start="21245" end="21256" title="Andrew Z. Fire" label="Andrew Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q206455" start="21261" end="21272" title="Craig Mello" label="Craig Mello"/>
<link wikidata="Q170676" start="21343" end="21357" title="Roger Kornberg" label="Roger Kornberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q203221" start="21472" end="21477" title="siRNA" label="siRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q60061" start="21631" end="21649" title="Venki Ramakrishnan" label="Venki Ramakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q109559" start="21651" end="21667" title="Thomas A. Steitz" label="Thomas A. Steitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426" start="21673" end="21683" title="Ada Yonath" label="Ada Yonath"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="21697" end="21734" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q88608397" start="21750" end="21764" title="Katalin Karikó" label="Katalin Karikó"/>
<link wikidata="Q88608402" start="21769" end="21782" title="Drew Weissman" label="Drew Weissman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689559" start="21816" end="21836" title="Nucleoside analogue" label="modified nucleosides"/>
<link wikidata="Q310067" start="21978" end="21988" title="Carl Woese" label="Carl Woese"/>
<link wikidata="Q407525" start="22205" end="22214" title="RNA world hypothesis" label="RNA world"/>
<link wikidata="Q107749" start="22296" end="22313" title="Volcanic glass" label="basalt lava glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326645" start="22353" end="22364" title="early Earth" label="early Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="22382" end="22385" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q422960" start="22394" end="22404" title="nucleobase" label="nucleobase"/>
<link wikidata="Q182990" start="22417" end="22423" title="uracil" label="uracil"/>
<link wikidata="Q178425" start="22425" end="22433" title="cytosine" label="cytosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q171973" start="22438" end="22445" title="thymine" label="thymine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169" start="22494" end="22505" title="outer space" label="outer space"/>
<link wikidata="Q207722" start="22550" end="22560" title="pyrimidine" label="pyrimidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="22565" end="22581" title="organic compound" label="organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="22600" end="22609" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q207722" start="22612" end="22622" title="Pyrimidine" label="Pyrimidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407212" start="22629" end="22661" title="polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons" label="polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="22724" end="22732" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q50081" start="22761" end="22770" title="red giant" label="red giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="22778" end="22795" title="Cosmic dust" label="interstellar dust"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22866" end="22884" title="Abiogenesis#Producing molecules: prebiotic synthesis" label="prebiotic molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q649112" start="22929" end="22944" title="Galactic Center" label="galactic center"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="22952" end="22968" title="Milky Way Galaxy" label="Milky Way Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q85795487" start="24527" end="24540" title="mRNA vaccines" label="mRNA vaccines"/>
<link wikidata="Q87719492" start="24729" end="24745" title="COVID-19 vaccine" label="COVID-19 vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="24758" end="24775" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15712714" start="24795" end="24817" title="Biomolecular structure" label="Biomolecular structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q751911" start="24820" end="24829" title="RNA virus" label="RNA virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="24832" end="24835" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5866144" start="24838" end="24860" title="History of RNA biology" label="History of RNA Biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595360" start="24863" end="24885" title="List of RNA biologists" label="List of RNA Biologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q43895463" start="24888" end="24899" title="RNA Society" label="RNA Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q178593" start="24902" end="24915" title="Macromolecule" label="Macromolecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277126" start="24918" end="24937" title="RNA-based evolution" label="RNA-based evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q418722" start="24940" end="24947" title="Aptamer" label="Aptamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48997776" start="24950" end="24961" title="RNA origami" label="RNA origami"/>
<link wikidata="Q252857" start="24964" end="24977" title="Transcriptome" label="Transcriptome"/>
<link wikidata="Q407525" start="24980" end="25000" title="RNA world hypothesis" label="RNA world hypothesis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25762" wikidata="Q8729" url="?curid=25762" title="Russian Revolution">
<text>The Russian Revolution was a period of political and social change in Russia, starting in 1917. This period saw Russia abolish its monarchy and adopt a socialist form of government following two successive revolutions and a civil war. It can also be seen as the precursor for the other revolutions that occurred in the aftermath of World War I, such as the German Revolution of 1918–1919. The Russian Revolution was one of the key events of the 20th century.

The Russian Revolution was inaugurated with the February Revolution in early 1917, in the midst of World War I. With the German Empire dealing major defeats on the war front, and increasing logistical problems in the rear causing shortages of bread and grain, the Russian Army was steadily losing morale, with large scale mutiny looming. High officials were convinced that if Tsar Nicholas II abdicated, the unrest would subside. Nicholas agreed and stepped down, ushering in a new provisional government led by the Russian Duma (the parliament).

During the civil unrest, soviet councils were formed by the locals in Petrograd that initially did not oppose the new Provisional Government; however, the Soviets did insist on their influence in the government and control over various militias. By March, Russia had two rival governments. The Provisional Government held state power in military and international affairs, whereas the network of Soviets held more power concerning domestic affairs. Critically, the Soviets held the allegiance of the working class, as well as the growing urban middle class. During this chaotic period, there were frequent mutinies, protests and strikes. Many socialist and other leftist political organizations were competing for influence within the Provisional Government and the Soviets. Notable factions included the Mensheviks, Social Revolutionaries, Anarchists, as well as the Bolsheviks, a far-left party led by Vladimir Lenin.

Initially the Bolsheviks were a marginal faction; however, they won popularity with their program promising peace, land, and bread: cease war with Germany, give land to the peasantry, and end the wartime famine. After assuming power, the Provisional Government chose to continue fighting in spite of near-universal public opposition. Taking advantage of the decision to stay in the war, the Bolsheviks and other socialist factions gained popular support to advance the revolution further.

Responding to widespread discontent in Petrograd, the Provisional Government repressed protestors leading to the July Days. Shortly thereafter, the Bolsheviks merged various workers&#x27; militias loyal to them into the Red Guards, which would be strong enough to seize power. The volatile situation reached its climax with the October Revolution, a Bolshevik armed insurrection by workers and soldiers in Petrograd that overthrew the Provisional Government, thereby seizing state power. The Bolsheviks, acting in the framework of the soviet councils, established their own government and later proclaimed the establishment of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR). Under pressure from German military offensives, the Bolsheviks soon relocated the national capital to Moscow.

The RSFSR began the process of reorganizing the former empire into the world&#x27;s first socialist state, to practice soviet democracy on a national and international scale. Their promise to end Russia&#x27;s participation in the First World War was fulfilled when the Bolshevik leaders signed the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk with Germany in March 1918. To secure the new state, the Bolsheviks established the Cheka, a secret police and revolutionary security service working to uncover, punish, and eliminate those considered to be &quot;enemies of the people&quot; in campaigns called the Red Terror, consciously modeled on those of the French Revolution.

Although the Bolsheviks held large support in urban areas, they had many foreign and domestic enemies that refused to recognize their government. Russia erupted into a bloody civil war, which pitted the Reds (Bolsheviks), against their enemies, which included non-Russian independence movements, anti-Bolshevik socialist parties, anarchists, monarchists and liberals; the latter two parties strongly supported the Russian White movement which was led mainly by right-leaning officers of the Russian Empire and was generally seen as fighting for the restoration of the old imperial order. In response, the Bolshevik commissar Leon Trotsky began organizing workers&#x27; militias loyal to the Bolsheviks into the Red Army. While key events occurred in Moscow and Petrograd, every city in the empire was convulsed, including the provinces of national minorities, and in the rural areas peasants took over and redistributed land.

As the war progressed, the RSFSR began to establish Soviet power in the newly independent republics that seceded from the Russian Empire. The RSFSR initially focused its efforts on the newly independent republics of Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, and Ukraine. Wartime cohesion and intervention from foreign powers prompted the RSFSR to begin unifying these nations under one flag and created the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR). Historians generally consider the end of the revolutionary period to be in 1922, when the Russian Civil War concluded with the defeat of the White Army and most separatist factions, leading to mass emigration from Russia. The victorious Bolshevik Party reconstituted itself into the All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) and would remain in power for the next six decades.

==Background==
The Russian Revolution of 1905 was a major factor contributing to the cause of the Revolutions of 1917. The events of Bloody Sunday triggered nationwide protests and soldier mutinies. A council of workers called the St. Petersburg Soviet was created in this chaos. While the 1905 Revolution was ultimately crushed, and the leaders of the St. Petersburg Soviet were arrested, this laid the groundwork for the later Petrograd Soviet and other revolutionary movements during the leadup to 1917. The 1905 Revolution also led to the creation of a Duma (parliament) that would later form the Provisional Government following February 1917.

Russia&#x27;s poor performance in 1914–1915 prompted growing complaints directed at Tsar Nicholas II and the Romanov family. A short wave of patriotic nationalism ended in the face of defeats and poor conditions on the Eastern Front of World War I. The Tsar made the situation worse by taking personal control of the Imperial Russian Army in 1915, a challenge far beyond his skills. He was now held personally responsible for Russia&#x27;s continuing defeats and losses. In addition, Tsarina Alexandra, left to rule while the Tsar commanded at the front, was German born, leading to suspicion of collusion, only to be exacerbated by rumors relating to her relationship with the controversial mystic Grigori Rasputin. Rasputin&#x27;s influence led to disastrous ministerial appointments and corruption, resulting in a worsening of conditions within Russia.

After the entry of the Ottoman Empire on the side of the Central Powers in October 1914, Russia was deprived of a major trade route to the Mediterranean Sea, which worsened the economic crisis and the munitions shortages. Meanwhile, Germany was able to produce great amounts of munitions whilst constantly fighting on two major battlefronts.
The conditions during the war resulted in a devastating loss of morale within the Russian army and the general population of Russia itself. This was particularly apparent in the cities, owing to a lack of food in response to the disruption of agriculture. Food scarcity had become a considerable problem in Russia, but the cause of this did not lie in any failure of the harvests, which had not been significantly altered during wartime. The indirect reason was that the government, in order to finance the war, printed millions of rouble notes, and by 1917, inflation had made prices increase up to four times what they had been in 1914. Farmers were consequently faced with a higher cost of living, but with little increase in income. As a result, they tended to hoard their grain and to revert to subsistence farming. Thus the cities were constantly short of food. At the same time, rising prices led to demands for higher wages in the factories, and in January and February 1916, revolutionary propaganda, in part aided by German funds, led to widespread strikes. This resulted in growing criticism of the government, including an increased participation of workers in revolutionary parties.

Liberal parties too had an increased platform to voice their complaints, as the initial fervor of the war resulted in the Tsarist government creating a variety of political organizations. In July 1915, a Central War Industries Committee was established under the chairmanship of a prominent Octobrist, Alexander Guchkov (1862–1936), including ten workers&#x27; representatives. The Petrograd Mensheviks agreed to join despite the objections of their leaders abroad. All this activity gave renewed encouragement to political ambitions, and in September 1915, a combination of Octobrists and Kadets in the Duma demanded the forming of a responsible government, which the Tsar rejected.

All these factors had given rise to a sharp loss of confidence in the regime, even within the ruling class, growing throughout the war. Early in 1916, Guchkov discussed with senior army officers and members of the Central War Industries Committee about a possible coup to force the abdication of the Tsar. In December, a small group of nobles assassinated Rasputin, and in January 1917 the Tsar&#x27;s cousin, Grand Duke Nicholas, was asked indirectly by Prince Lvov whether he would be prepared to take over the throne from his nephew, Tsar Nicholas II. None of these incidents were in themselves the immediate cause of the February Revolution, but they do help to explain why the monarchy survived only a few days after it had broken out.

Meanwhile, Socialist Revolutionary leaders in exile, many of them living in Switzerland, had been the glum spectators of the collapse of international socialist solidarity. French and German Social Democrats had voted in favour of their respective governments&#x27; war efforts. Georgi Plekhanov in Paris had adopted a violently anti-German stand, while Alexander Parvus supported the German war effort as the best means of ensuring a revolution in Russia. The Mensheviks largely maintained that Russia had the right to defend herself against Germany, although Julius Martov (a prominent Menshevik), now on the left of his group, demanded an end to the war and a settlement on the basis of national self-determination, with no annexations or indemnities.

It was these views of Martov that predominated in a manifesto drawn up by Leon Trotsky (at the time a Menshevik) at a conference in Zimmerwald, attended by 35 Socialist leaders in September 1915. Inevitably, Vladimir Lenin supported by Zinoviev and Radek, strongly contested them. Their attitudes became known as the Zimmerwald Left. Lenin rejected both the defence of Russia and the cry for peace. Since the autumn of 1914, he had insisted that &quot;from the standpoint of the working class and of the labouring masses the lesser evil would be the defeat of the Tsarist Monarchy&quot;; the war must be turned into a civil war of the proletarian soldiers against their own governments, and if a proletarian victory should emerge from this in Russia, then their duty would be to wage a revolutionary war for the liberation of the masses throughout Europe.

===Economic and social changes===
An elementary theory of property, believed by many peasants, was that land should belong to those who work on it. At the same time, peasant life and culture was changing constantly. Change was facilitated by the physical movement of growing numbers of peasant villagers who migrated to and from industrial and urban environments, but also by the introduction of city culture into the village through material goods, the press, and word of mouth.

Workers also had good reasons for discontent: overcrowded housing with often deplorable sanitary conditions, long hours at work (on the eve of the war, a 10-hour workday six days a week was the average and many were working 11–12 hours a day by 1916), constant risk of injury and death from poor safety and sanitary conditions, harsh discipline (not only rules and fines, but foremen&#x27;s fists), and inadequate wages (made worse after 1914 by steep wartime increases in the cost of living). At the same time, urban industrial life had its benefits, though these could be just as dangerous (in terms of social and political stability) as the hardships. There were many encouragements to expect more from life. Acquiring new skills gave many workers a sense of self-respect and confidence, heightening expectations and desires. Living in cities, workers encountered material goods they had never seen in villages. Most importantly, workers living in cities were exposed to new ideas about the social and political order.

The social causes of the Russian Revolution can be derived from centuries of oppression of the lower classes by the Tsarist regime and Nicholas&#x27;s failures in World War I. While rural agrarian peasants had been emancipated from serfdom in 1861, they still resented paying redemption payments to the state, and demanded communal tender of the land they worked. The problem was further compounded by the failure of Sergei Witte&#x27;s land reforms of the early 20th century. Increasing peasant disturbances and sometimes actual revolts occurred, with the goal of securing ownership of the land they worked. Russia consisted mainly of poor farming peasants and substantial inequality of land ownership, with 1.5% of the population owning 25% of the land.

The rapid industrialization of Russia also resulted in urban overcrowding and poor conditions for urban industrial workers (as mentioned above). Between 1890 and 1910, the population of the capital, Saint Petersburg, nearly doubled from 1,033,600 to 1,905,600, with Moscow experiencing similar growth. This created a new &#x27;proletariat&#x27; which, due to being crowded together in the cities, was much more likely to protest and go on strike than the peasantry had been in previous times. One 1904 survey found that an average of 16 people shared each apartment in Saint Petersburg, with six people per room. There was also no running water, and piles of human waste were a threat to the health of the workers. The poor conditions only aggravated the situation, with the number of strikes and incidents of public disorder rapidly increasing in the years shortly before World War I. Because of late industrialization, Russia&#x27;s workers were highly concentrated. By 1914, 40% of Russian workers were employed in factories of 1,000+ workers (32% in 1901). 42% worked in 100–1,000 worker enterprises, 18% in 1–100 worker businesses (in the US, 1914, the figures were 18%, 47% and 35% respectively).
World War I added to the chaos. Conscription across Russia resulted in unwilling citizens being sent off to war. The vast demand for factory production of war supplies and workers resulted in many more labor riots and strikes. Conscription stripped skilled workers from the cities, who had to be replaced with unskilled peasants. When famine began to hit due to the poor railway system, workers abandoned the cities in droves seeking food. Finally, the soldiers themselves, who suffered from a lack of equipment and protection from the elements, began to turn against the Tsar. This was mainly because, as the war progressed, many of the officers who were loyal to the Tsar were killed, being replaced by discontented conscripts from the major cities who had little loyalty to the Tsar.

===Political issues===
Many sections of the country had reason to be dissatisfied with the existing autocracy. Nicholas II was a deeply conservative ruler and maintained a strict authoritarian system. Individuals and society in general were expected to show self-restraint, devotion to community, deference to the social hierarchy and a sense of duty to the country. Religious faith helped bind all of these tenets together as a source of comfort and reassurance in the face of difficult conditions and as a means of political authority exercised through the clergy. Perhaps more than any other modern monarch, Nicholas II attached his fate and the future of his dynasty to the notion of the ruler as a saintly and infallible father to his people.

This vision of the Romanov monarchy left him unaware of the state of his country. With a firm belief that his power to rule was granted by Divine Right, Nicholas assumed that the Russian people were devoted to him with unquestioning loyalty. This ironclad belief rendered Nicholas unwilling to allow the progressive reforms that might have alleviated the suffering of the Russian people. Even after the 1905 Revolution spurred the Tsar to decree limited civil rights and democratic representation, he worked to limit even these liberties in order to preserve the ultimate authority of the crown.

Despite constant oppression, the desire of the people for democratic participation in government decisions was strong. Since the Age of Enlightenment, Russian intellectuals had promoted Enlightenment ideals such as the dignity of the individual and the rectitude of democratic representation. These ideals were championed most vociferously by Russia&#x27;s liberals, although populists, Marxists, and anarchists also claimed to support democratic reforms. A growing opposition movement had begun to challenge the Romanov monarchy openly well before the turmoil of World War I.

Dissatisfaction with Russian autocracy culminated in the huge national upheaval that followed the Bloody Sunday massacre of January 1905, in which hundreds of unarmed protesters were shot by the Tsar&#x27;s troops. Workers responded to the massacre with a crippling general strike, forcing Nicholas to put forth the October Manifesto, which established a democratically elected parliament (the State Duma). Although the Tsar accepted the 1906 Fundamental State Laws one year later, he subsequently dismissed the first two Dumas when they proved uncooperative. Unfulfilled hopes of democracy fueled revolutionary ideas and violent outbursts targeted at the monarchy.

One of the Tsar&#x27;s principal rationales for risking war in 1914 was his desire to restore the prestige that Russia had lost amid the debacles of the Russo-Japanese War (1904–1905). Nicholas also sought to foster a greater sense of national unity with a war against a common and old enemy. The Russian Empire was an agglomeration of diverse ethnicities that had demonstrated significant signs of disunity in the years before the First World War. Nicholas believed in part that the shared peril and tribulation of a foreign war would mitigate the social unrest over the persistent issues of poverty, inequality, and inhumane working conditions. Instead of restoring Russia&#x27;s political and military standing, World War I led to the slaughter of Russian troops and military defeats that undermined both the monarchy and Russian society to the point of collapse.

===World War I===

The outbreak of war in August 1914 initially served to quiet the prevalent social and political protests, focusing hostilities against a common external enemy, but this patriotic unity did not last long. As the war dragged on inconclusively, war-weariness gradually took its toll. Although many ordinary Russians joined anti-German demonstrations in the first few weeks of the war, hostility toward the Kaiser and the desire to defend their land and their lives did not necessarily translate into enthusiasm for the Tsar or the government.

Russia&#x27;s first major battle of the war was a disaster; in the 1914 Battle of Tannenberg, over 30,000 Russian troops were killed or wounded and 90,000 captured, while Germany suffered just 12,000 casualties. However, Austro-Hungarian forces allied to Germany were driven back deep into the Galicia region by the end of the year. In the autumn of 1915, Nicholas had taken direct command of the army, personally overseeing Russia&#x27;s main theatre of war and leaving his ambitious but incapable wife Alexandra in charge of the government. Reports of corruption and incompetence in the Imperial government began to emerge, and the growing influence of Grigori Rasputin in the Imperial family was widely resented.

In 1915, things took a critical turn for the worse when Germany shifted its focus of attack to the Eastern Front. The superior German Army – better led, better trained, and better supplied – was quite effective against the ill-equipped Russian forces, driving the Russians out of Galicia, as well as Russian Poland during the Gorlice–Tarnów Offensive campaign. By the end of October 1916, Russia had lost between 1,600,000 and 1,800,000 soldiers, with an additional 2,000,000 prisoners of war and 1,000,000 missing, all making up a total of nearly 5,000,000 men.

These staggering losses played a definite role in the mutinies and revolts that began to occur. In 1916, reports of fraternizing with the enemy began to circulate. Soldiers went hungry, lacked shoes, munitions, and even weapons. Rampant discontent lowered morale, which was further undermined by a series of military defeats.

Casualty rates were the most vivid sign of this disaster. By the end of 1914, only five months into the war, around 390,000 Russian men had lost their lives and nearly 1,000,000 were injured. Far sooner than expected, inadequately trained recruits were called for active duty, a process repeated throughout the war as staggering losses continued to mount. The officer class also saw remarkable changes, especially within the lower echelons, which were quickly filled with soldiers rising up through the ranks. These men, usually of peasant or working-class backgrounds, were to play a large role in the politicization of the troops in 1917.

The army quickly ran short of rifles and ammunition (as well as uniforms and food), and by mid-1915, men were being sent to the front bearing no arms. It was hoped that they could equip themselves with arms recovered from fallen soldiers, of both sides, on the battlefields. The soldiers did not feel as if they were valuable, rather they felt as if they were expendable.

By the spring of 1915, the army was in steady retreat, which was not always orderly; desertion, plundering, and chaotic flight were not uncommon. By 1916, however, the situation had improved in many respects. Russian troops stopped retreating, and there were even some modest successes in the offensives that were staged that year, albeit at great loss of life. Also, the problem of shortages was largely solved by a major effort to increase domestic production. Nevertheless, by the end of 1916, morale among soldiers was even worse than it had been during the great retreat of 1915. The fortunes of war may have improved, but the fact of war remained which continually took Russian lives. The crisis in morale (as was argued by Allan Wildman, a leading historian of the Russian army in war and revolution) &quot;was rooted fundamentally in the feeling of utter despair that the slaughter would ever end and that anything resembling victory could be achieved.&quot;

The war did not only devastate soldiers. By the end of 1915, there were manifold signs that the economy was breaking down under the heightened strain of wartime demand. The main problems were food shortages and rising prices. Inflation dragged incomes down at an alarmingly rapid rate, and shortages made it difficult for an individual to sustain oneself. These shortages were a problem especially in the capital, St. Petersburg, where distance from supplies and poor transportation networks made matters particularly worse. Shops closed early or entirely for lack of bread, sugar, meat, and other provisions, and lines lengthened massively for what remained. Conditions became increasingly difficult to afford food and physically obtain it.

Strikes increased steadily from the middle of 1915, and so did crime, but, for the most part, people suffered and endured, scouring the city for food. Working-class women in St. Petersburg reportedly spent about forty hours a week in food lines, begging, turning to prostitution or crime, tearing down wooden fences to keep stoves heated for warmth, and continued to resent the rich.

Government officials responsible for public order worried about how long people&#x27;s patience would last. A report by the St. Petersburg branch of the security police, the Okhrana, in October 1916, warned bluntly of &quot;the possibility in the near future of riots by the lower classes of the empire enraged by the burdens of daily existence.&quot;

Tsar Nicholas was blamed for all of these crises, and what little support he had left began to crumble. As discontent grew, the State Duma issued a warning to Nicholas in November 1916, stating that, inevitably, a terrible disaster would grip the country unless a constitutional form of government was put in place. Nicholas ignored these warnings and Russia&#x27;s Tsarist regime collapsed a few months later during the February Revolution of 1917. One year later, the Tsar and his entire family were executed.

== February Revolution ==


At the beginning of February, Petrograd workers began several strikes and demonstrations. On , Putilov, Petrograd&#x27;s largest industrial plant was closed by a workers&#x27; strike. The next day, a series of meetings and rallies were held for International Women&#x27;s Day, which gradually turned into economic and political gatherings. Demonstrations were organised to demand bread, and these were supported by the industrial working force who considered them a reason for continuing the strikes. The women workers marched to nearby factories bringing out over 50,000 workers on strike. By , virtually every industrial enterprise in Petrograd had been shut down, together with many commercial and service enterprises. Students, white-collar workers, and teachers joined the workers in the streets and at public meetings.

To quell the riots, the Tsar looked to the army. At least 180,000 troops were available in the capital, but most were either untrained or injured. Historian Ian Beckett suggests around 12,000 could be regarded as reliable, but even these proved reluctant to move in on the crowd, since it included so many women. It was for this reason that on , when the Tsar ordered the army to suppress the rioting by force, troops began to revolt. Although few actively joined the rioting, many officers were either shot or went into hiding; the ability of the garrison to hold back the protests was all but nullified, symbols of the Tsarist regime were rapidly torn down around the city, and governmental authority in the capital collapsed – not helped by the fact that Nicholas had prorogued the Duma that morning, leaving it with no legal authority to act. The response of the Duma, urged on by the liberal bloc, was to establish a Temporary Committee to restore law and order; meanwhile, the socialist parties established the Petrograd Soviet to represent workers and soldiers. The remaining loyal units switched allegiance the next day.

The Tsar directed the royal train back towards Petrograd, which was stopped on , by a group of revolutionaries at Malaya Vishera. When the Tsar finally arrived at Pskov, the Army Chief Nikolai Ruzsky, and the Duma deputies Alexander Guchkov and Vasily Shulgin suggested in unison that he abdicate the throne. He did so on , on behalf of himself, and then, having taken advice on behalf of his son, the Tsarevich. Nicholas nominated his brother, the Grand Duke Michael Alexandrovich, to succeed him. But the Grand Duke realised that he would have little support as ruler, so he declined the crown on , stating that he would take it only if that was the consensus of democratic action. Six days later, Nicholas, no longer Tsar and addressed with contempt by the sentries as &quot;Nicholas Romanov&quot;, was reunited with his family at the Alexander Palace at Tsarskoye Selo. He was placed under house arrest with his family by the Provisional Government.

The immediate effect of the February Revolution was a widespread atmosphere of elation and excitement in Petrograd. On , a provisional government was announced. The center-left was well represented, and the government was initially chaired by a liberal aristocrat, Prince Georgy Yevgenievich Lvov, a member of the Constitutional Democratic Party (KD). The socialists had formed their rival body, the Petrograd Soviet (or workers&#x27; council) four days earlier. The Petrograd Soviet and the Provisional Government competed for power over Russia.

== Dual power: &quot;Dvoyevlastiye&quot;==

The effective power of the Provisional Government was challenged by the authority of an institution that claimed to represent the will of workers and soldiers and could, in fact, mobilize and control these groups during the early months of the revolution – the Petrograd Soviet Council of Workers&#x27; Deputies. The model for the Soviets were workers&#x27; councils that had been established in scores of Russian cities during the 1905 Revolution. In February 1917, striking workers elected deputies to represent them and socialist activists began organizing a citywide council to unite these deputies with representatives of the socialist parties. On 27 February, socialist Duma deputies, mainly Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries, took the lead in organizing a citywide council. The Petrograd Soviet met in the Tauride Palace, room 13, permitted by the Provisional Government.

The leaders of the Petrograd Soviet believed that they represented particular classes of the population, not the whole nation. They also believed Russia was not ready for socialism. They viewed their role as limited to pressuring hesitant &quot;bourgeoisie&quot; to rule and to introduce extensive democratic reforms in Russia (the replacement of the monarchy by a republic, guaranteed civil rights, a democratic police and army, abolition of religious and ethnic discrimination, preparation of elections to a constituent assembly, and so on). They met in the same building as the emerging Provisional Government not to compete with the Duma Committee for state power, but to best exert pressure on the new government, to act, in other words, as a popular democratic lobby.

The relationship between these two major powers was complex from the beginning and would shape the politics of 1917. The representatives of the Provisional Government agreed to &quot;take into account the opinions of the Soviet of Workers&#x27; Deputies&quot;, though they were also determined to prevent interference which would create an unacceptable situation of dual power. In fact, this was precisely what was being created, though this &quot;dual power&quot; (dvoyevlastiye) was the result less of the actions or attitudes of the leaders of these two institutions than of actions outside their control, especially the ongoing social movement taking place on the streets of Russia&#x27;s cities, factories, shops, barracks, villages, and in the trenches.

A series of political crises – see the chronology below – in the relationship between population and government and between the Provisional Government and the Soviets (which developed into a nationwide movement with a national leadership). The All-Russian Central Executive Committee of Soviets (VTsIK) undermined the authority of the Provisional Government but also of the moderate socialist leaders of the Soviets. Although the Soviet leadership initially refused to participate in the &quot;bourgeois&quot; Provisional Government, Alexander Kerensky, a young, popular lawyer and a member of the Socialist Revolutionary Party (SRP), agreed to join the new cabinet, and became an increasingly central figure in the government, eventually taking leadership of the Provisional Government. As minister of war and later Prime Minister, Kerensky promoted freedom of speech, released thousands of political prisoners, continued the war effort, even organizing another offensive (which, however, was no more successful than its predecessors). Nevertheless, Kerensky still faced several great challenges, highlighted by the soldiers, urban workers, and peasants, who claimed that they had gained nothing by the revolution:
* Other political groups were trying to undermine him.
* Heavy military losses were being suffered on the front.
* The soldiers were dissatisfied and demoralised and had started to defect. (On arrival back in Russia, these soldiers were either imprisoned or sent straight back into the front.)
* There was enormous discontent with Russia&#x27;s involvement in the war, and many were calling for an end to it.
* There were great shortages of food and supplies, which was difficult to remedy because of the wartime economic conditions.

The political group that proved most troublesome for Kerensky, and would eventually overthrow him, was the Bolshevik Party, led by Vladimir Lenin. Lenin had been living in exile in neutral Switzerland and, due to democratization of politics after the February Revolution, which legalized formerly banned political parties, he perceived the opportunity for his Marxist revolution. Although return to Russia had become a possibility, the war made it logistically difficult. Eventually, German officials arranged for Lenin to pass through their territory, hoping that his activities would weaken Russia or even – if the Bolsheviks came to power – lead to Russia&#x27;s withdrawal from the war. Lenin and his associates, however, had to agree to travel to Russia in a sealed train: Germany would not take the chance that he would foment revolution in Germany. After passing through the front, he arrived in Petrograd in April 1917.

On the way to Russia, Lenin prepared the April Theses, which outlined central Bolshevik policies. These included that the Soviets take power (as seen in the slogan &quot;all power to the Soviets&quot;) and denouncing the liberals and social revolutionaries in the Provisional Government, forbidding co-operation with it. Many Bolsheviks, however, had supported the Provisional Government, including Lev Kamenev.

With Lenin&#x27;s arrival, the popularity of the Bolsheviks increased steadily. Over the course of the spring, public dissatisfaction with the Provisional Government and the war, in particular among workers, soldiers and peasants, pushed these groups to radical parties. Despite growing support for the Bolsheviks, buoyed by maxims that called most famously for &quot;all power to the Soviets&quot;, the party held very little real power in the moderate-dominated Petrograd Soviet. In fact, historians such as Sheila Fitzpatrick have asserted that Lenin&#x27;s exhortations for the Soviet Council to take power were intended to arouse indignation both with the Provisional Government, whose policies were viewed as conservative, and the Soviets themselves, which were viewed as subservients to the conservative government. By some other historians&#x27; accounts, Lenin and his followers were unprepared for how their groundswell of support, especially among influential worker and soldier groups, would translate into real power in the summer of 1917.

On 18 June, the Provisional Government launched an attack against Germany that failed miserably. Soon after, the government ordered soldiers to go to the front, reneging on a promise. The soldiers refused to follow the new orders. The arrival of radical Kronstadt sailors – who had tried and executed many officers, including one admiral – further fueled the growing revolutionary atmosphere. Sailors and soldiers, along with Petrograd workers, took to the streets in violent protest, calling for &quot;all power to the Soviets&quot;. The revolt, however, was disowned by Lenin and the Bolshevik leaders and dissipated within a few days. In the aftermath, Lenin fled to Finland under threat of arrest while Trotsky, among other prominent Bolsheviks, was arrested. The July Days confirmed the popularity of the anti-war, radical Bolsheviks, but their unpreparedness at the moment of revolt was an embarrassing gaffe that lost them support among their main constituent groups: soldiers and workers.

The Bolshevik failure in the July Days proved temporary. The Bolsheviks had undergone a spectacular growth in membership. Whereas, in February 1917, the Bolsheviks were limited to only 24,000 members, by September 1917 there were 200,000 members of the Bolshevik faction. Previously, the Bolsheviks had been in the minority in the two leading cities of RussiaSt. Petersburg and Moscow behind the Mensheviks and the Socialist Revolutionaries, by September the Bolsheviks were in the majority in both cities. Furthermore, the Bolshevik-controlled Moscow Regional Bureau of the Party also controlled the Party organizations of the 13 provinces around Moscow. These 13 provinces held 37% of Russia&#x27;s population and 20% of the membership of the Bolshevik faction.

In August, poor and misleading communication led General Lavr Kornilov, the recently appointed Supreme Commander of Russian military forces, to believe that the Petrograd government had already been captured by radicals, or was in serious danger thereof. In response, he ordered troops to Petrograd to pacify the city. To secure his position, Kerensky had to ask for Bolshevik assistance. He also sought help from the Petrograd Soviet, which called upon armed Red Guards to &quot;defend the revolution&quot;. The Kornilov Affair failed largely due to the efforts of the Bolsheviks, whose influence over railroad and telegraph workers proved vital in stopping the movement of troops. With his coup failing, Kornilov surrendered and was relieved of his position. The Bolsheviks&#x27; role in stopping the attempted coup further strengthened their position.

In early September, the Petrograd Soviet freed all jailed Bolsheviks and Trotsky became chairman of the Petrograd Soviet. Growing numbers of socialists and lower-class Russians viewed the government less as a force in support of their needs and interests. The Bolsheviks benefited as the only major organized opposition party that had refused to compromise with the Provisional Government, and they benefited from growing frustration and even disgust with other parties, such as the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries, who stubbornly refused to break with the idea of national unity across all classes.
In Finland, Lenin had worked on his book &quot;State and Revolution&quot; and continued to lead his party, writing newspaper articles and policy decrees. By October, he returned to Petrograd (present-day St. Petersburg), aware that the increasingly radical city presented him no legal danger and a second opportunity for revolution. Recognising the strength of the Bolsheviks, Lenin began pressing for the immediate overthrow of the Kerensky government by the Bolsheviks. Lenin was of the opinion that taking power should occur in both St. Petersburg and Moscow simultaneously, parenthetically stating that it made no difference which city rose up first. The Bolshevik Central Committee drafted a resolution, calling for the dissolution of the Provisional Government in favor of the Petrograd Soviet. The resolution was passed 10–2 (Lev Kamenev and Grigory Zinoviev prominently dissenting) promoting the October Revolution.

==October Revolution==

The October Revolution, which unfolded on Wednesday 7 November 1917 according to the Gregorian calendar and on Wednesday 25 October according to the Julian calendar in use under tsarist Russia, was organized by the Bolshevik party. Lenin did not have any direct role in the revolution and he was hiding for his personal safety. However, in late October, Lenin secretly and at great personal risk entered Petrograd and attended a private gathering of the Bolshevik Central Committee on the evening of 23 October. The Revolutionary Military Committee established by the Bolshevik party was organizing the insurrection and Leon Trotsky was the chairman. 50,000 workers had passed a resolution in favour of Bolshevik demand for transfer of power to the soviets. However, Lenin played a crucial role in the debate in the leadership of the Bolshevik party for a revolutionary insurrection as the party in the autumn of 1917 received a majority in the soviets. An ally in the left fraction of the Revolutionary-Socialist Party, with huge support among the peasants who opposed Russia&#x27;s participation in the war, supported the slogan &#x27;All power to the Soviets&#x27;. The initial stage of the October Revolution which involved the assault on Petrograd occurred largely without any human casualties.
Liberal and monarchist forces, loosely organized into the White Army, immediately went to war against the Bolsheviks&#x27; Red Army, in a series of battles that would become known as the Russian Civil War. This did not happen in 1917. The Civil War began in early 1918 with domestic anti-Bolshevik forces confronting the nascent Red Army. In autumn of 1918 Allied countries needed to block German access to Russian supplies. They sent troops to support the &quot;Whites&quot; with supplies of weapons, ammunition and logistic equipment being sent from the main Western countries but this was not at all coordinated. Germany did not participate in the civil war as it surrendered to the Allied.

The provisional government with its second and third coalition was led by a right wing fraction of the Socialist-Revolutionary party, SR. This non-elected provisional government faced the revolutionary situation and the growing mood against the war by avoiding elections to the state Duma. However, the October revolution forced the political parties behind the newly dissolved provisional government to move and move fast for immediate elections. All happened so fast that the left SR fraction did not have time to reach out and be represented in ballots of the SR party which was part of the coalition in the provisional government. This non-elected government supported continuation of the war on the side of the allied forces. The elections to the State Duma 25 November 1917 therefore did not mirror the true political situation among peasants even if we don&#x27;t know how the outcome would be if the anti-war left SR fraction had a fair chance to challenge the party leaders. In the elections, the Bolshevik party received 25% of the votes and the Socialist-Revolutionaries as much as 58%. It is possible the left SR had a good chance to reach more than 25% of the votes and thereby legitimate the October revolution but we can only guess.

Lenin did not believe that a socialist revolution necessarily presupposed a fully developed capitalist economy. A semi-capitalist country would suffice and Russia had a working class base of 5% of the population.

Though Lenin was the leader of the Bolshevik Party, it has been argued that since Lenin was not present during the actual takeover of the Winter Palace, it was really Trotsky&#x27;s organization and direction that led the revolution, merely spurred by the motivation Lenin instigated within his party. Bolshevik figures such as Anatoly Lunacharsky, Moisei Uritsky and Dmitry Manuilsky agreed that Lenin’s influence on the Bolshevik party was decisive but the October insurrection was carried out according to Trotsky’s, not to Lenin’s plan.

Critics on the Right have long argued that the financial and logistical assistance of German intelligence via their key agent, Alexander Parvus was a key component as well, though historians are divided, since there is little evidence supporting that claim.

Soviet membership was initially freely elected, but many members of the Socialist Revolutionary Party, anarchists, and other leftists created opposition to the Bolsheviks through the Soviets themselves. The elections to the Russian Constituent Assembly took place 25 November 1917. The Bolsheviks gained 25% of the vote. When it became clear that the Bolsheviks had little support outside of the industrialized areas of Saint Petersburg and Moscow, they simply barred non-Bolsheviks from membership in the Soviets. The Bolsheviks dissolved the Constituent Assembly in January 1918.

== Russian Civil War ==

The October Revolution led by the Bolsheviks was not recognized by variety of social and political groups, including army officers and cossacks, the &quot;bourgeoisie&quot; and the landowners, and political groups ranging from the far Right to the moderate socialists, the Socialist Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks, who opposed the drastic restructuring championed by the Bolsheviks following the collapse of the Provisional Government.

The Russian Civil War, which broke out in the months following the revolution, resulted in the deaths and suffering of millions of people regardless of their political orientation. The war was fought mainly between the Red Army (&quot;Reds&quot;), consisting of the Bolsheviks and the supporters of the Soviets, and the White movement (&quot;Whites&quot;), and their loosely allied &quot;White Armies&quot; led mainly by the right-leaning and conservative officers of the Russian Empire and the Cossacks and supported by the classes which lost their power and privileges with the Bolshevik revolution; the Civil War also included armed conflicts with nationalist movements for independence, armed struggle and terrorism by anti-Bolshevik socialists and anarchists, and uprisings of the peasants who organized themselves into the &quot;Green armies&quot;. Although the views within the Russian Whites ranged from from monarchism to socialism, the Whites generally preferred the Russian Empire to the revolution, and they were commonly seen as restorers of the old order as they fought the movements of the non-Russian nationalities in favour of &quot;indivisible Russia&quot; and opposed the land reform and defended the property rights of the upper classes; the socialists who opposed both factions saw the rule of the Whites (a military dictatorship headed by Alexander Kolchak and by the commanders of the White forces) as a right-wing dictatorship. The Russian Whites had backing from other countries such as the United Kingdom, France, the United States, and Japan, while the Reds possessed internal support, proving to be much more effective. Though the Allied nations, using external interference, provided substantial military aid to the Whites, they were ultimately defeated.

The Bolsheviks firstly assumed power in Petrograd, expanding their rule outwards. They eventually reached the Easterly Siberian Russian coast in Vladivostok, four years after the war began, an occupation that is believed to have ended all significant military campaigns in the nation. Less than one year later, the last area controlled by the White Army, the Ayano-Maysky District, directly to the north of the Krai containing Vladivostok, was given up when General Anatoly Pepelyayev capitulated in 1923.

Several revolts were initiated against the Bolsheviks and their army near the end of the war, notably the Kronstadt Rebellion. This was a naval mutiny engineered by Soviet Baltic sailors, former Red Army soldiers, and the people of Kronstadt. This armed uprising was fought against the antagonizing Bolshevik economic policies that farmers were subjected to, including seizures of grain crops by the Communists. This all amounted to large-scale discontent. When delegates representing the Kronstadt sailors arrived at Petrograd for negotiations, they raised 15 demands primarily pertaining to the Russian right to freedom. The Government firmly denounced the rebellions and labelled the requests as a reminder of the Social Revolutionaries, a political party that was popular among Soviets before Lenin, but refused to cooperate with the Bolshevik Army. The Government then responded with an armed suppression of these revolts and suffered ten thousand casualties before entering the city of Kronstadt. This ended the rebellions fairly quickly, causing many of the rebels to flee seeking political exile.

During the Civil War, Nestor Makhno led a Ukrainian anarchist movement. Makhno&#x27;s Insurgent Army allied to the Bolsheviks thrice, with one of the powers ending the alliance each time. However, a Bolshevik force under Mikhail Frunze destroyed the Makhnovshchina, when the Makhnovists refused to merge into the Red Army. In addition, the so-called &quot;Green Army&quot; (peasants defending their property against the opposing forces) played a secondary role in the war, mainly in Ukraine.

=== Revolutionary tribunals ===
Revolutionary tribunals were present during both the Revolution and the Civil War, intended for the purpose of combatting forces of counter-revolution. At the Civil War&#x27;s zenith, it is reported that upwards of 200,000 cases were investigated by approximately 200 tribunals. These tribunals established themselves more so from the Cheka as a more moderate force that acted under the banner of revolutionary justice, rather than a utilizer of strict brute force as the former did. However, these tribunals did come with their own set of inefficiencies, such as responding to cases in a matter of months and not having a concrete definition of &quot;counter-revolution&quot; that was determined on a case-by-case basis. The &quot;Decree on Revolutionary Tribunals&quot; used by the People&#x27;s Commissar of Justice, states in article 2 that &quot;In fixing the penalty, the Revolutionary Tribunal shall be guided by the circumstances of the case and the dictates of the revolutionary conscience.&quot; Revolutionary tribunals ultimately demonstrated that a form of justice was still prevalent in Russian society where the Russian Provisional Government failed. This, in part, triggered the political transition of the October Revolution and the Civil War that followed in its aftermath.

==Murder of the imperial family==
The Bolsheviks murdered the Tsar and his family on 16 July 1918. In early March 1917, the Provisional Government had placed Nicholas and his family under house arrest in the Alexander Palace at Tsarskoye Selo, south of Petrograd. But in August 1917, they evacuated the Romanovs to Tobolsk in the Urals to protect them from the rising tide of revolution. After the Bolsheviks came to power in October 1917, the conditions of their imprisonment grew stricter and talk of putting Nicholas on trial increased. In April and May 1918, the looming civil war led the Bolsheviks to move the family to the stronghold of Yekaterinburg.

During the early morning of 16 July, Nicholas, Alexandra, their children, their physician, and several servants were taken into the basement and shot. According to Edvard Radzinsky and Dmitrii Volkogonov, the order came directly from Lenin and Yakov Sverdlov in Moscow. However, this claim has never been confirmed. The murder may have been carried out on the initiative of local Bolshevik officials, or it may have been an option pre-approved in Moscow as White troops were rapidly approaching Yekaterinburg. Radzinsky noted that Lenin&#x27;s bodyguard personally delivered the telegram ordering the killing and that he was ordered to destroy the evidence.

== Symbolism ==
The Russian Revolution became the site for many instances of symbolism, both physical and non-physical. Communist symbolism is perhaps the most notable of this time period, such as the debut of the iconic hammer and sickle as a representation of the October Revolution in 1917, eventually becoming the official symbol of the USSR in 1924, and later the symbol of Communism as a whole. Although the Bolsheviks did not have extensive political experience, their portrayal of the revolution itself as both a political and symbolic order resulted in Communism&#x27;s portrayal as a messianic faith, formally known as communist messianism. Portrayals of notable revolutionary figures such as Lenin were done in iconographic methods, equating them similarly to religious figures, though religion itself was banned in the USSR and groups such as the Russian Orthodox Church were persecuted.

==The revolution and the world==

The revolution ultimately led to the establishment of the future Soviet Union as an ideocracy; however, the establishment of such a state came as an ideological paradox, as Marx&#x27;s ideals of how a socialist state ought to be created were based on the formation being natural and not artificially incited (i.e. by means of revolution). Leon Trotsky said that the goal of socialism in Russia would not be realized without the success of the world revolution. A revolutionary wave caused by the Russian Revolution lasted until 1923, but despite initial hopes for success in the German Revolution of 1918–19, the short-lived Hungarian Soviet Republic, and others like it, only the Mongolian Revolution of 1921 saw a Marxist movement at the time succeed in keeping power in its hands.

This issue is subject to conflicting views on communist history by various Marxist groups and parties. Joseph Stalin later rejected this concept, stating that socialism was possible in one country.The confusion regarding Stalin&#x27;s position on the issue stems from the fact that, after Lenin&#x27;s death in 1924, he successfully used Lenin&#x27;s argument – the argument that socialism&#x27;s success needs the support of workers of other countries in order to happen – to defeat his competitors within the party by accusing them of betraying Lenin and, therefore, the ideals of the October Revolution.

The Russian Revolution was perceived as a rupture with imperialism for various civil rights and decolonization struggles and providing a space for oppressed groups across the world. This was given further credence with the Soviet Union supporting many anti-colonial third world movements with financial funds against European colonial powers.

==Historiography==

Few events in historical research have been as conditioned by political influences as the October Revolution. The historiography of the Revolution generally divides into three schools of thought: the Soviet-Marxist (Marxist-Leninist) view, the Western &#x27;totalitarian&#x27; view, and the &#x27;revisionist&#x27; view. The &#x27;totalitarian&#x27; historians are also referred to as &#x27;traditionalists&#x27; and &#x27;Cold War historians&#x27; for relying on interpretations rooted in the early years of the Cold War and described as a conservative direction; the Western Revisionists have lacked a full-fledged doctrine or philosophy of history, but were distinguished in the 1960s-1970s by their criticism of the &#x27;traditionalist&#x27; bias towards the USSR and the left in general and their focus on &quot;history from below&quot; and social perspectives. While the &#x27;totalitarian&#x27; historians described the Bolshevik revolution as a coup carried out by a minority which turned Russia into a totalitarian dictatorship, the &#x27;revisionists&#x27; opposed such description and stressed the genuinely &#x27;popular&#x27; nature of the Revolution. Since the Revolutions of 1989 and the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, the Western-Totalitarian view has again become dominant and the Soviet-Marxist view has practically vanished in mainstream political analysis. The &#x27;revisionists&#x27; achieved some success in challenging the &#x27;traditionalists&#x27; and became accepted in academic circles, while &#x27;totalitarian&#x27; historians retained popularity and influence in politics and public spheres.

Following the death of Vladimir Lenin, the Bolshevik government was thrown into a crisis. Lenin failed to designate who his successor would be or how they would be chosen. A power struggle broke out in the party between Leon Trotsky and his enemies. Trotsky was defeated by the anti-Trotsky bloc by the mid-1920s and his hopes for party leadership were dashed. Among Trotsky&#x27;s opponents, Joseph Stalin would rise to assume unchallenged party leadership by 1928. In 1927, Trotsky was expelled from the party and in 1929 he lost his citizenship and was sent into exile. While in exile he began honing his own interpretation of Marxism called Trotskyism. The schism between Trotsky and Stalin is the focal point where the Revisionist view comes into existence. Trotsky traveled across the world denouncing Stalin and the Soviet Union under his leadership. He specifically focused his criticism on Stalin&#x27;s doctrine, Socialism in One Country, claiming that it was incongruent with the ideology of the revolution. Eventually, Trotsky settled in Mexico City and founded a base of operations for him and his supporters. In 1937 at the height of the Great Purge, he published &quot;The Revolution Betrayed&quot; which outlined his ideological contradictions with Stalin, and how Stalin was guilty of subverting and debasing the 1917 revolution. He continued to vocally criticize Stalin and Stalinism until his assassination in 1940 on Stalin&#x27;s orders.

The Soviet-Marxist interpretation is the belief that the Russian Revolution under the Bolsheviks was a proud and glorious effort of the working class which saw the removal of the Tsar, nobility, and capitalists from positions of power. The Bolsheviks and later the Communist Party took the first steps in liberating the proletariat and building a workers&#x27; state that practiced equality. Outside of Eastern Europe this view was heavily criticized as following the death of Lenin the Soviet Union became more authoritarian. Even though the Soviet Union no longer exists, the Soviet-Marxist view is still used as an interpretation in academia today. Both academics and Soviet supporters argue this view is supported by several events. First, the RSFSR made substantial advances to women&#x27;s rights. It was the first country to decriminalize abortion and allowed women to be educated, which was forbidden under the Tsar. Furthermore, the RSFSR decriminalized homosexuality between consenting adults, which was seen as radical for the time period. The Bolshevik government also actively recruited working class citizens into positions of party leadership, thereby ensuring the proletariat was represented in policymaking. One of the most important aspects to this view was the Bolshevik victory in the Russian Civil War. On paper, the Bolsheviks should have been defeated in part due to the broad international support their enemies were receiving. Britain, France, the United States, Japan, and other countries sent aid to the White Army and expedition forces against the Bolsheviks. The Bolsheviks were further at a disadvantage due to factors such as: the small land area under their control, lack of professional officers, and supply shortages. In spite of this, the Red Army prevailed. The Red Army unlike many White factions maintained a high morale among their troops and civilians throughout the duration of the civil war. This was in part due to their skillful use of propaganda. Bolshevik propaganda portrayed the Red Army as liberators and stewards of the poor and downtrodden. Bolshevik support was further elevated by Lenin&#x27;s initiatives to distribute land to the peasantry, and ending the war with Germany. During the civil war, the Bolsheviks were able to raise an army numbering around five million active soldiers. Domestic support and patriotism played a decisive role in the Russian Civil War. By 1923 the Bolsheviks had controlled the last of the White Army holdouts and the Russian Civil War concluded with a Bolshevik victory. This victory ultimately influenced how the Soviet Union interpreted its own ideology and the October Revolution itself. Starting in 1919, the Soviets would commemorate the event with a military parade and a public holiday. This tradition lasted up until the collapse of the Soviet Union. As time went on the Soviet-Marxist interpretation evolved with an &quot;anti-Stalinist&quot; version of it. This subsection attempts to draw a distinction between the &quot;Lenin period&quot; (1917–24) and the &quot;Stalin period&quot; (1928–53).

Nikita Khrushchev, Stalin&#x27;s successor, argued that Stalin&#x27;s regime differed greatly from the leadership of Lenin in his &quot;Secret Speech&quot;, delivered in 1956. He was critical of the cult of the individual which was constructed around Stalin whereas Lenin stressed &quot;the role of the people as the creator of history&quot;. He also emphasized that Lenin favored a collective leadership which relied on personal persuasion and recommended the removal of Stalin from the position of General Secretary. Khrushchev contrasted this with the &quot;despotism&quot; of Stalin which require absolute submission to his position and also highlighted that many of the people who were later annihilated as &quot;enemies of the party&quot;, &quot;had worked with Lenin during his life&quot;. He also contrasted the &quot;severe methods&quot; used by Lenin in the &quot;most necessary cases&quot; as a &quot;struggle for survival&quot; during the Civil War with the extreme methods and mass repressions used by Stalin even when the Revolution was &quot;already victorious&quot;.

Views from the west were mixed. Socialists and labor organizations tended to support the October Revolution and the Bolshevik seizure of power. On the other hand, western governments were mortified. Western leaders, and later some academics concluded that the Russian Revolution only replaced one form of tyranny (Tsarism), with another (communism). Initially, the Bolsheviks were tolerant of opposing political factions. Upon seizing state power, they organized a parliament, the Russian Constituent Assembly. On 25 November, an election was held. Despite the Bolsheviks being the party that overthrew the Provisional Government and organizing the assembly, they lost the election. Rather than govern as a coalition, the Bolsheviks banned all political opposition. Historians point to this as the start of communist authoritarianism. Conservative historian Robert Service states, &quot;he (Lenin) aided the foundations of dictatorship and lawlessness. He had consolidated the principle of state penetration of the whole society, its economy and its culture. Lenin had practiced terror and advocated revolutionary amoralism.&quot; Lenin allowed for certain disagreement and debate but only within the highest organs of the Bolshevik party, and practicing democratic centralism. The RSFSR and later the Soviet Union continued to practice political repression until its dissolution in 1991.

Trotskyist theoreticians have disputed the view that a one-party state was a natural outgrowth of the Bolsheviks&#x27; actions. George Novack stressed the initial efforts by the Bolsheviks to form a government with the Left Socialist Revolutionaries and bring other parties such as the Mensheviks into political legality. Tony Cliff argued the Bolshevik–Left Socialist Revolutionary coalition government dissolved the Constituent Assembly due to a number of reasons. They cited the outdated voter-rolls which did not acknowledge the split among the Socialist Revolutionary party and the assemblies conflict with the Congress of the Soviets as an alternative democratic structure. Trotskyist historian Vadim Rogovin believed Stalinism had &quot;discredited the idea of socialism in the eyes of millions of people throughout the world&quot;. Rogovin also argued that the Left Opposition, led by Leon Trotsky, was a political movement &quot;which offered a real alternative to Stalinism, and that to crush this movement was the primary function of the Stalinist terror&quot;.

==Cultural portrayal==
=== Literature ===
* &quot;The Twelve&quot; (1918) by the Symbolist poet Aleksandr Blok and &quot;Mystery-Bouffe&quot; (1918) and &quot;150 000 000&quot; by the Futurist poet Vladimir Mayakovsky were among the first poetic responses to the Revolution.
* &quot;The White Guard&quot; by Mikhail Bulgakov (1925), partially autobiographical novel, portraying the life of one family torn apart by uncertainty of the Civil War times; his short novel &quot;Heart of a Dog&quot; (1925) has been interpreted as a satirical allegory of the Revolution.
* &quot;The Life of Klim Samgin&quot; (1927–1936) by Maxim Gorky, a novel with a controversial reputation sometimes described as an example of Modernist literature, portrays the decline of Russian &quot;intelligentsia&quot; from the early 1870s to the Revolution as seen by a middle class intellectual during the course of his life.
* &quot;Chevengur&quot; (1929) by Andrei Platonov depicts the Revolution and the Civil War in a grotesque way in a form of a Modernist parable, as a struggle between the Utopia and the Dystopia that confounds the both, and as associated by the motifs of death and apocalypse.
* Mikhail Sholokhov&#x27;s novel &quot;Quiet Flows the Don&quot; (1928–1940) describes the lives of Don Cossacks during the World War I, the Revolution, and the Civil War.
* George Orwell&#x27;s classic novella &quot;Animal Farm&quot; (1945) is an allegory of the Russian Revolution and its aftermath. It describes the dictator Joseph Stalin as a big Berkshire boar named, &quot;Napoleon&quot;. Trotsky is represented by a pig called Snowball who is a brilliant talker and makes magnificent speeches. However, Napoleon overthrows Snowball as Stalin overthrew Trotsky and Napoleon takes over the farm the animals live on. Napoleon becomes a tyrant and uses force and propaganda to oppress the animals, while culturally teaching them that they are free.
* &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot; (1957) by Boris Pasternak describes the fate of Russian &quot;intelligentsia&quot;; the events take place between the Revolution of 1905 and World War II.
* &quot;The Red Wheel&quot; (1984–1991) by Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, a cycle of novels that describes the fall of the Russian Empire and the establishment of the Soviet Union.

===Film===
The Russian Revolution has been portrayed in or served as backdrop for many films. Among them, in order of release date:

* &quot;The End of Saint Petersburg&quot;. 1927. Directed by Vsevolod Pudovkin and Mikhail Doller, USSR
* &quot;&quot;. 1927. Directed by Sergei Eisenstein and Grigori Aleksandrov. Soviet Union. Black and qhite. Silent.
* &quot;Scarlet Dawn&quot;, a 1932 Pre-Code American romantic drama starring Douglas Fairbanks, Jr. and Nancy Carroll caught up in the fallout of the Russian Revolution.
* &quot;Knight Without Armour&quot;. 1937. A British historical drama starring Marlene Dietrich and Robert Donat, with Dietrich as an imperiled aristocrat on the eve of the Russian Revolution.
* &quot;Lenin in 1918&quot;. 1939. Directed by Mikhail Romm, E. Aron, and I. Simkov. Historical-revolutionary film about Lenin&#x27;s activities in the first years of Soviet power.
* &quot;Doctor Zhivago&quot;. 1965. A drama-romance-war film directed by David Lean, filmed in Europe with a largely European cast, loosely based on the famous novel of the same name by Boris Pasternak.
* &quot;Reds&quot;. 1981. Directed by Warren Beatty, it is based on the book &quot;Ten Days that Shook the World&quot;.
* &quot;Anastasia&quot;. 1997. An American animated feature, directed by Don Bluth and Gary Goldman.

==See also==

* Index of articles related to the Russian Revolution and Civil War
* April Crisis
* Foreign relations of the Soviet Union
* Iranian Revolution
* Arthur Ransome
* Paris Commune
* Preference falsification
* Ten Days That Shook the World

== Explanatory footnotes ==
== References ==
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Historiography===
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Participants&#x27; accounts===
* 
* 

===Primary sources===
* 
* Includes private letters, press editorials, government decrees, diaries, philosophical tracts, belles-lettres, and memoirs.
* 

==External links==
* Read, Christopher: Revolutions (Russian Empire), in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War.
* Brudek, Paweł: Revolutions (East Central Europe), in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War.
* Sumpf, Alexandre: Russian Civil War, in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War.
* Mawdsley, Evan: International Responses to the Russian Civil War (Russian Empire), in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War.
* Melancon, Michael S.: Social Conflict and Control, Protest and Repression (Russian Empire), in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War.
* Sanborn, Joshua A.: Russian Empire, in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War.
* Gaida, Fedor Aleksandrovich: Governments, Parliaments and Parties (Russian Empire), in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War.
* Albert, Gleb: Labour Movements, Trade Unions and Strikes (Russian Empire), in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War.
* Gatrell, Peter: Organization of War Economies (Russian Empire), in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War.
* Marks, Steven G.: War Finance (Russian Empire), in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War.
* Orlando Figes&#x27;s free educational website on the Russian Revolution and Soviet history, May 2014
* Soviet history archive at www.marxists.org
* Archival footage of the Russian Revolution // Net-Film Newsreels and Documentary Films Archive
* Précis of Russian Revolution —A summary of the key events and factors of the 1917 Russian Revolution.
* Kevin Murphy&#x27;s Isaac and Tamara Deutscher Memorial Prize lecture &quot;Can we Write the History of the Russian Revolutionæ, which examines historical accounts of 1917 in the light of newly accessible archive material.
* &quot;The Mass Minority in Action: France and Russia&quot;—Chapter 6 of &quot;The Unconquerable World: Power, Nonviolence and the Will of the People&quot;. Thanks to Trotsky, the &#x27;insurrection&#x27; was bloodless.
* Violence and Revolution in 1917. Mike Haynes for &quot;Jacobin&quot;. 17 July 2017.
* The Bolsheviks and workers&#x27; control: the state and counter-revolution - Maurice Brinton</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="4" end="22" title="Russian Revolution" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088691" start="39" end="48" title="Political revolution (Trotskyism)" label="political"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279967" start="53" end="59" title="social revolution" label="social"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="70" end="76" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="119" end="139" title="Dissolution of the Russian Empire" label="abolish its monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="222" end="233" title="Russian Civil War" label="a civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318933" start="276" end="297" title="Revolutions of 1917–1923" label="the other revolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519948" start="319" end="343" title="aftermath of World War I" label="aftermath of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q170306" start="357" end="387" title="German Revolution of 1918–1919" label="German Revolution of 1918–1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630645" start="427" end="457" title="key events of the 20th century" label="key events of the 20th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q101534" start="508" end="527" title="February Revolution" label="February Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="559" end="570" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="581" end="594" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="836" end="852" title="Nicholas II of Russia" label="Tsar Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q239543" start="942" end="964" title="Russian Provisional Government" label="provisional government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649453" start="976" end="988" title="State Duma (Russian Empire)" label="Russian Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484763" start="1033" end="1048" title="Soviet democracy" label="soviet councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="1078" end="1087" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Petrograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q21765377" start="1275" end="1296" title="dual power" label="two rival governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="1508" end="1521" title="working class" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="1671" end="1678" title="Left-wing politics" label="leftist"/>
<link wikidata="Q191515" start="1813" end="1823" title="Mensheviks" label="Mensheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q217009" start="1825" end="1847" title="Socialist Revolutionary Party" label="Social Revolutionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033142" start="1849" end="1859" title="Anarchism in Russia" label="Anarchists"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="1876" end="1886" title="Bolsheviks" label="Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q155059" start="1890" end="1904" title="leninism" label="far-left party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="1912" end="1926" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349624" start="2037" end="2059" title="Soviet Decree" label="peace, land, and bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322251" start="2532" end="2541" title="July Days" label="July Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418376" start="2639" end="2649" title="Red Guards (Russia)" label="Red Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="2747" end="2765" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="3050" end="3094" title="Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic" label="Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="3206" end="3212" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q842112" start="3305" end="3320" title="socialist state" label="socialist state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484763" start="3334" end="3350" title="soviet democracy" label="soviet democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q122371" start="3514" end="3537" title="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk" label="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q203023" start="3622" end="3627" title="Cheka" label="Cheka"/>
<link wikidata="Q741775" start="3751" end="3772" title="Enemy of the people" label="enemies of the people"/>
<link wikidata="Q542291" start="3803" end="3813" title="Red Terror" label="Red Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="3851" end="3868" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="4046" end="4055" title="Russian Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067800" start="4131" end="4165" title="Pro-independence movements in the Russian Civil War" label="non-Russian independence movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q216669" start="4213" end="4224" title="Monarchism" label="monarchists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260815" start="4229" end="4237" title="Liberalism in Russia" label="liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q104309" start="4293" end="4307" title="White movement" label="White movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="4332" end="4354" title="Right-wing politics" label="right-leaning officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4229607" start="4486" end="4495" title="commissar" label="commissar"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="4496" end="4508" title="Leon Trotsky" label="Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="4582" end="4590" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q838811" start="4754" end="4761" title="peasant" label="peasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="4920" end="4934" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q132856" start="5014" end="5021" title="Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131337" start="5023" end="5033" title="Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895" start="5035" end="5042" title="Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130229" start="5044" end="5051" title="Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="5057" end="5064" title="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001082" start="5087" end="5119" title="Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War" label="intervention from foreign powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="5202" end="5237" title="Union of Soviet Socialist Republics" label="Union of Soviet Socialist Republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="5336" end="5353" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q152538" start="5439" end="5466" title="White émigré" label="mass emigration from Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="5529" end="5567" title="All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks)" label="All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks)"/>
<link wikidata="Q184928" start="5640" end="5666" title="Revolution of 1905" label="Russian Revolution of 1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q185642" start="5754" end="5767" title="Bloody Sunday (1905)" label="Bloody Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q511866" start="5802" end="5818" title="Mutiny" label="soldier mutinies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907485" start="5852" end="5873" title="St. Petersburg Soviet" label="St. Petersburg Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249009" start="6050" end="6066" title="Petrograd Soviet" label="Petrograd Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q844793" start="6178" end="6182" title="Duma" label="Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="6355" end="6371" title="Nicholas II of Russia" label="Tsar Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q112707" start="6380" end="6394" title="House of Romanov" label="Romanov family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354258" start="6412" end="6433" title="Russian nationalism" label="patriotic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q154573" start="6490" end="6518" title="Eastern Front (World War I)" label="Eastern Front of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078222" start="6588" end="6609" title="Imperial Russian Army" label="Imperial Russian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q152094" start="6755" end="6772" title="Alexandra Feodorovna (Alix of Hesse)" label="Tsarina Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q43989" start="6970" end="6986" title="Grigori Rasputin" label="Grigori Rasputin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="7151" end="7165" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="7185" end="7199" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="7267" end="7284" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q213753" start="7841" end="7849" title="harvests" label="harvests"/>
<link wikidata="Q15788" start="8002" end="8008" title="rouble" label="rouble"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="8270" end="8289" title="Subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="8468" end="8478" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470891" start="8958" end="8967" title="Union of October 17" label="Octobrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083549" start="8969" end="8986" title="Alexander Guchkov" label="Alexander Guchkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q155820" start="9257" end="9263" title="Constitutional Democratic Party" label="Kadets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083549" start="9503" end="9510" title="Guchkov" label="Guchkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q43989" start="9708" end="9716" title="Rasputin" label="Rasputin"/>
<link wikidata="Q160869" start="9762" end="9781" title="Grand Duke Nikolai Nikolaevich of Russia (1856–1929)" label="Grand Duke Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q297032" start="9807" end="9818" title="Georgy Lvov" label="Prince Lvov"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="10170" end="10181" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332068" start="10267" end="10273" title="French Section of the Workers&amp;#x27; International" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="10278" end="10301" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="German Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q182905" start="10373" end="10389" title="Georgi Plekhanov" label="Georgi Plekhanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="10393" end="10398" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092833" start="10423" end="10434" title="Anti-German sentiment" label="anti-German"/>
<link wikidata="Q57552" start="10448" end="10464" title="Alexander Parvus" label="Alexander Parvus"/>
<link wikidata="Q215505" start="10655" end="10668" title="Julius Martov" label="Julius Martov"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="10924" end="10936" title="Leon Trotsky" label="Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q203877" start="10982" end="10992" title="Zimmerwald" label="Zimmerwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q207459" start="11086" end="11094" title="Grigory Zinoviev" label="Zinoviev"/>
<link wikidata="Q84266" start="11099" end="11104" title="Karl Radek" label="Radek"/>
<link wikidata="Q665844" start="11167" end="11182" title="Zimmerwald Conference" label="Zimmerwald Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400881" start="11765" end="11773" title="property" label="property"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192212" start="13426" end="13437" title="Emancipation reform of 1861" label="emancipated"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="13443" end="13450" title="serfdom" label="serfdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q155329" start="13628" end="13640" title="Sergei Witte" label="Sergei Witte"/>
<link wikidata="Q85769404" start="13972" end="14005" title="Industrialization in the Russian Empire" label="rapid industrialization of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113614" start="14029" end="14041" title="overcrowding" label="overcrowding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392951" start="15203" end="15215" title="Conscription in the Russian Empire" label="Conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q660770" start="15537" end="15556" title="Russian Railways" label="poor railway system"/>
<link wikidata="Q839452" start="16847" end="16859" title="Divine right of kings" label="Divine Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="17434" end="17454" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q185642" start="17981" end="17994" title="Bloody Sunday (1905)" label="Bloody Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q109878" start="18199" end="18216" title="October Manifesto" label="October Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18277" end="18287" title="Duma#State Duma in Imperial Russia" label="State Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583213" start="18326" end="18348" title="Russian Constitution of 1906" label="Fundamental State Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="18703" end="18721" title="Russo-Japanese war" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="19265" end="19276" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q153858" start="20050" end="20070" title="Battle of Tannenberg (1914)" label="Battle of Tannenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="20199" end="20215" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austro-Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q659246" start="20272" end="20279" title="Battle of Galicia" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q313422" start="20822" end="20833" title="German Army (German Empire)" label="German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="20995" end="21009" title="Congress Poland" label="Russian Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q670489" start="21021" end="21045" title="Gorlice–Tarnów Offensive" label="Gorlice–Tarnów Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q633339" start="22686" end="22695" title="desertion" label="desertion"/>
<link wikidata="Q192623" start="22697" end="22707" title="Looting" label="plundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q688339" start="23163" end="23184" title="Great Retreat (Russia)" label="great retreat of 1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="23795" end="23804" title="Inflation" label="Inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="23983" end="23997" title="St. Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q138503" start="24871" end="24878" title="Okhrana" label="Okhrana"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="25621" end="25630" title="Petrograd" label="Petrograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621070" start="25686" end="25693" title="Putilov plant" label="Putilov"/>
<link wikidata="Q38964" start="25836" end="25866" title="International Women&amp;#x27;s Day" label="International Women&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q157945" start="27661" end="27675" title="Malaya Vishera" label="Malaya Vishera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214" start="27710" end="27715" title="Pskov" label="Pskov"/>
<link wikidata="Q952851" start="27732" end="27746" title="Nikolai Ruzsky" label="Nikolai Ruzsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083549" start="27770" end="27787" title="Guchkov" label="Alexander Guchkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376845" start="27792" end="27806" title="Vasily Shulgin" label="Vasily Shulgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q154045" start="27949" end="27958" title="Alexei Nikolaevich, Tsarevich of Russia" label="Tsarevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q154444" start="27996" end="28028" title="Grand Duke Michael Alexandrovich of Russia" label="Grand Duke Michael Alexandrovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519034" start="28385" end="28401" title="Alexander Palace" label="Alexander Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621200" start="28405" end="28419" title="Tsarskoye Selo" label="Tsarskoye Selo"/>
<link wikidata="Q297032" start="28767" end="28798" title="Georgy Lvov" label="Prince Georgy Yevgenievich Lvov"/>
<link wikidata="Q155820" start="28816" end="28847" title="Constitutional Democratic party" label="Constitutional Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249009" start="28902" end="28918" title="Petrograd Soviet" label="Petrograd Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q676093" start="29914" end="29928" title="Tauride Palace" label="Tauride Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q132603" start="30048" end="30066" title="Proletariat" label="particular classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="30226" end="30237" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q48211" start="32051" end="32069" title="Alexander Kerensky" label="Alexander Kerensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q217009" start="32115" end="32144" title="Socialist-Revolutionaries" label="Socialist Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="32368" end="32385" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q217105" start="32409" end="32427" title="political prisoner" label="political prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q690308" start="32480" end="32489" title="Kerensky Offensive" label="offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="33375" end="33390" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Bolshevik Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="33399" end="33413" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="33457" end="33468" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="33572" end="33589" title="Political party" label="political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="33628" end="33635" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356344" start="34032" end="34044" title="sealed train" label="sealed train"/>
<link wikidata="Q622099" start="34238" end="34250" title="April Theses" label="April Theses"/>
<link wikidata="Q165854" start="34596" end="34607" title="Lev Kamenev" label="Lev Kamenev"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="34659" end="34669" title="Bolsheviks" label="Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q453863" start="35120" end="35138" title="Sheila Fitzpatrick" label="Sheila Fitzpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q155863" start="35918" end="35927" title="Kronstadt" label="Kronstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="36334" end="36341" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322251" start="36432" end="36441" title="July Days" label="July Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q276193" start="37484" end="37497" title="Lavr Kornilov" label="Lavr Kornilov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418376" start="37887" end="37897" title="Red Guards (Russia)" label="Red Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369584" start="37940" end="37955" title="Kornilov Affair" label="Kornilov Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q509209" start="38939" end="38959" title="State and Revolution" label="State and Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q165854" start="39725" end="39736" title="Lev Kamenev" label="Lev Kamenev"/>
<link wikidata="Q207459" start="39741" end="39757" title="Grigory Zinoviev" label="Grigory Zinoviev"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="39796" end="39814" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="39926" end="39944" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="39990" end="40005" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633149" start="40590" end="40597" title="soviets" label="soviets"/>
<link wikidata="Q919883" start="40810" end="40860" title="Left Socialist-Revolutionaries" label="left fraction of the Revolutionary-Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="41084" end="41093" title="Petrograd" label="Petrograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056901" start="41129" end="41139" title="Casualty (person)" label="casualties"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851355" start="41199" end="41209" title="White Army" label="White Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="41264" end="41272" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q18809" start="43627" end="43646" title="Anatoly Lunacharsky" label="Anatoly Lunacharsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q366790" start="43648" end="43662" title="Moisei Uritsky" label="Moisei Uritsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383086" start="43667" end="43683" title="Dmitry Manuilsky" label="Dmitry Manuilsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q57552" start="43968" end="43984" title="Alexander Parvus" label="Alexander Parvus"/>
<link wikidata="Q217009" start="44172" end="44201" title="Socialist Revolutionary Party" label="Socialist Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617962" start="44307" end="44316" title="1917 Russian Constituent Assembly election" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468062" start="44324" end="44352" title="Russian Constituent Assembly" label="Russian Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="44712" end="44730" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44843" end="44851" title="Cossacks#Bolshevik uprising and Civil War, 1917–1922" label="cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="45153" end="45170" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="45368" end="45376" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q104309" start="45469" end="45483" title="White movement" label="White movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851355" start="45537" end="45549" title="White Army" label="White Armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="45574" end="45587" title="Right-wing politics" label="right-leaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="45592" end="45604" title="Political conservatism" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067800" start="45800" end="45838" title="Pro-independence movements in the Russian Civil War" label="nationalist movements for independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q518661" start="45984" end="45996" title="Green armies" label="Green armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q49896" start="46478" end="46499" title="military dictatorship" label="military dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q185718" start="46510" end="46527" title="Alexander Kolchak" label="Alexander Kolchak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333463" start="46576" end="46599" title="right-wing dictatorship" label="right-wing dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="46665" end="46679" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="46681" end="46687" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="46693" end="46706" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="46712" end="46717" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001082" start="46808" end="46886" title="Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War" label="Allied nations, using external interference, provided substantial military aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q959" start="47079" end="47090" title="Vladivostok" label="Vladivostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q554353" start="47293" end="47314" title="Ayano-Maysky District" label="Ayano-Maysky District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738486" start="47345" end="47349" title="Krai" label="Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q487964" start="47400" end="47418" title="Anatoly Pepelyayev" label="Anatoly Pepelyayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q208300" start="47547" end="47566" title="Kronstadt rebellion" label="Kronstadt Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q155863" start="47673" end="47682" title="Kronstadt" label="Kronstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q47900" start="48569" end="48582" title="Nestor Makhno" label="Nestor Makhno"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751642" start="48589" end="48608" title="Anarchism in Ukraine" label="Ukrainian anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8666419" start="48633" end="48647" title="Revolutionary Insurgent Army of Ukraine" label="Insurgent Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q191882" start="48768" end="48782" title="Mikhail Frunze" label="Mikhail Frunze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436243" start="48797" end="48811" title="Makhnovshchina" label="Makhnovshchina"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="48860" end="48868" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q518661" start="48903" end="48913" title="Green armies" label="Green Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742236" start="49072" end="49095" title="Revolutionary tribunal (Russia)" label="Revolutionary tribunals"/>
<link wikidata="Q12716225" start="49724" end="49742" title="Counter-revolutionary" label="counter-revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519034" start="50572" end="50588" title="Alexander Palace" label="Alexander Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621200" start="50592" end="50606" title="Tsarskoye Selo" label="Tsarskoye Selo"/>
<link wikidata="Q168782" start="50679" end="50686" title="Tobolsk" label="Tobolsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="50694" end="50699" title="Urals" label="Urals"/>
<link wikidata="Q887" start="51008" end="51021" title="Yekaterinburg" label="Yekaterinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q283859" start="51188" end="51204" title="Edvard Radzinsky" label="Edvard Radzinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232452" start="51209" end="51227" title="Dmitri Volkogonov" label="Dmitrii Volkogonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q298384" start="51268" end="51282" title="Yakov Sverdlov" label="Yakov Sverdlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711699" start="51760" end="51769" title="symbolism (arts)" label="symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041293" start="51803" end="51822" title="Communist symbolism" label="Communist symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170266" start="51904" end="51921" title="hammer and sickle" label="hammer and sickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q630281" start="52277" end="52286" title="Messianism" label="messianic"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="52542" end="52565" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4197895" start="52702" end="52711" title="ideocracy" label="ideocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q483372" start="52779" end="52786" title="paradox" label="paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="52992" end="53001" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q874579" start="53061" end="53077" title="world revolution" label="world revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886460" start="53081" end="53099" title="revolutionary wave" label="revolutionary wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q170306" start="53197" end="53225" title="German Revolution of 1918–19" label="German Revolution of 1918–19"/>
<link wikidata="Q243652" start="53243" end="53268" title="Hungarian Soviet Republic" label="Hungarian Soviet Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081446" start="53299" end="53327" title="Mongolian Revolution of 1921" label="Mongolian Revolution of 1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="53334" end="53341" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="53506" end="53519" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44404" start="53562" end="53599" title="Socialism in one country" label="socialism was possible in one country"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="54066" end="54077" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="54107" end="54121" title="decolonization" label="decolonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q252000" start="54158" end="54167" title="oppression" label="oppressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="54263" end="54276" title="anti-colonial" label="anti-colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="54277" end="54288" title="Third World" label="third world"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="54337" end="54345" title="colonialism" label="colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q50675" start="54489" end="54503" title="historiography" label="historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="54591" end="54607" title="Marxism-Leninism" label="Marxist-Leninist"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="54619" end="54626" title="Western world" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="54633" end="54645" title="Totalitarianism" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="55551" end="55570" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="Revolutions of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="55579" end="55610" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="56404" end="56417" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q181133" start="56656" end="56666" title="Trotskyism" label="Trotskyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44404" start="56934" end="56958" title="Socialism in one country" label="Socialism in One Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="57061" end="57072" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="57163" end="57174" title="Great Purge" label="Great Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785017" start="57195" end="57218" title="The Revolution Betrayed" label="The Revolution Betrayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="57403" end="57412" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151016" start="57423" end="57436" title="Assassination of Leon Trotsky" label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="58254" end="58273" title="women&amp;#x27;s rights" label="women&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="58317" end="58325" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q132603" start="58651" end="58662" title="proletariat" label="proletariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="58923" end="58930" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="58932" end="58938" title="French Third Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="58944" end="58957" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="58959" end="58964" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001082" start="58986" end="59058" title="Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War" label="sent aid to the White Army and expedition forces against the Bolsheviks."/>
<link wikidata="Q4158109" start="60166" end="60205" title="October Revolution Day" label="the Soviets would commemorate the event"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774292" start="60388" end="60402" title="Anti-Stalinist left" label="anti-Stalinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="60564" end="60581" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165372" start="60700" end="60713" title="On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences" label="Secret Speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q4180510" start="60763" end="60785" title="Joseph Stalin&amp;#x27;s cult of personality" label="cult of the individual"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146169" start="60947" end="60968" title="collective leadership" label="collective leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617962" start="62178" end="62186" title="1917 Russian Constituent Assembly election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749421" start="62506" end="62520" title="Robert Service (historian)" label="Robert Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q193852" start="62903" end="62924" title="democratic centralism" label="democratic centralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991155" start="62963" end="63005" title="Political repression in the Soviet Union" label="continued to practice political repression"/>
<link wikidata="Q181133" start="63038" end="63048" title="Trotskyism" label="Trotskyist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310673" start="63166" end="63179" title="George Novack" label="George Novack"/>
<link wikidata="Q919883" start="63257" end="63287" title="Left Socialist Revolutionaries" label="Left Socialist Revolutionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q550453" start="63360" end="63370" title="Tony Cliff" label="Tony Cliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098107" start="63654" end="63677" title="All-Russian Congress of Soviets" label="Congress of the Soviets"/>
<link wikidata="Q441679" start="63739" end="63752" title="Vadim Rogovin" label="Vadim Rogovin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569985" start="63907" end="63922" title="Left Opposition" label="Left Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4155672" start="64162" end="64172" title="The Twelve (poem)" label="The Twelve"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711699" start="64193" end="64202" title="Symbolism (arts)" label="Symbolist"/>
<link wikidata="Q164765" start="64208" end="64222" title="Aleksandr Blok" label="Aleksandr Blok"/>
<link wikidata="Q4296515" start="64233" end="64247" title="Mystery-Bouffe" label="Mystery-Bouffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3597507" start="64271" end="64282" title="150 000 000" label="150 000 000"/>
<link wikidata="Q3831119" start="64296" end="64304" title="Futurism (literature)" label="Futurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q132964" start="64310" end="64329" title="Vladimir Mayakovsky" label="Vladimir Mayakovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219874" start="64395" end="64410" title="The White Guard" label="The White Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q835" start="64420" end="64436" title="Mikhail Bulgakov" label="Mikhail Bulgakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345004" start="64585" end="64599" title="Heart of a Dog" label="Heart of a Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4180181" start="64685" end="64708" title="The Life of Klim Samgin" label="The Life of Klim Samgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12706" start="64730" end="64741" title="Maxim Gorky" label="Maxim Gorky"/>
<link wikidata="Q381142" start="64880" end="64894" title="intelligentsia" label="intelligentsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700722" start="65018" end="65027" title="Chevengur" label="Chevengur"/>
<link wikidata="Q315147" start="65044" end="65059" title="Andrei Platonov" label="Andrei Platonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q42398" start="65288" end="65305" title="Mikhail Sholokhov" label="Mikhail Sholokhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q75840" start="65325" end="65344" title="And Quiet Flows the Don" label="Quiet Flows the Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057292" start="65386" end="65398" title="Don Cossacks" label="Don Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="65460" end="65473" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396889" start="65503" end="65514" title="Animal Farm" label="Animal Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="65614" end="65627" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q820953" start="65637" end="65651" title="Berkshire pig" label="Berkshire boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q206870" start="66046" end="66060" title="Doctor Zhivago (novel)" label="Doctor Zhivago"/>
<link wikidata="Q41223" start="66077" end="66092" title="Boris Pasternak" label="Boris Pasternak"/>
<link wikidata="Q450330" start="66230" end="66243" title="The Red Wheel" label="The Red Wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34474" start="66265" end="66287" title="Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn" label="Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198716" start="66538" end="66565" title="The End of Saint Petersburg" label="The End of Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q55195" start="66591" end="66608" title="Vsevolod Pudovkin" label="Vsevolod Pudovkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775732" start="66613" end="66627" title="Mikhail Doller" label="Mikhail Doller"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="66629" end="66633" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003" start="66668" end="66685" title="Sergei Eisenstein" label="Sergei Eisenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q561459" start="66690" end="66709" title="Grigori Aleksandrov" label="Grigori Aleksandrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q608061" start="66758" end="66770" title="Scarlet Dawn" label="Scarlet Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408764" start="66785" end="66802" title="Pre-Code Hollywood" label="Pre-Code American"/>
<link wikidata="Q528428" start="66827" end="66849" title="Douglas Fairbanks, Jr." label="Douglas Fairbanks, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q267836" start="66854" end="66867" title="Nancy Carroll" label="Nancy Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518268" start="66928" end="66949" title="Knight Without Armour" label="Knight Without Armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612" start="66999" end="67015" title="Marlene Dietrich" label="Marlene Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q116983" start="67020" end="67032" title="Robert Donat" label="Robert Donat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471725" start="67121" end="67134" title="Lenin in 1918" label="Lenin in 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q461726" start="67160" end="67172" title="Mikhail Romm" label="Mikhail Romm"/>
<link wikidata="Q323827" start="67302" end="67316" title="Doctor Zhivago (1965 film)" label="Doctor Zhivago"/>
<link wikidata="Q55260" start="67367" end="67377" title="David Lean" label="David Lean"/>
<link wikidata="Q41223" start="67480" end="67495" title="Boris Pasternak" label="Boris Pasternak"/>
<link wikidata="Q597239" start="67505" end="67509" title="Reds (film)" label="Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q95030" start="67535" end="67548" title="Warren Beatty" label="Warren Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q30925" start="67580" end="67609" title="Ten Days that Shook the World" label="Ten Days that Shook the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q486609" start="67625" end="67634" title="Anastasia (1997 film)" label="Anastasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q448957" start="67690" end="67699" title="Don Bluth" label="Don Bluth"/>
<link wikidata="Q667959" start="67704" end="67716" title="Gary Goldman" label="Gary Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q96382029" start="67735" end="67800" title="Index of articles related to the Russian Revolution and Civil War" label="Index of articles related to the Russian Revolution and Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5791069" start="67803" end="67815" title="April Crisis" label="April Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074172" start="67818" end="67855" title="Foreign relations of the Soviet Union" label="Foreign relations of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="67858" end="67876" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q515845" start="67879" end="67893" title="Arthur Ransome" label="Arthur Ransome"/>
<link wikidata="Q133132" start="67896" end="67909" title="Paris Commune" label="Paris Commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q56296899" start="67912" end="67936" title="Preference falsification" label="Preference falsification"/>
<link wikidata="Q30925" start="67939" end="67968" title="Ten Days That Shook the World" label="Ten Days That Shook the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119666" start="70586" end="70593" title="Jacobin (magazine)" label="Jacobin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25764" wikidata="Q1062986" url="?curid=25764" title="Raven Software">
<text>Raven Software Corporation (trade name: Raven; formerly Raven Software, Inc.) is an American video game developer based in Middleton, Wisconsin, and part of Activision. Founded in May 1990 by brothers Brian and Steve Raffel, the company is most known for the dark fantasy franchise &quot;Heretic/Hexen&quot;, the first two &quot;Soldier of Fortune&quot; games, as well as licensed titles based in the &quot;Star Wars: Jedi Knight&quot; series and Marvel Comics&#x27;s X-Men characters, including 2006&#x27;s &quot;&quot;. Since 2011, Raven has been working on multiple &quot;Call of Duty&quot; games as both lead and support developer.

Raven&#x27;s first game, &quot;Black Crypt&quot; (1992), was conceived in the late 1980s by Raffel brothers to be a paper-and-pen role-playing game, until the two retooled the project from scratch to become a video game. While it did not perform well commercially, its positive reception by critics and technology efforts led to John Romero approaching Raven to develop new titles for the personal computer starting with &quot;ShadowCaster&quot; (1993), which was powered by Raven Engine, a modified &quot;Wolfenstein 3D&quot; engine designed by John Carmack. The game&#x27;s success impressed id Software and Strategic Simulations, who signed a deal to publish the company&#x27;s next titles, which had grown to two teams to work on 1994&#x27;s &quot;CyClones&quot; and &quot;Heretic&quot;. The latter, inspired by Brian Raffel&#x27;s interest in making a &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;–inspired game, was critically acclaimed, spawned several sequels, and helped Raven grow to three development teams.

In August 1997, Activision announced it had agreed to acquire Raven and took over the distribution to &quot;Hexen II&quot;, while the other two Raven teams continued production on the previously announced titles &quot;Take No Prisoners&quot; and &quot;MageSlayer&quot;. After 1998&#x27;s &quot;Heretic II&quot;, Raven aimed to expand its games to a broader audience, acquiring &quot;Soldier of Fortune&quot; magazine name rights to develop a game of the same name while also working on its first licensed title, &quot;Star Trek: Voyager – Elite Force&quot;. The latter achieved universal acclaim by critics and has since gained a cult following, encouraging LucasArts to collaborate with Raven on &quot;Star Wars Jedi Knight II: Jedi Outcast&quot; and &quot;Star Wars Jedi Knight: Jedi Academy&quot;. The company also continued partnering with id Software, working on &quot;Quake 4&quot; and the 2009 &quot;Wolfenstein&quot;, and becoming one of the first studios to license id Tech 4.

In the 2000s, Raven worked with Marvel Entertainment on some of its superhero properties, developing &quot;X-Men Legends&quot; (2004), &quot;X-Men Legends II: Rise of Apocalypse&quot; (2005), &quot;&quot; (2006) and &quot;X-Men Origins: Wolverine&quot; (2009). This lasted until Raven announced a new intellectual property, &quot;Singularity&quot;, which was released in 2010 to positive reception. In 2011, Raven shifted to work on several &quot;Call of Duty&quot; titles as support developer, and in 2014, the company opened a Chinese studio in Shanghai to collaborate with Tencent Games on &quot;Call of Duty Online,&quot; although this studio is no longer active today. Raven worked with Infinity Ward and Treyarch on 2020&#x27;s &quot;Call of Duty: Warzone&quot; and &quot;Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War&quot;, leading production on the latter&#x27;s single-player campaign. It developed &quot;Call of Duty: Black Ops 6&quot;, which was released on October 24, 2024.

== History ==
=== Foundation and &quot;Black Crypt&quot; (1986–1992)===
In 1986, Brian Raffel was an art teacher at University of Wisconsin–Madison and cross country-track coach at Middleton High School and his brother, Steve, was a screen-print shop. Their late father, Don, was an influence on the two growing up playing &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; adventure modules such as &quot;Palace of the Silver Princess&quot;, &quot;Tomb of Horrors&quot;, &quot;Lost Tomb of Martek&quot;, and &quot;Castle Amber&quot;, who inspired Brian to draw a concept by the end of 1988 called &quot;The Well&quot;— a paper-and-pen role-playing game originally conceived as a &quot;D&amp;D&quot; module until Steve came up and reworked it with Brian to be its own thing.

After seeing some of the recent games released to the Amiga, Brian decided that their art was &quot;as good as and in some cases better&quot; than what was coming and chose to move &quot;The Well&quot; to the Amiga for taking advantage of its computing power. Brian brothers retooled the project from scratch while opening their own company to work on the now called &quot;Black Crypt&quot;. Raven Software was officially incorporated on May 23, 1990.

Shortly after established Raven, Brian got together programmers Rick Johnson and Ben Gokey, and musician Kevin Schilder to join the company. Johnson was the youngest crew member at 18 years old. &quot;Black Crypt&quot; production started in April 1990 and lasted nearly two years, with Raffel brothers and the team moving to a $200 per month office, which sat under a workshop in Madison. The game&#x27;s budget was $40,000. Described as a &quot;Age of Darkness first-person tile-based real-time combat dungeon simulator&quot;, &quot;Black Crypt&quot; draws inspirations from FTL Games&#x27; &quot;Dungeon Master&quot; 3D realtime style and consists of twelve interconnected dungeons rendered in 64-colour extra half-brite graphics, which allowed players to define a palette customization of sixty-four colours—unlike &quot;Dungeon Master&quot; and its clones.

===id Software===
Raven Software was founded in 1990 by brothers Brian and Steve Raffel. Originally a three-person company, they were discovered by John Romero, co-founder of id Software, who collaborated with Raven to make games using their game engine beginning with &quot;ShadowCaster&quot;. Raven then started making games with id Software; the company even briefly moved to the same street as id Software. They used id&#x27;s engines for many of their games, such as &quot;Heretic,&quot; &quot;&quot; and &quot;Hexen II&quot;.

In 2005 and 2009, Raven developed two games from id&#x27;s catalog: &quot;Quake 4&quot; and &quot;Wolfenstein&quot; respectively.

===Activision===
The company was independent until 1997, when it was acquired by Activision for $12 million. They were still collaborating with id Software but at the same time developed other titles as well such as &quot;Soldier of Fortune&quot; in 2000, &quot;Star Wars Jedi Knight: Jedi Academy&quot; in 2003, &quot;X-Men Legends&quot; in 2004 and many more.

In August 2009, following poor performance and possible over-budget of &quot;Wolfenstein,&quot; the company made a major layoff of 30 to 35 staff, leaving two development teams. This was reduced to one after more layoffs in October 2010, after delays with &quot;Singularity;&quot; as many as 40 staff were released. Following the layoffs and after id Software was bought over by ZeniMax Media, Raven has since become a primary developer for the &quot;Call of Duty&quot; series. By July 2021, Raven Software had grown to roughly 350 employees.

In December 2021, Activision did not renew the contract of several members of the quality assurance (QA) department that were contract employees. One of the associate managers said that &quot;valuable members&quot; were fired although they &quot;were promised, for months, that Activision was working towards a pay restructure to increase their wages&quot;. Following these firings as well as other controversies involving Activision Blizzard, a strike has been initiated. On January 21, 2022, Raven&#x27;s QA team formed a union named the Game Workers Alliance with Communications Workers of America.

In May 2022, workers of the Raven QA team voted to unionize with a count of 19 – 2 in favor. In June 2022 Activision Blizzard CEO Bobby Kotick stated that the company would recognize the union and begin negotiations with it. Following the Raven QA team&#x27;s successful unionization, the 20-member QA team of Blizzard Albany announced a unionization drive in July 2022 as GWA Albany. The vote passed (14–0), forming the second union at an Activision Blizzard subsidiary.

On March 8, 2024, 600 QA testers at 3 Activision studios in Austin, Texas, Eden Prairie, Minnesota and El Segundo, California joined Raven and Blizzard&#x27;s unionizations to form the union &quot;Activision Quality Assurance United-CWA&quot; and voted to unionize (390–8) in favor, making it the largest video game union in the United States. Following Microsoft acquisition of Activision Blizzard, who included Raven Software, the company voluntarily recognized the union.

== Games ==
=== &quot;Heretic/Hexen&quot; (1994–1998) ===
&quot;Heretic&quot; (also referred as &quot;Hexen&quot;) is a series of first-person shooter games with action-adventure and action role-playing elements. The first game, &quot;Heretic&quot; (1994), was one of the first games to feature inventory manipulation and the ability to look up and down. It also introduced multiple gib objects that spawned when a character suffered a death by extreme force or heat. The game was the first in the &quot;Serpent Riders&quot; trilogy, followed by sequels &quot;&quot; (1995) and &quot;Hexen II&quot; (1997). A direct sequel to the first game, &quot;Heretic II&quot;, was released in 1998. Set in &quot;City of the Damned&quot;, capital city of the dark fantasy fictional world of Silverspring, the series was one of the first to combine 3D realistic graphics with fantasy setting, using Silverspring and its people to enrich the narrative and exploration. 

=== &quot;Soldier of Fortune&quot; (2000–2002) ===
Raven is the creator of &quot;Soldier of Fortune&quot;, a military first-person shooter series based in the magazine of the same name. The first game, &quot;Soldier of Fortune&quot; (2000) introduced GHOUL, an in-house physics engine designed by Raven that helped the game&#x27;s realistic graphic depictions of firearms dismembering the human body. This graphic violence is the main stylistic attraction, enabling depiction of extreme graphic violence, in which character models are based on body parts that can each independently sustain damage (gore zones). Players play as John Mullins in the first game and &quot;Soldier of Fortune II: Double Helix&quot; (2002). The series continued after Raven ceased developing further games. &quot;Soldier of Fortune: Payback&quot; (2007) was developed by Cauldron HQ, while &quot;Soldier of Fortune Online&quot;, an MMOFPS, was developed by South Korean company Dragonfly and released in 2010.

=== &quot;Star Wars: Jedi Knight&quot; (2002–2003) ===

&quot;Star Wars: Jedi Knight&quot; is a series of first- and third-person shooter games with action-adventure hack and slash elements. Originally created and developed by LucasArts, &quot;Jedi Knight&quot; was passed to Raven after numerous restructures at LucasArts in the 2000&#x27;s led by then president Simon Jeffery. The series is set years after &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot; and focuses on Kyle Katarn, a former Imperial officer who becomes a mercenary working for the Rebel Alliance, and later a Jedi and instructor at Luke Skywalker&#x27;s Jedi Academy. Raven produced Katarn&#x27;s storyline sequels &quot;Star Wars Jedi Knight II: Jedi Outcast&quot; (2002) and &quot;Star Wars Jedi Knight: Jedi Academy&quot; (2003).

In 2012, Raven began hiring employees for a game, and were announced as collaborating with Infinity Ward on &quot;Call of Duty: Ghosts&quot; in May 2013.

On April 3, 2013 following the closure of LucasArts, Raven Software released the source code for &quot;Star Wars Jedi Knight II: Jedi Outcast&quot; and &quot;Star Wars Jedi Knight: Jedi Academy&quot; on SourceForge under the GPL-2.0-only license.

In April 2014, the company became lead developer of the now shutdown free-to-play Chinese &quot;Call of Duty&quot; title, &quot;Call of Duty: Online&quot;. The company also remade &quot;Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare,&quot; titled &quot;Call of Duty: Modern Warfare Remastered&quot;.

In 2020, Raven Software collaborated with Infinity Ward on the game &quot;Call of Duty: Warzone&quot;. The company is considered the face of maintaining, updating and debugging the game as they regularly provide status updates and patch notes on Twitter and their official website (though it is unclear if they are the sole studio responsible behind-the-scenes).

Raven developed &quot;Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War&quot; with Treyarch, which released on November 13, 2020.

Raven developed &quot;Call of Duty: Black Ops 6&quot; with Treyarch, which released on October 24, 2024.

== Development philosophy ==

Raven is known for its approach to multi-project development teams and choice to use project leads and &quot;state-of-the-art tools&quot; that can help incubate ideas before they evolve into production. Eric Biessman, Raven&#x27;s project director, said: &quot;It&#x27;s very laid back here. We&#x27;re left alone to be as creative as we can be&quot;. The work culture at Raven is focused in their mentality of team-driven initiatives, extensive playtests, emergent narrative-focused gameplay and less middle-management involvement. Brian Raffel ascribes the company&#x27;s motto as &quot;move or die&quot;, explaining that different directions and creative opportunities are a key element in game design to help Raven determinate which market and public their games are visioning. The studio&#x27;s vice-president Steve Raffel also head Raven Scout Team (RST), a research group within the company who spend time with analysis, planning and creating vertical slices-based methods to be purposeful improved in company&#x27;s future projects.

== Accolades and recognition ==

Raven was listed in 2016 by &quot;Fortune&quot; as the 77th best place to work, and the 66th best in 2017, both as part of Activision Blizzard studios. Raven co-founder Brian Raffel was inducted on &quot;In Business&quot; Hall of Fame &quot;for his visionary leadership and unparalled passion in game&#x27;s industry, shaping a successful company and inspiring countless individuals within the gaming community, helping create a close-knit and collaborative culture among teams that marked him as a true icon&quot;.

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1062986" start="0" end="26" title="Raven Software" label="Raven Software Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417728" start="28" end="38" title="trade name" label="trade name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062986" start="40" end="45" title="Raven Software" label="Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062986" start="56" end="76" title="Raven Software" label="Raven Software, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q210167" start="93" end="113" title="video game developer" label="video game developer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570640" start="123" end="143" title="Middleton, Wisconsin" label="Middleton, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q200491" start="157" end="167" title="Activision" label="Activision"/>
<link wikidata="Q794912" start="259" end="271" title="dark fantasy" label="dark fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q936016" start="288" end="301" title="Heretic (video game)" label="Heretic/Hexen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427606" start="329" end="347" title="Soldier of Fortune (video game)" label="Soldier of Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956578" start="372" end="380" title="Brand licensing" label="licensed"/>
<link wikidata="" start="407" end="429" title="Star Wars: Jedi Knight" label="Star Wars: Jedi Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="447" end="460" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q128452" start="468" end="473" title="X-Men" label="X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q192156" start="575" end="587" title="Call of Duty" label="Call of Duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q880202" start="668" end="679" title="Black Crypt" label="Black Crypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347716" start="753" end="766" title="Paper-and-pencil game" label="paper-and-pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="767" end="779" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="846" end="856" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q193564" start="940" end="950" title="Game engine" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q280045" start="966" end="977" title="John Romero" label="John Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="1026" end="1043" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461626" start="1064" end="1076" title="ShadowCaster" label="ShadowCaster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1112" end="1124" title="id Tech#Wolfenstein 3D engine" label="Raven Engine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1137" end="1170" title="id Tech#Wolfenstein 3D engine" label="&amp;quot;Wolfenstein 3D&amp;quot; engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q92605" start="1183" end="1195" title="John Carmack" label="John Carmack"/>
<link wikidata="Q204474" start="1231" end="1242" title="id Software" label="id Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268871" start="1247" end="1268" title="Strategic Simulations" label="Strategic Simulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699815" start="1389" end="1397" title="CyClones" label="CyClones"/>
<link wikidata="Q936016" start="1414" end="1421" title="Heretic (video game)" label="Heretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="1500" end="1522" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q261636" start="1578" end="1592" title="Sequel" label="several sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q284203" start="1754" end="1762" title="Hexen II" label="Hexen II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284431" start="1864" end="1881" title="Take No Prisoners (video game)" label="Take No Prisoners"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843127" start="1898" end="1908" title="MageSlayer" label="MageSlayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251404" start="1940" end="1950" title="Heretic II" label="Heretic II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489274" start="2023" end="2062" title="Soldier of Fortune (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Soldier of Fortune&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427606" start="2088" end="2109" title="Soldier of Fortune (video game)" label="game of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2164" end="2196" title="Star Trek: Voyager – Elite Force" label="Star Trek: Voyager – Elite Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="2276" end="2290" title="cult following" label="cult following"/>
<link wikidata="Q216611" start="2304" end="2313" title="LucasArts" label="LucasArts"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2349" end="2387" title="Star Wars Jedi Knight II: Jedi Outcast" label="Star Wars Jedi Knight II: Jedi Outcast"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2404" end="2439" title="Star Wars Jedi Knight: Jedi Academy" label="Star Wars Jedi Knight: Jedi Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q290534" start="2520" end="2527" title="Quake 4" label="Quake 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165728" start="2553" end="2564" title="Wolfenstein (2009 video game)" label="Wolfenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q306572" start="2621" end="2630" title="id Tech 4" label="id Tech 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200552" start="2665" end="2685" title="Marvel Entertainment" label="Marvel Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="2701" end="2710" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957004" start="2740" end="2753" title="X-Men Legends" label="X-Men Legends"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2774" end="2810" title="X-Men Legends II: Rise of Apocalypse" label="X-Men Legends II: Rise of Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2855" end="2879" title="X-Men Origins: Wolverine (video game)" label="X-Men Origins: Wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="2934" end="2955" title="intellectual property" label="intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079645" start="2963" end="2974" title="Singularity (video game)" label="Singularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="3180" end="3188" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q39057776" start="3209" end="3222" title="Tencent Games" label="Tencent Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q130530" start="3232" end="3251" title="Call of Duty Online" label="Call of Duty Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q731482" start="3325" end="3338" title="Infinity Ward" label="Infinity Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q382543" start="3343" end="3351" title="Treyarch" label="Treyarch"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3373" end="3394" title="Call of Duty: Warzone" label="Call of Duty: Warzone"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3411" end="3443" title="Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War" label="Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3534" end="3559" title="Call of Duty: Black Ops 6" label="Call of Duty: Black Ops 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757598" start="3709" end="3720" title="art teacher" label="art teacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="3724" end="3755" title="University of Wisconsin–Madison" label="University of Wisconsin–Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q500050" start="3760" end="3773" title="Cross country running" label="cross country"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842016" start="3789" end="3810" title="Middleton High School (Middleton, Wisconsin)" label="Middleton High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q187791" start="3841" end="3853" title="screen-print" label="screen-print"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="3854" end="3858" title="Shopping mall" label="shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="3937" end="3959" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686479" start="3966" end="3982" title="Adventure (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)" label="adventure module"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126283" start="3998" end="4027" title="Palace of the Silver Princess" label="Palace of the Silver Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208389" start="4041" end="4056" title="Tomb of Horrors" label="Tomb of Horrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264078" start="4070" end="4089" title="Lost Tomb of Martek" label="Lost Tomb of Martek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049986" start="4107" end="4119" title="Castle Amber (module)" label="Castle Amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347716" start="4214" end="4227" title="paper-and-pencil game" label="paper-and-pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="4228" end="4245" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="4422" end="4427" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197550" start="4611" end="4626" title="computing power" label="computing power"/>
<link wikidata="Q880202" start="4741" end="4752" title="Black Crypt" label="Black Crypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753830" start="4873" end="4883" title="Video game programming" label="programmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q639669" start="4917" end="4925" title="musician" label="musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q656720" start="5189" end="5197" title="workshop" label="workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="5201" end="5208" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q217192" start="5267" end="5282" title="Dark Ages (historiography)" label="Age of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299049" start="5283" end="5295" title="first-person video game" label="first-person"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802119" start="5296" end="5300" title="Tile rendering" label="tile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313710" start="5307" end="5323" title="real-time tactics" label="real-time combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q338583" start="5397" end="5406" title="FTL Games" label="FTL Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587638" start="5419" end="5433" title="Dungeon Master (video game)" label="Dungeon Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="5440" end="5442" title="3D computer graphics" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165478" start="5443" end="5451" title="continuous game" label="realtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385116" start="5527" end="5552" title="Amiga Halfbrite mode" label="extra half-brite graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357944" start="5588" end="5595" title="Palette (computing)" label="palette"/>
<link wikidata="Q280045" start="5831" end="5842" title="John Romero" label="John Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q204474" start="5858" end="5869" title="id Software" label="id Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461626" start="5958" end="5970" title="ShadowCaster" label="ShadowCaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q193564" start="6114" end="6120" title="game engine" label="engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q936016" start="6161" end="6168" title="Heretic (video game)" label="Heretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q284203" start="6199" end="6207" title="Hexen II" label="Hexen II"/>
<link wikidata="Q290534" start="6290" end="6297" title="Quake 4" label="Quake 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165728" start="6314" end="6325" title="Wolfenstein (2009 video game)" label="Wolfenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q200491" start="6428" end="6438" title="Activision" label="Activision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427606" start="6569" end="6587" title="Soldier of Fortune (video game)" label="Soldier of Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6609" end="6644" title="Star Wars Jedi Knight: Jedi Academy" label="Star Wars Jedi Knight: Jedi Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957004" start="6666" end="6679" title="X-Men Legends" label="X-Men Legends"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165728" start="6787" end="6798" title="Wolfenstein (2009 video game)" label="Wolfenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079645" start="6972" end="6983" title="Singularity (video game)" label="Singularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q189557" start="7089" end="7102" title="ZeniMax Media" label="ZeniMax Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q192156" start="7161" end="7173" title="Call of Duty" label="Call of Duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q188522" start="7336" end="7353" title="Software testing" label="quality assurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q107790974" start="7653" end="7666" title="California Department of Fair Employment and Housing v. Activision Blizzard" label="controversies"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="7700" end="7706" title="Strike action" label="strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q110659896" start="7794" end="7815" title="Game Workers Alliance" label="Game Workers Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154183" start="7821" end="7854" title="Communications Workers of America" label="Communications Workers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117176" start="7987" end="7999" title="Bobby Kotick" label="Bobby Kotick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947354" start="8167" end="8182" title="Blizzard Albany" label="Blizzard Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q200491" start="8368" end="8378" title="Activision" label="Activision"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="8390" end="8403" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q985558" start="8405" end="8428" title="Eden Prairie, Minnesota" label="Eden Prairie, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q983859" start="8433" end="8455" title="El Segundo, California" label="El Segundo, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q113685945" start="8684" end="8728" title="Acquisition of Activision Blizzard by Microsoft" label="Microsoft acquisition of Activision Blizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954662" start="8771" end="8793" title="NLRB election procedures" label="voluntarily recognized"/>
<link wikidata="Q936016" start="9041" end="9048" title="Heretic (video game)" label="Heretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023663" start="9189" end="9192" title="gib (video gaming)" label="gib"/>
<link wikidata="Q284203" start="9390" end="9398" title="Hexen II" label="Hexen II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251404" start="9454" end="9464" title="Heretic II" label="Heretic II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="9533" end="9545" title="capital city" label="capital city"/>
<link wikidata="Q794912" start="9553" end="9565" title="dark fantasy" label="dark fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="9669" end="9676" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489274" start="9922" end="9947" title="Soldier of Fortune (magazine)" label="magazine of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427606" start="9971" end="9989" title="Soldier of Fortune (video game)" label="Soldier of Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q62505" start="10033" end="10047" title="physics engine" label="physics engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597163" start="10104" end="10122" title="Graphic violence" label="graphic depictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597163" start="10362" end="10366" title="Graphic violence" label="gore"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10432" end="10467" title="Soldier of Fortune II: Double Helix" label="Soldier of Fortune II: Double Helix"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10554" end="10581" title="Soldier of Fortune: Payback" label="Soldier of Fortune: Payback"/>
<link wikidata="Q890779" start="10612" end="10623" title="Cauldron (video game company)" label="Cauldron HQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q975060" start="10673" end="10679" title="MMOFPS" label="MMOFPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q12593736" start="10719" end="10728" title="Dragonfly (company)" label="Dragonfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q216611" start="10979" end="10988" title="LucasArts" label="LucasArts"/>
<link wikidata="Q181803" start="11167" end="11185" title="Return of the Jedi" label="Return of the Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q55305" start="11207" end="11218" title="Kyle Katarn" label="Kyle Katarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q52347" start="11229" end="11237" title="Galactic Empire (Star Wars)" label="Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="11260" end="11269" title="mercenary" label="mercenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q52316" start="11286" end="11300" title="Rebel Alliance" label="Rebel Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q51724" start="11314" end="11318" title="Jedi" label="Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q51746" start="11337" end="11351" title="Luke Skywalker" label="Luke Skywalker"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11426" end="11464" title="Star Wars Jedi Knight II: Jedi Outcast" label="Star Wars Jedi Knight II: Jedi Outcast"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11488" end="11523" title="Star Wars Jedi Knight: Jedi Academy" label="Star Wars Jedi Knight: Jedi Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q731482" start="11630" end="11643" title="Infinity Ward" label="Infinity Ward"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11653" end="11673" title="Call of Duty: Ghosts" label="Call of Duty: Ghosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q216611" start="11736" end="11745" title="LucasArts" label="LucasArts"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="11775" end="11786" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11797" end="11835" title="Star Wars Jedi Knight II: Jedi Outcast" label="Star Wars Jedi Knight II: Jedi Outcast"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11852" end="11887" title="Star Wars Jedi Knight: Jedi Academy" label="Star Wars Jedi Knight: Jedi Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q165400" start="11897" end="11908" title="SourceForge" label="SourceForge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="11919" end="11931" title="GNU General Public License" label="GPL-2.0-only"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414510" start="12011" end="12023" title="free-to-play" label="free-to-play"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12070" end="12090" title="Call of Duty: Online" label="Call of Duty: Online"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12128" end="12158" title="Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare" label="Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12179" end="12218" title="Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare Remastered" label="Call of Duty: Modern Warfare Remastered"/>
<link wikidata="Q731482" start="12269" end="12282" title="Infinity Ward" label="Infinity Ward"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12301" end="12322" title="Call of Duty: Warzone" label="Call of Duty: Warzone"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12613" end="12645" title="Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War" label="Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q382543" start="12657" end="12665" title="Treyarch" label="Treyarch"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12727" end="12752" title="Call of Duty: Black Ops 6" label="Call of Duty: Black Ops 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q179012" start="12926" end="12938" title="project lead" label="project lead"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12967" end="12972" title="Video game programming#Tools" label="tools"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13032" end="13042" title="Video game development#Production" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203549" start="13287" end="13295" title="playtest" label="playtest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044250" start="13298" end="13316" title="emergent narrative" label="emergent narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q999897" start="13343" end="13360" title="middle-management" label="middle-management"/>
<link wikidata="Q42470" start="13415" end="13420" title="motto" label="motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q12336660" start="13534" end="13545" title="Video game design" label="game design"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="13705" end="13713" title="Research and development" label="research"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922856" start="13791" end="13805" title="vertical slice" label="vertical slice"/>
<link wikidata="Q372989" start="13950" end="13957" title="Fortune (magazine)" label="Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q344341" start="14039" end="14058" title="Activision Blizzard" label="Activision Blizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q944103" start="14120" end="14131" title="Madison metropolitan area" label="In Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621997" start="14138" end="14150" title="Hall of Fame" label="Hall of Fame"/>
</links>
</doc>
