<doc id="24113" wikidata="Q11696" url="?curid=24113" title="President of the United States">
<text>The president of the United States (POTUS) is the head of state and head of government of the United States. The president directs the executive branch of the federal government and is the commander-in-chief of the United States Armed Forces.

The power of the presidency has grown substantially since the first president, George Washington, took office in 1789. While presidential power has ebbed and flowed over time, the presidency has played an increasingly significant role in American political life since the beginning of the 20th century, carrying over into the 21st century with notable expansions during the presidencies of Franklin D. Roosevelt and George W. Bush. In modern times, the president is one of the world&#x27;s most powerful political figures and the leader of the world&#x27;s only remaining superpower. As the leader of the nation with the largest economy by nominal GDP, the president possesses significant domestic and international hard and soft power. For much of the 20th century, especially during the Cold War, the U.S. president was often called &quot;the leader of the free world&quot;.

Article II of the Constitution establishes the executive branch of the federal government and vests executive power in the president. The power includes the execution and enforcement of federal law and the responsibility to appoint federal executive, diplomatic, regulatory, and judicial officers. Based on constitutional provisions empowering the president to appoint and receive ambassadors and conclude treaties with foreign powers, and on subsequent laws enacted by Congress, the modern presidency has primary responsibility for conducting U.S. foreign policy. The role includes responsibility for directing the world&#x27;s most expensive military, which has the second-largest nuclear arsenal.

The president also plays a leading role in federal legislation and domestic policymaking. As part of the system of separation of powers, Article I, Section7 of the Constitution gives the president the power to sign or veto federal legislation. Since modern presidents are typically viewed as leaders of their political parties, major policymaking is significantly shaped by the outcome of presidential elections, with presidents taking an active role in promoting their policy priorities to members of Congress who are often electorally dependent on the president. In recent decades, presidents have also made increasing use of executive orders, agency regulations, and judicial appointments to shape domestic policy.

The president is elected indirectly through the Electoral College to a four-year term, along with the vice president. Under the Twenty-second Amendment, ratified in 1951, no person who has been elected to two presidential terms may be elected to a third. In addition, nine vice presidents have become president by virtue of a president&#x27;s intra-term death or resignation. In all, 45 individuals have served 47 presidencies spanning 60 four-year terms. Donald Trump is the 47th and current president since January 20, 2025.

== History and development ==
=== Origins ===
During the American Revolutionary War, the Thirteen Colonies, represented by the Second Continental Congress in Philadelphia, declared themselves to be independent sovereign states and no longer under British rule. The affirmation was made in the Declaration of Independence, which was written predominantly by Thomas Jefferson and adopted unanimously on July 4, 1776, by the Second Continental Congress. Recognizing the necessity of closely coordinating their efforts against the British, the Continental Congress simultaneously began the process of drafting a constitution that would bind the states together. There were long debates on a number of issues, including representation and voting, and the exact powers to be given the central government. Congress finished work on the Articles of Confederation to establish a perpetual union between the states in November 1777 and sent it to the states for ratification.

Under the Articles, which took effect on March 1, 1781, the Congress of the Confederation was a central political authority without any legislative power. It could make its own resolutions, determinations, and regulations, but not any laws, and could not impose any taxes or enforce local commercial regulations upon its citizens. This institutional design reflected how Americans believed the deposed British system of Crown and Parliament ought to have functioned with respect to the royal dominion: a superintending body for matters that concerned the entire empire. The states were out from under any monarchy and assigned some formerly royal prerogatives (e.g., making war, receiving ambassadors, etc.) to Congress; the remaining prerogatives were lodged within their own respective state governments. The members of Congress elected a president of the United States in Congress Assembled to preside over its deliberation as a neutral discussion moderator. Unrelated to and quite dissimilar from the later office of president of the United States, it was a largely ceremonial position without much influence.

In 1783, the Treaty of Paris secured independence for each of the former colonies. With peace at hand, the states each turned toward their own internal affairs. By 1786, Americans found their continental borders besieged and weak and their respective economies in crises as neighboring states agitated trade rivalries with one another. They witnessed their hard currency pouring into foreign markets to pay for imports, their Mediterranean commerce preyed upon by North African pirates, and their foreign-financed Revolutionary War debts unpaid and accruing interest. Civil and political unrest loomed. Events such as the Newburgh Conspiracy and Shays&#x27; Rebellion demonstrated that the Articles of Confederation were not working.

Following the successful resolution of commercial and fishing disputes between Virginia and Maryland at the Mount Vernon Conference in 1785, Virginia called for a trade conference between all the states, set for September 1786 in Annapolis, Maryland, with an aim toward resolving further-reaching interstate commercial antagonisms. When the convention failed for lack of attendance due to suspicions among most of the other states, Alexander Hamilton of New York led the Annapolis delegates in a call for a convention to offer revisions to the Articles, to be held the next spring in Philadelphia. Prospects for the next convention appeared bleak until James Madison and Edmund Randolph succeeded in securing George Washington&#x27;s attendance to Philadelphia as a delegate for Virginia.

When the Constitutional Convention convened in May 1787, the 12 state delegations in attendance (Rhode Island did not send delegates) brought with them an accumulated experience over a diverse set of institutional arrangements between legislative and executive branches from within their respective state governments. Most states maintained a weak executive without veto or appointment powers, elected annually by the legislature to a single term only, sharing power with an executive council, and countered by a strong legislature. New York offered the greatest exception, having a strong, unitary governor with veto and appointment power elected to a three-year term, and eligible for reelection to an indefinite number of terms thereafter. It was through the closed-door negotiations at Philadelphia that the presidency framed in the U.S. Constitution emerged.

=== 1789–1933 ===
As the nation&#x27;s first president, George Washington established many norms that would come to define the office. His decision to retire after two terms helped address fears that the nation would devolve into monarchy and established a precedent that would not be broken until 1940 and would eventually be made permanent by the Twenty-Second Amendment. By the end of his presidency, political parties had developed, with John Adams defeating Thomas Jefferson in 1796, the first truly contested presidential election. After Jefferson defeated Adams in 1800, he and his fellow Virginians James Madison and James Monroe would each serve two terms, eventually dominating the nation&#x27;s politics during the Era of Good Feelings until Adams&#x27; son John Quincy Adams won election in 1824 after the Democratic-Republican Party split.

The election of Andrew Jackson in 1828 was a significant milestone, as Jackson was not part of the Virginia and Massachusetts elite that had held the presidency for its first 40 years. Jacksonian democracy sought to strengthen the presidency at the expense of Congress, while broadening public participation as the nation rapidly expanded westward. However, his successor, Martin Van Buren, became unpopular after the Panic of 1837, and the death of William Henry Harrison and subsequent poor relations between John Tyler and Congress led to further weakening of the office. Including Van Buren, in the 24 years between 1837 and 1861, six presidential terms would be filled by eight different men, with none serving two terms. The Senate played an important role during this period, with the Great Triumvirate of Henry Clay, Daniel Webster, and John C. Calhoun playing key roles in shaping national policy in the 1830s and 1840s until debates over slavery began pulling the nation apart in the 1850s.

Abraham Lincoln&#x27;s leadership during the Civil War has led historians to regard him as one of the nation&#x27;s greatest presidents. The circumstances of the war and Republican domination of Congress made the office very powerful, and Lincoln&#x27;s re-election in 1864 was the first time a president had been re-elected since Jackson in 1832. After Lincoln&#x27;s assassination, his successor Andrew Johnson lost all political support and was nearly removed from office, with Congress remaining powerful during the two-term presidency of Civil War general Ulysses S. Grant. After the end of Reconstruction, Grover Cleveland would eventually become the first Democratic president elected since before the war, running in three consecutive elections (1884, 1888, 1892) and winning twice. In 1900, William McKinley became the first incumbent to win re-election since Grant in 1872.

After McKinley&#x27;s assassination by Leon Czolgosz in 1901, Theodore Roosevelt became a dominant figure in American politics. Historians believe Roosevelt permanently changed the political system by strengthening the presidency, with some key accomplishments including breaking up trusts, conservationism, labor reforms, making personal character as important as the issues, and hand-picking his successor, William Howard Taft. The following decade, Woodrow Wilson led the nation to victory during World War I, although Wilson&#x27;s proposal for the League of Nations was rejected by the Senate. Warren Harding, while popular in office, would see his legacy tarnished by scandals, especially Teapot Dome, and Herbert Hoover quickly became very unpopular after failing to alleviate the Great Depression.

=== Imperial presidency ===
The ascendancy of Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1933 led further toward what historians now describe as the Imperial presidency. Backed by enormous Democratic majorities in Congress and public support for major change, Roosevelt&#x27;s New Deal dramatically increased the size and scope of the federal government, including more executive agencies. The traditionally small presidential staff was greatly expanded, with the Executive Office of the President being created in 1939, none of whom require Senate confirmation. Roosevelt&#x27;s unprecedented re-election to a third and fourth term, the victory of the United States in World War II, and the nation&#x27;s growing economy all helped established the office as a position of global leadership. His successors, Harry Truman and Dwight D. Eisenhower, each served two terms as the Cold War led the presidency to be viewed as the &quot;leader of the free world&quot;, while John F. Kennedy was a youthful and popular leader who benefited from the rise of television in the 1960s.

After Lyndon B. Johnson lost popular support due to the Vietnam War and Richard Nixon&#x27;s presidency collapsed in the Watergate scandal, Congress enacted a series of reforms intended to reassert itself. These included the War Powers Resolution, enacted over Nixon&#x27;s veto in 1973, and the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974 that sought to strengthen congressional fiscal powers. By 1976, Gerald Ford conceded that &quot;the historic pendulum&quot; had swung toward Congress, raising the possibility of a &quot;disruptive&quot; erosion of his ability to govern. Ford failed to win election to a full term and his successor, Jimmy Carter, failed to win re-election. Ronald Reagan, who had been an actor before beginning his political career, used his talent as a communicator to help reshape the American agenda away from New Deal policies toward more conservative ideology.

After the Cold War, the United States became the world&#x27;s undisputed leading power. Bill Clinton, George W. Bush, and Barack Obama each served two terms as president. Meanwhile, the nation gradually became more politically polarized, leading to the ascendency of increasingly polarized Congressmembers, especially following the 1994 mid-term elections which saw Republicans control the House for the first time in 40 years, and the rise of routine filibusters in the Senate. Recent presidents have thus increasingly focused on executive orders, agency regulations, and judicial appointments to implement major policies, at the expense of legislation and congressional power. Presidential elections in the 21st century have reflected this continuing polarization, with no candidate except Obama in 2008 winning by more than five percent of the popular vote and two, George W. Bush (2000) and Donald Trump (2016), winning in the Electoral College while losing the popular vote. Bush (2004) and Trump (2024) were later re-elected, winning both in the Electoral College and the popular vote.

=== Critics of presidency&#x27;s evolution ===
The nation&#x27;s Founding Fathers expected the Congress, which was the first branch of government described in the Constitution, to be the dominant branch of government; however, they did not expect a strong executive department. However, presidential power has shifted over time, which has resulted in claims that the modern presidency has become too powerful, unchecked, unbalanced, and &quot;monarchist&quot; in nature. In 2008 professor Dana D. Nelson expressed belief that presidents over the previous thirty years worked towards &quot;undivided presidential control of the executive branch and its agencies&quot;. She criticized proponents of the unitary executive theory for expanding &quot;the many existing uncheckable executive powers—such as executive orders, decrees, memorandums, proclamations, national security directives and legislative signing statements—that already allow presidents to enact a good deal of foreign and domestic policy without aid, interference or consent from Congress&quot;. Bill Wilson, board member of Americans for Limited Government, opined that the expanded presidency was &quot;the greatest threat ever to individual freedom and democratic rule&quot;.

== Legislative powers ==
Article I, Section1 of the Constitution vests all lawmaking power in Congress&#x27;s hands, and Article 1, Section 6, Clause2 prevents the president (and all other executive branch officers) from simultaneously being a member of Congress. Nevertheless, the modern presidency exerts significant power over legislation, both due to constitutional provisions and historical developments over time.

=== Signing and vetoing bills ===

The president&#x27;s most significant legislative power derives from the Presentment Clause, which gives the president the power to veto any bill passed by Congress. While Congress can override a presidential veto, it requires a two-thirds vote of both houses, which is usually very difficult to achieve except for widely supported bipartisan legislation. The framers of the Constitution feared that Congress would seek to increase its power and enable a &quot;tyranny of the majority&quot;, so giving the indirectly elected president a veto was viewed as an important check on the legislative power. While George Washington believed the veto should only be used in cases where a bill was unconstitutional, it is now routinely used in cases where presidents have policy disagreements with a bill. The veto – or threat of a veto – has thus evolved to make the modern presidency a central part of the American legislative process.

Specifically, under the Presentment Clause, once a bill has been presented by Congress, the president has three options:
# Sign the legislation within ten days, excluding Sundays, the bill becomes law.
# Veto the legislation within the above timeframe and return it to the house of Congress from which it originated, expressing any objections, the bill does not become law, unless both houses of Congress vote to override the veto by a two-thirds vote.
# Take no action on the legislation within the above timeframe—the bill becomes law, as if the president had signed it, unless Congress is adjourned at the time, in which case it does not become law, which is known as a pocket veto.

In 1996, Congress attempted to enhance the president&#x27;s veto power with the Line Item Veto Act. The legislation empowered the president to sign any spending bill into law while simultaneously striking certain spending items within the bill, particularly any new spending, any amount of discretionary spending, or any new limited tax benefit. Congress could then repass that particular item. If the president then vetoed the new legislation, Congress could override the veto by its ordinary means, a two-thirds vote in both houses. In &quot;Clinton v. City of New York&quot;, , the U.S. Supreme Court ruled such a legislative alteration of the veto power to be unconstitutional.

=== Setting the agenda ===

For most of American history, candidates for president have sought election on the basis of a promised legislative agenda. Article II, Section 3, Clause 2 requires the president to recommend such measures to Congress which the president deems &quot;necessary and expedient&quot;. This is done through the constitutionally-based State of the Union address, which usually outlines the president&#x27;s legislative proposals for the coming year, and through other formal and informal communications with Congress.

The president can be involved in crafting legislation by suggesting, requesting, or even insisting that Congress enact laws that the president believes are needed. Additionally, the president can attempt to shape legislation during the legislative process by exerting influence on individual members of Congress. Presidents possess this power because the Constitution is silent about who can write legislation, but the power is limited because only members of Congress can introduce legislation.

The president or other officials of the executive branch may draft legislation and then ask senators or representatives to introduce these drafts into Congress. Additionally, the president may attempt to have Congress alter proposed legislation by threatening to veto that legislation unless requested changes are made.

=== Promulgating regulations ===
Many laws enacted by Congress do not address every possible detail, and either explicitly or implicitly delegate powers of implementation to an appropriate federal agency. As the head of the executive branch, presidents control a vast array of agencies that can issue regulations with little oversight from Congress.

In the 20th century, critics charged that too many legislative and budgetary powers that should have belonged to Congress had slid into the hands of presidents. One critic charged that presidents could appoint a &quot;virtual army of &#x27;czars&#x27;—each wholly unaccountable to Congress yet tasked with spearheading major policy efforts for the White House&quot;. Presidents have been criticized for making signing statements when signing congressional legislation about how they understand a bill or plan to execute it. This practice has been criticized by the American Bar Association as unconstitutional. Conservative commentator George Will wrote of an &quot;increasingly swollen executive branch&quot; and &quot;the eclipse of Congress&quot;.

=== Convening and adjourning Congress ===
To allow the government to act quickly in case of a major domestic or international crisis arising when Congress is not in session, the president is empowered by Article II, Section3 of the Constitution to call a special session of one or both houses of Congress. Since John Adams first did so in 1797, the president has called the full Congress to convene for a special session on 27 occasions. Harry S. Truman was the most recent to do so in July 1948, known as the Turnip Day Session. In addition, prior to ratification of the Twentieth Amendment in 1933, which brought forward the date on which Congress convenes from December to January, newly inaugurated presidents would routinely call the Senate to meet to confirm nominations or ratify treaties. In practice, the power has fallen into disuse in the modern era as Congress now formally remains in session year-round, convening pro forma sessions every three days even when ostensibly in recess. Correspondingly, the president is authorized to adjourn Congress if the House and Senate cannot agree on the time of adjournment; no president has ever had to exercise this power.

== Executive powers ==


The president is head of the executive branch of the federal government and is constitutionally obligated to &quot;take care that the laws be faithfully executed&quot;. The executive branch has over four million employees, including the military.

=== Administrative powers ===

Presidents make political appointments. An incoming president may make up to 4,000 upon taking office, 1,200 of which must be confirmed by the U.S. Senate. Ambassadors, members of the Cabinet, and various officers, are among the positions filled by presidential appointment with Senate confirmation.

The power of a president to fire executive officials has long been a contentious political issue. Generally, a president may remove executive officials at will. However, Congress can curtail and constrain a president&#x27;s authority to fire commissioners of independent regulatory agencies and certain inferior executive officers by statute.

To manage the growing federal bureaucracy, presidents have gradually surrounded themselves with many layers of staff, who were eventually organized into the Executive Office of the President of the United States. Within the Executive Office, the president&#x27;s innermost layer of aides, and their assistants, are located in the White House Office.

The president also possesses the power to manage operations of the federal government by issuing various types of directives, such as presidential proclamation and executive orders. When the president is lawfully exercising one of the constitutionally conferred presidential responsibilities, the scope of this power is broad. Even so, these directives are subject to judicial review by U.S. federal courts, which can find them to be unconstitutional. Congress can overturn an executive order through legislation.

=== Foreign affairs ===
Article II, Section 3, Clause 4 requires the president to &quot;receive Ambassadors&quot;. This clause, known as the Reception Clause, has been interpreted to imply that the president possesses broad power over matters of foreign policy, and to provide support for the president&#x27;s exclusive authority to grant recognition to a foreign government. The Constitution also empowers the president to appoint United States ambassadors, and to propose and chiefly negotiate agreements between the United States and other countries. Such agreements, upon receiving the advice and consent of the U.S. Senate (by a two-thirds majority vote), become binding with the force of federal law.

While foreign affairs has always been a significant element of presidential responsibilities, advances in technology since the Constitution&#x27;s adoption have increased presidential power. Where formerly ambassadors were vested with significant power to independently negotiate on behalf of the United States, presidents now routinely meet directly with leaders of foreign countries.

=== Commander-in-chief ===
One of the most important of executive powers is the president&#x27;s role as commander-in-chief of the United States Armed Forces. The power to declare war is constitutionally vested in Congress, but the president has ultimate responsibility for the direction and disposition of the military. The exact degree of authority that the Constitution grants to the president as commander-in-chief has been the subject of much debate throughout history, with Congress at various times granting the president wide authority and at others attempting to restrict that authority. The framers of the Constitution took care to limit the president&#x27;s powers regarding the military; Alexander Hamilton explained this in Federalist No. 69:

In the modern era, pursuant to the War Powers Resolution, Congress must authorize any troop deployments longer than 60 days, although that process relies on triggering mechanisms that have never been employed, rendering it ineffectual. Additionally, Congress provides a check to presidential military power through its control over military spending and regulation. Presidents have historically initiated the process for going to war, but critics have charged that there have been several conflicts in which presidents did not get official declarations, including Theodore Roosevelt&#x27;s military move into Panama in 1903, the Korean War, the Vietnam War, and the invasions of Grenada in 1983 and Panama in 1989.

The amount of military detail handled personally by the president in wartime has varied greatly. George Washington, the first U.S. president, firmly established military subordination under civilian authority. In 1794, Washington used his constitutional powers to assemble 12,000 militia to quell the Whiskey Rebellion, a conflict in Western Pennsylvania involving armed farmers and distillers who refused to pay an excise tax on spirits. According to historian Joseph Ellis, this was the &quot;first and only time a sitting American president led troops in the field&quot;, though James Madison briefly took control of artillery units in defense of Washington, D.C., during the War of 1812. Abraham Lincoln was deeply involved in overall strategy and in day-to-day operations during the American Civil War, 1861–1865; historians have given Lincoln high praise for his strategic sense and his ability to select and encourage commanders such as Ulysses S. Grant.

The present-day operational command of the Armed Forces is delegated to the Department of Defense and is normally exercised through the secretary of defense. The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Combatant Commands assist with the operation as outlined in the presidentially approved Unified Command Plan (UCP).

== Judicial powers ==


The president has the power to nominate federal judges, including members of the United States courts of appeals and the Supreme Court of the United States. However, these nominations require Senate confirmation before they may take office. Securing Senate approval can provide a major obstacle for presidents who wish to orient the federal judiciary toward a particular ideological stance. When nominating judges to U.S. district courts, presidents often respect the long-standing tradition of senatorial courtesy. Presidents may also grant pardons and reprieves. Gerald Ford pardoned Richard Nixon a month after taking office. Presidents often grant pardons shortly before leaving office, like when Bill Clinton pardoned Patty Hearst on his last day in office; this is often controversial.

Two doctrines concerning executive power have developed that enable the president to exercise executive power with a degree of autonomy. The first is executive privilege, which allows the president to withhold from disclosure any communications made directly to the president in the performance of executive duties. George Washington first claimed the privilege when Congress requested to see Chief Justice John Jay&#x27;s notes from an unpopular treaty negotiation with Great Britain. While not enshrined in the Constitution or any other law, Washington&#x27;s action created the precedent for the privilege. When Nixon tried to use executive privilege as a reason for not turning over subpoenaed evidence to Congress during the Watergate scandal, the Supreme Court ruled in &quot;United States v. Nixon&quot;, , that executive privilege did not apply in cases where a president was attempting to avoid criminal prosecution. When Bill Clinton attempted to use executive privilege regarding the Lewinsky scandal, the Supreme Court ruled in &quot;Clinton v. Jones&quot;, , that the privilege also could not be used in civil suits. These cases established the legal precedent that executive privilege is valid, although the exact extent of the privilege has yet to be clearly defined. Additionally, federal courts have allowed this privilege to radiate outward and protect other executive branch employees but have weakened that protection for those executive branch communications that do not involve the president.

The state secrets privilege allows the president and the executive branch to withhold information or documents from discovery in legal proceedings if such release would harm national security. Precedent for the privilege arose early in the 19th century when Thomas Jefferson refused to release military documents in the treason trial of Aaron Burr and again in &quot;Totten v. United States&quot; , when the Supreme Court dismissed a case brought by a former Union spy. However, the privilege was not formally recognized by the U.S. Supreme Court until &quot;United States v. Reynolds&quot; , where it was held to be a common law evidentiary privilege. Before the September 11 attacks, use of the privilege had been rare, but increasing in frequency. Since 2001, the government has asserted the privilege in more cases and at earlier stages of the litigation, thus in some instances causing dismissal of the suits before reaching the merits of the claims, as in the Ninth Circuit&#x27;s ruling in &quot;Mohamed v. Jeppesen Dataplan, Inc.&quot; Critics of the privilege claim its use has become a tool for the government to cover up illegal or embarrassing government actions.

The degree to which the president personally has absolute immunity from court cases is contested and has been the subject of several Supreme Court decisions. &quot;Nixon v. Fitzgerald&quot; (1982) dismissed a civil lawsuit against by-then former president Richard Nixon based on his official actions. &quot;Clinton v. Jones&quot; (1997) decided that a president has no immunity against civil suits for actions taken before becoming president and ruled that a sexual harassment suit could proceed without delay, even against a sitting president. The 2019 Mueller report on Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election detailed evidence of possible obstruction of justice, but investigators declined to refer Donald Trump for prosecution based on a United States Department of Justice policy against indicting an incumbent president. The report noted that impeachment by Congress was available as a remedy. As of October 2019, a case was pending in the federal courts regarding access to personal tax returns in a criminal case brought against Donald Trump by the New York County District Attorney alleging violations of New York state law.

Memoranda from the Office of Legal Counsel issued in 1973 and 2000 internally prohibit the Department of Justice from prosecuting a president, which some legal scholars have criticized but others have endorsed.

In defense against federal criminal prosecution for his alleged 2020 election subversion, in January 2024, Trump argued to the DC Circuit Court of Appeals that a president enjoys absolute immunity for criminal acts conducted while in office. The next month, a three-judge panel of the court unanimously ruled against Trump. It was the first time an appeals court had addressed such a presidential immunity matter, since no other sitting or former president had ever been criminally indicted.

In &quot;Trump v. United States&quot;, on July 1, 2024, the Supreme Court ruled that presidents were entitled to absolute immunity from exercising core powers enumerated by the Constitution, presumption of immunity for other official acts, and no immunity for unofficial actions. The case was sent back to lower courts to determine which actions in the criminal complaint should be classified as official vs. unofficial. The ruling was the first time the courts granted a president criminal immunity.

== Leadership roles ==
=== Head of state ===

As head of state, the president represents the United States government to its own people and represents the nation to the rest of the world. For example, during a state visit by a foreign head of state, the president typically hosts a State Arrival Ceremony held on the South Lawn, a custom begun by John F. Kennedy in 1961. This is followed by a state dinner given by the president which is held in the State Dining Room later in the evening.

As a national leader, the president also fulfills many less formal ceremonial duties. For example, William Howard Taft started the tradition of throwing out the ceremonial first pitch in 1910 at Griffith Stadium, Washington, D.C., on the Washington Senators&#x27;s Opening Day. Every president since Taft, except for Jimmy Carter, threw out at least one ceremonial first ball or pitch for Opening Day, the All-Star Game, or the World Series, usually with much fanfare. Every president since Theodore Roosevelt has served as honorary president of the Boy Scouts of America.

Other presidential traditions are associated with American holidays. Rutherford B. Hayes began in 1878 the first White House egg rolling for local children. Beginning in 1947, during the Harry S. Truman administration, every Thanksgiving the president is presented with a live domestic turkey during the annual National Thanksgiving Turkey Presentation held at the White House. Since 1989, when the custom of &quot;pardoning&quot; the turkey was formalized by George H. W. Bush, the turkey has been taken to a farm where it will live out the rest of its natural life.

Presidential traditions also involve the president&#x27;s role as head of government. Many outgoing presidents since James Buchanan traditionally give advice to their successor during the presidential transition. Ronald Reagan and his successors have also left a private message on the desk of the Oval Office on Inauguration Day for the incoming president.

The modern presidency holds the president as one of the nation&#x27;s premier celebrities. Some argue that images of the presidency have a tendency to be manipulated by administration public relations officials as well as by presidents themselves. One critic described the presidency as &quot;propagandized leadership&quot; which has a &quot;mesmerizing power surrounding the office&quot;. Administration public relations managers staged carefully crafted photo-ops of smiling presidents with smiling crowds for television cameras. One critic wrote the image of John F. Kennedy was described as carefully framed &quot;in rich detail&quot; which &quot;drew on the power of myth&quot; regarding the incident of PT 109 and wrote that Kennedy understood how to use images to further his presidential ambitions. As a result, some political commentators have opined that American voters have unrealistic expectations of presidents: voters expect a president to &quot;drive the economy, vanquish enemies, lead the free world, comfort tornado victims, heal the national soul and protect borrowers from hidden credit-card fees&quot;.

=== Head of party ===

The president is typically considered to be the head of their political party. Since the entire House of Representatives and at least one-third of the Senate is elected simultaneously with the president, candidates from a political party inevitably have their electoral success intertwined with the performance of the party&#x27;s presidential candidate. The coattail effect, or lack thereof, will also often impact a party&#x27;s candidates at state and local levels of government as well. However, there are often tensions between a president and others in the party, with presidents who lose significant support from their party&#x27;s caucus in Congress generally viewed to be weaker and less effective.

=== Global leader ===

With the rise of the United States as a superpower in the 20th century, and the United States having the world&#x27;s largest economy into the 21st century, the president is typically viewed as a global leader, and at times the world&#x27;s most powerful political figure. The position of the United States as the leading member of NATO, and the country&#x27;s strong relationships with other wealthy or democratic nations like those comprising the European Union, have led to the moniker that the president is the &quot;leader of the free world&quot;.

== Selection process ==

=== Eligibility ===

Article II, Section 1, Clause 5 of the Constitution sets three qualifications for holding the presidency. To serve as president, one must:
* be a natural-born citizen of the United States;
* be at least 35 years old;
* be a resident in the United States for at least 14 years.

A person who meets the above qualifications would, however, still be disqualified from holding the office of president under any of the following conditions:
* Under Article I, Section 3, Clause 7, having been impeached, convicted and disqualified from holding further public office, although there is some legal debate as to whether the disqualification clause also includes the presidential office: the only previous persons disqualified under this clause were three federal judges.
* Under Section 3 of the Fourteenth Amendment, no person who swore an oath to support the Constitution, and later rebelled against the United States, is eligible to hold any office. However, this disqualification can be lifted by a two-thirds vote of each house of Congress. There is, again, some debate as to whether the clause as written allows disqualification from the presidential position, or whether it would first require litigation outside of Congress, although there is precedent for use of this amendment outside of the original intended purpose of excluding Confederates from public office after the Civil War.
* Under the Twenty-second Amendment, no person can be elected president more than twice. The amendment also specifies that if any eligible person serves as president or acting president for more than two years of a term for which some other eligible person was elected president, the former can only be elected president once.

=== Campaigns and nomination ===

The modern presidential campaign begins before the primary elections, which the two major political parties use to clear the field of candidates before their national nominating conventions, where the most successful candidate is made the party&#x27;s presidential nominee. Typically, the party&#x27;s presidential candidate chooses a vice presidential nominee, and this choice is rubber-stamped by the convention. The most common previous profession of presidents is lawyer.

Nominees participate in nationally televised debates, and while the debates are usually restricted to the Democratic and Republican nominees, third party candidates may be invited, such as Ross Perot in the 1992 debates. Nominees campaign across the country to explain their views, convince voters and solicit contributions. Much of the modern electoral process is concerned with winning swing states through frequent visits and mass media advertising drives.

=== Election ===

The president is elected indirectly by the voters of each state and the District of Columbia through the Electoral College, a body of electors formed every four years for the sole purpose of electing the president and vice president to concurrent four-year terms. As prescribed by Article II, Section 1, Clause 2, each state is entitled to a number of electors equal to the size of its total delegation in both houses of Congress. Additionally, the Twenty-third Amendment provides that the District of Columbia is entitled to the number it would have if it were a state, but in no case more than that of the least populous state. Currently, all states and the District of Columbia select their electors based on a popular election. In all but two states, the party whose presidential–vice presidential ticket receives a plurality of popular votes in the state has its entire slate of elector nominees chosen as the state&#x27;s electors. Maine and Nebraska deviate from this practice, awarding two electors to the statewide winner and one to the winner in each congressional district.

On the first Monday after the second Wednesday in December, about six weeks after the election, the electors convene in their respective state capitals (and in Washington, D.C.) to vote for president and, on a separate ballot, for vice president. They typically vote for the candidates of the party that nominated them. While there is no constitutional mandate or federal law requiring them to do so, the District of Columbia and 32 states have laws requiring that their electors vote for the candidates to whom they are pledged. The constitutionality of these laws was upheld in &quot;Chiafalo v. Washington&quot; (2020). Following the vote, each state then sends a certified record of their electoral votes to Congress. The votes of the electors are opened and counted during a joint session of Congress, held in the first week of January. If a candidate has received an absolute majority of electoral votes for president (currently 270 of 538), that person is declared the winner. Otherwise, the House of Representatives must meet to elect a president using a contingent election procedure in which representatives, voting by state delegation, with each state casting a single vote, choose between the top &quot;three&quot; electoral vote-getters for president. To win the presidency, a candidate must receive the votes of an absolute majority of states (currently 26 of 50).

There have been two contingent presidential elections in the nation&#x27;s history. A 73–73 electoral vote tie between Thomas Jefferson and fellow Democratic-Republican Aaron Burr in the election of 1800 necessitated the first. Conducted under the original procedure established by Article II, Section 1, Clause3 of the Constitution, which stipulates that if two or three persons received a majority vote and an equal vote, the House of Representatives would choose one of them for president; the would become vice president. On February 17, 1801, Jefferson was elected president on the 36th ballot, and Burr elected vice president. Afterward, the system was overhauled through the Twelfth Amendment in time to be used in the 1804 election. A quarter-century later, the choice for president again devolved to the House when no candidate won an absolute majority of electoral votes (131 of 261) in the election of 1824. Under the Twelfth Amendment, the House was required to choose a president from among the top three electoral vote recipients: Andrew Jackson, John Quincy Adams, and William H. Crawford. Held February 9, 1825, this second and most recent contingent election resulted in John Quincy Adams being elected president on the first ballot.

=== Inauguration ===
Pursuant to the Twentieth Amendment, the four-year term of office for both the president and the vice president begins at noon on January 20, in the year following the preceding presidential election. The first presidential and vice presidential terms to begin on this date, known as Inauguration Day, were the second terms of President Franklin D. Roosevelt and Vice President John Nance Garner in 1937. Previously, Inauguration Day was on March 4. As a result of the date change, the first term (1933–37) of both men had been shortened by days.

Before executing the powers of the office, a president is required to recite the presidential Oath of Office, found in Article II, Section 1, Clause8 of the Constitution. This is the only component in the inauguration ceremony mandated by the Constitution:

Presidents have traditionally placed one hand upon a Bible while taking the oath, and have added &quot;So help me God&quot; to the end of the oath. Although the oath may be administered by any person authorized by law to administer oaths, presidents are traditionally sworn in by the chief justice of the United States.

== Incumbency ==
=== Term limit ===
When the first president, George Washington, announced in his Farewell Address that he was not running for a third term, he established a &quot;two terms then out&quot; precedent. Precedent became tradition after Thomas Jefferson publicly embraced the principle a decade later during his second term, as did his two immediate successors, James Madison and James Monroe. In spite of the strong two-term tradition, Ulysses S. Grant sought nomination at the 1880 Republican National Convention for a non-consecutive third term, but was unsuccessful.

In 1940, after leading the nation through the Great Depression and focused on supporting U.S. allied nations at war with the Axis powers, Franklin Roosevelt was elected to a third term, breaking the long-standing precedent. Four years later, with the U.S. engaged in World War II, he was re-elected again despite his declining physical health; he died 82 days into his fourth term on April 12, 1945.

In response to the unprecedented length of Roosevelt&#x27;s presidency, the Twenty-second Amendment was adopted in 1951. The amendment bars anyone from being elected president more than twice, or once if that person served more than two years (24 months) of another president&#x27;s four-year term. Harry S. Truman, the president at the time it was submitted to the states by the Congress, was exempted from its limitations. Without the exemption, he would not have been eligible to run for a second full term in 1952 (which he briefly sought), as he had served nearly all of Franklin Roosevelt&#x27;s unexpired 1945–1949 term and had been elected to a full four-year term beginning in 1949.

=== Vacancies and succession ===
Under Section1 of the Twenty-fifth Amendment, ratified in 1967, the vice president becomes president upon the removal from office, death, or resignation of the president. Deaths have occurred a number of times, resignation has occurred only once, and removal from office has never occurred.

Before the ratification of the Twenty-fifth amendment (which clarified the matter of succession), Article II, Section 1, Clause 6, stated only that the vice president assumes the &quot;powers and duties&quot; of the presidency in the event of a president&#x27;s removal, death, resignation, or inability. Under this clause, there was ambiguity about whether the vice president would actually become president in the event of a vacancy, or simply act as president, potentially resulting in a special election. Upon the death of President William Henry Harrison in 1841, Vice President John Tyler declared that he had succeeded to the office itself, refusing to accept any papers addressed to the &quot;Acting President&quot;, and Congress ultimately accepted it.

In the event of a double vacancy, Article II, Section 1, Clause 6 also authorizes Congress to declare who shall become acting president in the &quot;Case of Removal, Death, Resignation or Inability, both of the president and vice president&quot;. The Presidential Succession Act of 1947 (codified as ) provides that if both the president and vice president have left office or are both otherwise unavailable to serve during their terms of office, the presidential line of succession follows the order of: speaker of the House, then, if necessary, the president pro tempore of the Senate, and then if necessary, the eligible heads of federal executive departments who form the president&#x27;s cabinet. The cabinet currently has 15 members, of which the secretary of state is first in line; the other Cabinet secretaries follow in the order in which their department (or the department of which their department is the successor) was created. Those individuals who are constitutionally ineligible to be elected to the presidency are also disqualified from assuming the powers and duties of the presidency through succession. No statutory successor has yet been called upon to act as president.

=== Declarations of inability ===
Under the Twenty-fifth Amendment, the president may temporarily transfer the presidential powers and duties to the vice president, who then becomes acting president, by transmitting to the speaker of the House and the president &quot;pro tempore&quot; of the Senate a statement that he is unable to discharge his duties. The president resumes his or her powers upon transmitting a second declaration stating that he is again able. The mechanism has been used by Ronald Reagan (once), George W. Bush (twice), and Joe Biden (once), each in anticipation of surgery.

The Twenty-fifth Amendment also provides that the vice president, together with a majority of certain members of the Cabinet, may transfer the presidential powers and duties to the vice president by transmitting a written declaration, to the speaker of the House and the president &quot;pro tempore&quot; of the Senate, to the effect that the president is unable to discharge his or her powers and duties. If the president then declares that no such inability exist, he or she resumes the presidential powers unless the vice president and Cabinet make a second declaration of presidential inability, in which case Congress decides the question.

=== Removal ===
Article II, Section 4 of the Constitution allows for the removal of high federal officials, including the president, from office for &quot;treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors&quot;. Article I, Section 2, Clause5 authorizes the House of Representatives to serve as a &quot;grand jury&quot; with the power to impeach said officials by a majority vote. Article I, Section 3, Clause6 authorizes the Senate to serve as a court with the power to remove impeached officials from office, by a two-thirds vote to convict.

Three presidents have been impeached by the House of Representatives: Andrew Johnson in 1868, Bill Clinton in 1998, and Donald Trump in 2019 and 2021; none have been convicted by the Senate. Additionally, the House Judiciary Committee conducted an impeachment inquiry against Richard Nixon in 1973–74 and reported three articles of impeachment to the House of Representatives for final action; however, he resigned from office before the House voted on them.

=== Circumvention of authority ===

Controversial measures have sometimes been taken short of removal to deal with perceived recklessness on the part of the president, or with a long-term disability. In some cases, staff have intentionally failed to deliver messages to or from the president, typically to avoid executing or promoting the president to write certain orders. This has ranged from Richard Nixon&#x27;s Chief of Staff not transmitting orders to the Cabinet due to the president&#x27;s heavy drinking, to staff removing memos from Donald Trump&#x27;s desk. Decades before the Twenty-fifth Amendment, in 1919, President Woodrow Wilson had a stroke that left him partly incapacitated. First lady Edith Wilson kept this condition a secret from the public for a while, and controversially became the sole gatekeeper for access to the president (aside from his doctor), assisting him with paperwork and deciding which information was &quot;important&quot; enough to share with him.

=== Compensation ===

Since 2001, the president&#x27;s annual salary has been $400,000, along with a $50,000 expense allowance; a $100,000 nontaxable travel account; and a $19,000 entertainment account. The president&#x27;s salary is set by Congress, and under Article II, Section 1, Clause7 of the Constitution, any increase or reduction in presidential salary cannot take effect before the next presidential term of office.

=== Residence ===

The Executive Residence of the White House in Washington, D.C., is the official residence of the president. The site was selected by George Washington, and the cornerstone was laid in 1792. Every president since John Adams (in 1800) has lived there. At various times in U.S. history, it has been known as the &quot;President&#x27;s Palace&quot;, the &quot;President&#x27;s House&quot;, and the &quot;Executive Mansion&quot;. Theodore Roosevelt officially gave the White House its current name in 1901. The federal government pays for state dinners and other official functions, but the president pays for personal, family, and guest dry cleaning and food.

Camp David, officially titled Naval Support Facility Thurmont, a mountain-based military camp in Frederick County, Maryland, is the president&#x27;s country residence. A place of solitude and tranquility, the site has been used extensively to host foreign dignitaries since the 1940s.

The President&#x27;s Guest House, located next to the Eisenhower Executive Office Building at the White House Complex and Lafayette Park, serves as the president&#x27;s official guest house and as a secondary residence for the president if needed. Four interconnected, 19th-century houses—Blair House, Lee House, and 700 and 704 Jackson Place—with a combined floor space exceeding constitute the property.

=== Travel ===
The primary means of long-distance air travel for the president is one of two identical Boeing VC-25 aircraft, which are extensively modified Boeing 747 airliners and are referred to as Air Force One while the president is on board (although any U.S. Air Force aircraft the president is aboard is designated as &quot;Air Force One&quot; for the duration of the flight). In-country trips are typically handled with just one of the two planes, while overseas trips are handled with both, one primary and one backup. The president also has access to smaller Air Force aircraft, most notably the Boeing C-32, which are used when the president must travel to airports that cannot support a jumbo jet. Any civilian aircraft the president is aboard is designated Executive One for the flight.

For short-distance air travel, the president has access to a fleet of U.S. Marine Corps helicopters of varying models, designated Marine One when the president is aboard any particular one in the fleet. Flights are typically handled with as many as five helicopters all flying together and frequently swapping positions as to disguise which helicopter the president is actually aboard to any would-be threats.

For ground travel, the president uses the presidential state car, which is an armored limousine designed to look like a Cadillac sedan, but built on a truck chassis. The U.S. Secret Service operates and maintains the fleet of several limousines. The president also has access to two armored motorcoaches, which are primarily used for touring trips.

=== Protection ===
The U.S. Secret Service is charged with protecting the president and the first family. As part of their protection, presidents, first ladies, their children and other immediate family members, and other prominent persons and locations are assigned Secret Service codenames. The use of such names was originally for security purposes and dates to a time when sensitive electronic communications were not routinely encrypted; today, the names simply serve for purposes of brevity, clarity, and tradition.

== Post-presidency ==
=== Activities ===
Some former presidents have had significant careers after leaving office. Prominent examples include William Howard Taft&#x27;s tenure as chief justice of the United States and Herbert Hoover&#x27;s work on government reorganization after World War II. Grover Cleveland, whose bid for reelection failed in 1888, was elected president again four years later in 1892, and Donald Trump, whose bid for reelection failed in 2020, was elected president again four years later in 2024. Two former presidents served in Congress after leaving the White House: John Quincy Adams was elected to the House of Representatives, serving there for 17 years, and Andrew Johnson returned to the Senate in 1875, though he died soon after. Some ex-presidents were very active, especially in international affairs, most notably Theodore Roosevelt; Herbert Hoover; Richard Nixon; and Jimmy Carter.

Presidents may use their predecessors as emissaries to deliver private messages to other nations or as official representatives of the United States to state funerals and other important foreign events. Richard Nixon made multiple foreign trips to countries including China and Russia and was lauded as an elder statesman. Jimmy Carter became a global human rights campaigner, international arbiter, and election monitor, as well as a recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize. Bill Clinton also worked as an informal ambassador, most recently in the negotiations that led to the release of two American journalists, Laura Ling and Euna Lee, from North Korea. During his presidency, George W. Bush called on former presidents George H. W. Bush and Clinton to assist with humanitarian efforts after the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami. President Obama followed suit by asking presidents Clinton and George W. Bush to lead efforts to aid Haiti after an earthquake devastated that country in 2010.

Clinton has been active politically since his presidential term ended, working with his wife Hillary on her 2008 and 2016 presidential bids and President Obama on his 2012 reelection campaign. Obama has also been active politically since his presidential term ended, having worked with his former vice president Joe Biden on his 2020 election campaign. After losing his bid for the presidency in 2020, Trump remained politically active and was an outspoken critic of his successor and the Democratic Party. He also contended with four criminal cases. Trump announced his fourth bid to the presidency in 2022, ultimately becoming the nominee of his party for the third time and won a second presidential term in 2024.

=== Pension and other benefits ===
The Former Presidents Act (FPA), enacted in 1958, grants lifetime benefits to former presidents and their widows, including a monthly pension, medical care in military facilities, health insurance, and Secret Service protection; also provided is funding for a certain number of staff and for office expenses. The act has been amended several times to provide increases in presidential pensions and in the allowances for office staff. The FPA excludes any president who was removed from office by impeachment.

According to a 2008 report by the Congressional Research Service:

Chief executives leaving office prior to 1958 often entered retirement pursuing various occupations and received no federal assistance. When industrialist Andrew Carnegie announced a plan in 1912 to offer $25,000 annual pensions to former Presidents, many Members of Congress deemed it inappropriate that such a pension would be provided by a private corporation executive. That same year, legislation was first introduced to create presidential pensions, but it was not enacted. In 1955, such legislation was considered by Congress because of former President Harry S. Truman&#x27;s financial limitations in hiring an office staff

The pension has increased numerous times with congressional approval. Retired presidents receive a pension based on the salary of the current administration&#x27;s cabinet secretaries, which was $199,700 per year in 2012. Former presidents who served in Congress may also collect congressional pensions. The act also provides former presidents with travel funds and franking privileges.

Prior to 1997, all former presidents, their spouses, and their children until age 16 were protected by the Secret Service until the president&#x27;s death. In 1997, Congress passed legislation limiting Secret Service protection to no more than 10 years from the date a president leaves office. On January 10, 2013, President Obama signed legislation reinstating lifetime Secret Service protection for him, George W. Bush, and all subsequent presidents. A first spouse who remarries is no longer eligible for Secret Service protection.

=== Presidential libraries ===
Every president since Herbert Hoover has created a repository known as a presidential library for preserving and making available his papers, records, and other documents and materials. Completed libraries are deeded to and maintained by the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA); the initial funding for building and equipping each library must come from private, non-federal sources. There are currently thirteen presidential libraries in the NARA system. There are also presidential libraries maintained by state governments and private foundations and Universities of Higher Education, including:
* The Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum, which is run by the State of Illinois; 
* The George W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum, which is run by Southern Methodist University; 
* The George H. W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum, which is run by Texas A&amp;M University; and
* The Lyndon Baines Johnson Presidential Library and Museum, which is run by the University of Texas at Austin.

Several former presidents have overseen the building and opening of their own presidential libraries. Some even made arrangements for their own burial at the site. Several presidential libraries contain the graves of the president they document: 
* The Harry S. Truman Presidential Library and Museum in Independence, Missouri; 
* The Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library, Museum and Boyhood Home in Abilene, Kansas; 
* The Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum in Yorba Linda, California; and 
* The Ronald Reagan Presidential Library and Museum in Simi Valley, California. 
These gravesites are open to the general public.

== Political affiliation ==

Political parties have dominated American politics for most of the nation&#x27;s history. Though the Founding Fathers generally spurned political parties as divisive and disruptive, and their rise had not been anticipated when the U.S. Constitution was drafted in 1787, organized political parties developed in the U.S. in the mid-1790s nonetheless. They evolved from political factions, which began to appear almost immediately after the Federal government came into existence. Those who supported the Washington administration were referred to as &quot;pro-administration&quot; and would eventually form the Federalist Party, while those in opposition largely joined the emerging Democratic-Republican Party.

Greatly concerned about the very real capacity of political parties to destroy the fragile unity holding the nation together, Washington remained unaffiliated with any political faction or party throughout his eight-year presidency. He was, and remains, the only U.S. president never to be affiliated with a political party. Since Washington, every U.S. president has been affiliated with a political party at the time of assuming office.

The number of presidents per political party by their affiliation at the time they were first sworn into office (alphabetical, by last name) are:
== Timeline of presidents ==
The following timeline depicts the progression of the presidents and their political affiliation at the time of assuming office.

== See also ==

* Outline of American politics
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==

* Edwards, George C. and Thomas G. Howell (eds.). 2009. &quot;The Oxford Handbook of the American Presidency&quot;. Oxford University Press.
* Howell, William G. 2023. &quot;The American Presidency: An Institutional Approach to Executive Politics&quot;. Princeton University Press.
* Tebbel, John William, and Sarah Miles Watts. &quot;The Press and the Presidency: From George Washington to Ronald Reagan&quot; (Oxford University Press, 1985). online review
* Waterman, Richard W., and Robert Wright. &quot;The Image-Is-Everything Presidency: Dilemmas in American Leadership&quot; (Routledge, 2018).
* &quot;Presidential Studies Quarterly&quot;, published by Wiley, is an academic journal on the presidency.
==External links==

* White House homepage
* , Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="4" end="34" title="President of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="36" end="41" title="President of the United States" label="POTUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="50" end="63" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="68" end="86" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="94" end="107" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="135" end="151" title="Federal government of the United States#Executive branch" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="159" end="177" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="189" end="207" title="Powers of the president of the United States#Commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="215" end="241" title="United States Armed Forces" label="United States Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="323" end="340" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824548" start="634" end="655" title="Presidency of Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="660" end="674" title="Presidency of George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489259" start="816" end="826" title="superpower" label="superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="865" end="895" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="largest economy by nominal GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382513" start="960" end="964" title="Hard power" label="hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143951" start="969" end="979" title="soft power" label="soft power"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="1033" end="1041" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q48423" start="1122" end="1152" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution" label="Article II of the Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q874302" start="1751" end="1774" title="List of countries by military expenditures" label="most expensive military"/>
<link wikidata="Q189062" start="1790" end="1820" title="List of states with nuclear weapons" label="second-largest nuclear arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451826" start="1938" end="1958" title="Separation of powers under the United States Constitution" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1960" end="1979" title="Article One of the United States Constitution#Section 7: Bills" label="Article I, Section7"/>
<link wikidata="Q112762791" start="2041" end="2045" title="Veto power in the United States" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338798" start="2451" end="2466" title="executive order" label="executive order"/>
<link wikidata="Q877353" start="2559" end="2577" title="Indirect election" label="elected indirectly"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="2590" end="2607" title="United States Electoral College" label="Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="2644" end="2658" title="Vice President of the United States" label="vice president"/>
<link wikidata="Q214679" start="2670" end="2693" title="Twenty-second Amendment" label="Twenty-second Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594928" start="2868" end="2901" title="List of presidents of the United States who died in office" label="president&amp;#x27;s intra-term death"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241106" start="2905" end="2916" title="Nixon resignation" label="resignation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35073" start="2926" end="2940" title="List of presidents of the United States" label="45 individuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="2998" end="3010" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="3127" end="3153" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="3159" end="3176" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983034" start="3197" end="3224" title="Second Continental Congress" label="Second Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="3228" end="3240" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="3280" end="3295" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="3317" end="3324" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="3363" end="3390" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="3427" end="3443" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="3597" end="3604" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="3711" end="3717" title="U.S. state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="3899" end="3924" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169545" start="3940" end="3955" title="Perpetual Union" label="perpetual union"/>
<link wikidata="Q193170" start="4022" end="4034" title="ratification" label="ratification"/>
<link wikidata="Q490812" start="4063" end="4074" title="Coming into force" label="took effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195929" start="4097" end="4126" title="Congress of the Confederation" label="Congress of the Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="4457" end="4462" title="The Crown" label="Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="4467" end="4477" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="4529" end="4537" title="dominion" label="dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042529" start="4678" end="4695" title="royal prerogative" label="royal prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857508" start="4878" end="4930" title="President of the Continental Congress" label="president of the United States in Congress Assembled"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961937" start="4977" end="4997" title="discussion moderator" label="discussion moderator"/>
<link wikidata="Q217450" start="5165" end="5180" title="Treaty of Paris (1783)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421756" start="5509" end="5522" title="hard currency" label="hard currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="5578" end="5591" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="5616" end="5628" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q899359" start="5630" end="5637" title="Barbary pirates" label="pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574076" start="5774" end="5793" title="Newburgh Conspiracy" label="Newburgh Conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q392601" start="5798" end="5819" title="Shays&amp;#x27; Rebellion" label="Shays&amp;#x27; Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="5966" end="5974" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6924366" start="5995" end="6018" title="Mount Vernon Conference" label="Mount Vernon Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="6117" end="6136" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996243" start="6228" end="6238" title="Annapolis Convention (1786)" label="convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="6319" end="6337" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="6471" end="6483" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="6540" end="6553" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q318703" start="6558" end="6573" title="Edmund Randolph" label="Edmund Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="6596" end="6613" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q405475" start="6686" end="6711" title="Constitutional Convention (United States)" label="Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="6774" end="6786" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="7210" end="7218" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="7514" end="7531" title="Constitution of the United States" label="U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="7598" end="7615" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q214679" start="7891" end="7914" title="Twenty-Second Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-Second Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="7984" end="7994" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="8005" end="8021" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="8149" end="8162" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="8167" end="8179" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384794" start="8268" end="8288" title="Era of Good Feelings" label="Era of Good Feelings"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="8311" end="8328" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q42186" start="8360" end="8387" title="Democratic-Republican Party" label="Democratic-Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="8412" end="8426" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040924" start="8581" end="8601" title="Jacksonian democracy" label="Jacksonian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11820" start="8769" end="8785" title="Martin Van Buren" label="Martin Van Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092480" start="8814" end="8827" title="Panic of 1837" label="Panic of 1837"/>
<link wikidata="Q11869" start="8846" end="8868" title="William Henry Harrison" label="William Henry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11881" start="8907" end="8917" title="John Tyler" label="John Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600099" start="9188" end="9205" title="Great Triumvirate" label="Great Triumvirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="9209" end="9219" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q106231" start="9221" end="9235" title="Daniel Webster" label="Daniel Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q207191" start="9241" end="9256" title="John C. Calhoun" label="John C. Calhoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="9398" end="9413" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="9443" end="9452" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="9796" end="9810" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="9959" end="9975" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="9994" end="10008" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="10010" end="10026" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q35041" start="10198" end="10214" title="William McKinley" label="William McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866985" start="10305" end="10318" title="Assassination of William McKinley" label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q348187" start="10322" end="10335" title="Leon Czolgosz" label="Leon Czolgosz"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="10345" end="10363" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="10692" end="10711" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="10735" end="10749" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="10783" end="10794" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="10836" end="10853" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q35286" start="10882" end="10896" title="Warren Harding" label="Warren Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236296" start="10978" end="10989" title="Teapot Dome" label="Teapot Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="10995" end="11009" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="11071" end="11087" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="11136" end="11157" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479847" start="11221" end="11240" title="Imperial Presidency" label="Imperial presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="11349" end="11357" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355327" start="11536" end="11569" title="Executive Office of the President" label="Executive Office of the President"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11742" end="11754" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="11880" end="11892" title="Harry Truman" label="Harry Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="11897" end="11917" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="11948" end="11956" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011772" start="12002" end="12026" title="leader of the free world" label="leader of the free world"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="12040" end="12055" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="12153" end="12170" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="12203" end="12214" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="12219" end="12232" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="12268" end="12285" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419202" start="12372" end="12393" title="War Powers Resolution" label="War Powers Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125952" start="12443" end="12499" title="Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974" label="Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="12564" end="12575" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="12799" end="12811" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="12840" end="12853" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="13138" end="13150" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="13152" end="13166" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="13172" end="13184" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892454" start="13382" end="13405" title="1994 United States elections" label="1994 mid-term elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448434" start="13502" end="13513" title="Filibuster in the United States Senate" label="filibusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338798" start="13581" end="13596" title="executive order" label="executive order"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="13935" end="13939" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="13945" end="13957" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="13959" end="13963" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="14036" end="14040" title="2004 United States presidential election" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="14053" end="14057" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="14208" end="14224" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="14238" end="14246" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="14306" end="14318" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214706" start="14632" end="14646" title="Dana D. Nelson" label="Dana D. Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887245" start="14844" end="14868" title="unitary executive theory" label="unitary executive theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911388" start="15203" end="15214" title="Bill Wilson (activist)" label="Bill Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745617" start="15232" end="15264" title="Americans for Limited Government" label="Americans for Limited Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923476" start="15412" end="15431" title="Vesting Clauses" label="Article I, Section1"/>
<link wikidata="Q559518" start="15462" end="15477" title="Right of initiative (legislative)" label="lawmaking power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028395" start="15508" end="15537" title="Ineligibility Clause" label="Article 1, Section 6, Clause2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241017" start="15916" end="15934" title="Presentment Clause" label="Presentment Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q686822" start="15984" end="15988" title="Bill (law)" label="bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="15999" end="16007" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16072" end="16087" title="Supermajority#Two-thirds vote" label="two-thirds vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q490812" start="16962" end="16973" title="Coming into force" label="becomes law"/>
<link wikidata="Q112762791" start="16977" end="16981" title="Veto power in the United States" label="Veto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17209" end="17224" title="Supermajority#Two-thirds vote" label="two-thirds vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q615305" start="17446" end="17457" title="pocket veto" label="pocket veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553185" start="17540" end="17558" title="Line Item Veto Act of 1996" label="Line Item Veto Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134289" start="18004" end="18031" title="Clinton v. City of New York" label="Clinton v. City of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="18045" end="18063" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18294" end="18325" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution#Section 3: Presidential responsibilities" label="Article II, Section 3, Clause 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q554211" start="18499" end="18517" title="State of the Union" label="State of the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066612" start="19778" end="19786" title="List of federal agencies in the United States" label="agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285210" start="20262" end="20279" title="signing statement" label="signing statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q463465" start="20417" end="20441" title="American Bar Association" label="American Bar Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270178" start="20488" end="20499" title="George Will" label="George Will"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20808" end="20828" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution#Clause_3:_Extraordinary_sessions_and_prorogation_of_Congress" label="Article II, Section3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574869" start="20859" end="20874" title="special session" label="special session"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="20916" end="20926" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="21042" end="21057" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856057" start="21114" end="21132" title="Turnip Day Session" label="Turnip Day Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q211104" start="21176" end="21195" title="Twentieth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twentieth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q263233" start="21295" end="21306" title="United States presidential inauguration" label="inaugurated"/>
<link wikidata="Q48423" start="21884" end="21910" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution" label="constitutionally obligated"/>
<link wikidata="Q17075528" start="22100" end="22122" title="Political appointments in the United States" label="political appointments"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22210" end="22238" title="Advice and consent#United States" label="confirmed by the U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q121998" start="22240" end="22250" title="Ambassador" label="Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q639738" start="22268" end="22275" title="Cabinet of the United States" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q24965407" start="22289" end="22297" title="Officer of the United States" label="officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="22719" end="22726" title="statute" label="statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355327" start="22886" end="22940" title="Executive Office of the President of the United States" label="Executive Office of the President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q9287183" start="23059" end="23077" title="White House Office" label="White House Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q48976586" start="23185" end="23204" title="Presidential directive" label="types of directives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241458" start="23214" end="23239" title="Presidential proclamation (United States)" label="presidential proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338798" start="23244" end="23259" title="executive order" label="executive order"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303028" start="23448" end="23463" title="Judicial review in the United States" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23619" end="23650" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution#Section 3: Presidential responsibilities" label="Article II, Section 3, Clause 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058726" start="23934" end="23945" title="diplomatic recognition" label="recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362323" start="24229" end="24248" title="Supermajority" label="two-thirds majority"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24795" end="24813" title="Powers of the president of the United States#Commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="24821" end="24847" title="United States Armed Forces" label="United States Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="25390" end="25408" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440646" start="25427" end="25444" title="Federalist No. 69" label="Federalist No. 69"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419202" start="25482" end="25503" title="War Powers Resolution" label="War Powers Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="26011" end="26029" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="26056" end="26062" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="26076" end="26086" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="26092" end="26103" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q769" start="26126" end="26133" title="Grenada" label="Grenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="26146" end="26152" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185046" start="26324" end="26371" title="civilian control of the military" label="military subordination under civilian authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q377542" start="26464" end="26481" title="Whiskey Rebellion" label="Whiskey Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988152" start="26497" end="26517" title="Western Pennsylvania" label="Western Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q669468" start="26625" end="26637" title="Joseph Ellis" label="Joseph Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="26745" end="26758" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q897786" start="26802" end="26829" title="Burning of Washington" label="defense of Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="26842" end="26853" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="26855" end="26870" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="26951" end="26969" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="27107" end="27123" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="27202" end="27223" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="27262" end="27282" title="United States Secretary of Defense" label="secretary of defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763459" start="27288" end="27325" title="chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q143467" start="27334" end="27351" title="Combatant Command" label="Combatant Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006696" start="27515" end="27529" title="United States federal judge" label="federal judges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641851" start="27556" end="27587" title="United States courts of appeals" label="United States courts of appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="27596" end="27630" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27667" end="27686" title="Advice and consent#United States" label="Senate confirmation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="27892" end="27912" title="United States district court" label="U.S. district courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450074" start="27970" end="27989" title="senatorial courtesy" label="senatorial courtesy"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="28017" end="28023" title="pardon" label="pardon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28029" end="28038" title="Pardon#Related concepts" label="reprieves"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="28040" end="28051" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="28061" end="28074" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="28176" end="28188" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q229556" start="28198" end="28210" title="Patty Hearst" label="Patty Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255828" start="28252" end="28265" title="Controversy" label="controversial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419945" start="28418" end="28437" title="executive privilege" label="executive privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="28661" end="28674" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q310847" start="28675" end="28683" title="John Jay" label="John Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="28739" end="28752" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="28998" end="29015" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495462" start="29050" end="29072" title="United States v. Nixon" label="United States v. Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q154234" start="29263" end="29279" title="Clinton–Lewinsky scandal" label="Lewinsky scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134291" start="29314" end="29330" title="Clinton v. Jones" label="Clinton v. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q665141" start="29426" end="29441" title="Precedent" label="legal precedent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791366" start="29788" end="29811" title="state secrets privilege" label="state secrets privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q902342" start="29900" end="29909" title="Discovery (law)" label="discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q258307" start="29958" end="29975" title="national security" label="national security"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="30042" end="30058" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="30104" end="30111" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q179090" start="30121" end="30131" title="Aaron Burr" label="Aaron Burr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828436" start="30151" end="30174" title="Totten v. United States" label="Totten v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893449" start="30343" end="30368" title="United States v. Reynolds" label="United States v. Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="30403" end="30413" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q176763" start="30414" end="30425" title="Evidence (law)" label="evidentiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="30448" end="30468" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358778" start="30750" end="30763" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit" label="Ninth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6891597" start="30787" end="30821" title="Mohamed v. Jeppesen Dataplan, Inc." label="Mohamed v. Jeppesen Dataplan, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q4669817" start="31010" end="31027" title="absolute immunity" label="absolute immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042005" start="31125" end="31144" title="Nixon v. Fitzgerald" label="Nixon v. Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q63213423" start="31515" end="31529" title="Mueller report" label="Mueller report"/>
<link wikidata="Q525302" start="31618" end="31640" title="obstruction of justice" label="obstruction of justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="31678" end="31690" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="31718" end="31753" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013416" start="32033" end="32066" title="New York County District Attorney" label="New York County District Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079258" start="32130" end="32153" title="Office of Legal Counsel" label="Office of Legal Counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q121087450" start="32379" end="32411" title="Federal prosecution of Donald Trump (election obstruction case)" label="alleged 2020 election subversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918178" start="32450" end="32477" title="DC Circuit Court of Appeals" label="DC Circuit Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q124842709" start="32825" end="32847" title="Trump v. United States (2024)" label="Trump v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q132382" start="33007" end="33018" title="presumption" label="presumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="33367" end="33380" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603027" start="33600" end="33622" title="State visits to the United States" label="State Arrival Ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511154" start="33635" end="33645" title="South Lawn (White House)" label="South Lawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="33665" end="33680" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603676" start="33712" end="33724" title="state dinner" label="state dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q554511" start="33769" end="33786" title="State Dining Room of the White House" label="State Dining Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="33909" end="33928" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064159" start="33971" end="33993" title="ceremonial first pitch" label="ceremonial first pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608924" start="34005" end="34021" title="Griffith Stadium" label="Griffith Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="" start="34048" end="34074" title="Minnesota Twins#Washington Nationals/Senators: 1901–1960" label="Washington Senators&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q903416" start="34075" end="34086" title="Opening Day" label="Opening Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="34127" end="34139" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="34216" end="34229" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="34238" end="34250" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="34301" end="34319" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q608132" start="34360" end="34381" title="Boy Scouts of America" label="Boy Scouts of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q35686" start="34453" end="34472" title="Rutherford B. Hayes" label="Rutherford B. Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q675267" start="34509" end="34520" title="egg rolling" label="egg rolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="34571" end="34586" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913791" start="34609" end="34621" title="Thanksgiving (United States)" label="Thanksgiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q620085" start="34695" end="34736" title="National Thanksgiving Turkey Presentation" label="National Thanksgiving Turkey Presentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="34844" end="34861" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q12325" start="35070" end="35084" title="James Buchanan" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893166" start="35141" end="35164" title="United States presidential transition" label="presidential transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="35166" end="35179" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q263233" start="35266" end="35282" title="United States presidential inauguration" label="Inauguration Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q133080" start="35496" end="35512" title="public relations" label="public relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776406" start="35768" end="35777" title="Photo op" label="photo-ops"/>
<link wikidata="Q846279" start="36021" end="36027" title="Patrol torpedo boat PT-109" label="PT 109"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138669" start="36820" end="36835" title="coattail effect" label="coattail effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489259" start="37233" end="37243" title="superpower" label="superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="37525" end="37529" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="37642" end="37656" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011772" start="37714" end="37738" title="leader of the free world" label="leader of the free world"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37793" end="37824" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution#Clause 5: Qualifications for office" label="Article II, Section 1, Clause 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969985" start="37939" end="37980" title="Natural-born-citizen clause (United States)" label="natural-born citizen of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38017" end="38046" title="Residency (domicile)#United States" label="resident in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38237" end="38267" title="Article One of the United States Constitution#Clause 7: Judgment in cases of impeachment; Punishment on conviction" label="Article I, Section 3, Clause 7"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38564" end="38601" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution#Participants in rebellion" label="Section 3 of the Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="39126" end="39138" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederates"/>
<link wikidata="Q214679" start="39191" end="39214" title="Twenty-second Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-second Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916312" start="39592" end="39609" title="United States presidential primary" label="primary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413715" start="39699" end="39730" title="United States presidential nominating convention" label="national nominating conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811251" start="39922" end="39936" title="Rubber stamp (politics)" label="rubber-stamped"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407190" start="40042" end="40070" title="United States presidential debates" label="nationally televised debates"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="40124" end="40134" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="40139" end="40149" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q6579199" start="40160" end="40171" title="Third party (United States)" label="third party"/>
<link wikidata="Q313697" start="40207" end="40217" title="Ross Perot" label="Ross Perot"/>
<link wikidata="Q195594" start="40406" end="40417" title="swing state" label="swing state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="40447" end="40457" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="40569" end="40589" title="Washington, D.C." label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215810" start="40946" end="40968" title="Twenty-third Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-third Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q15145017" start="41299" end="41305" title="Ticket (election)" label="ticket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799148" start="41317" end="41326" title="Plurality (voting)" label="plurality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198311" start="41372" end="41377" title="Slate (elections)" label="slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="41435" end="41440" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="41445" end="41453" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q13751836" start="41558" end="41580" title="List of United States congressional districts" label="congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q81665" start="41876" end="41881" title="Political parties in the United States" label="party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425577" start="42104" end="42111" title="Promise" label="pledged"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751865" start="42169" end="42191" title="Chiafalo v. Washington" label="Chiafalo v. Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362323" start="42456" end="42473" title="Supermajority" label="absolute majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="42582" end="42606" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404720" start="42646" end="42665" title="contingent election" label="contingent election"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="43082" end="43098" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q179090" start="43132" end="43142" title="Aaron Burr" label="Aaron Burr"/>
<link wikidata="Q698106" start="43150" end="43166" title="1800 United States presidential election" label="election of 1800"/>
<link wikidata="" start="43245" end="43275" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution#Clause_3:_Electoral_College" label="Article II, Section 1, Clause3"/>
<link wikidata="Q172099" start="43645" end="43662" title="Twelfth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twelfth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q698133" start="43689" end="43702" title="1804 United States presidential election" label="1804 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q618127" start="43864" end="43880" title="1824 United States presidential election" label="election of 1824"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="44008" end="44022" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="44024" end="44041" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q175877" start="44047" end="44066" title="William H. Crawford" label="William H. Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q211104" start="44252" end="44271" title="Twentieth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twentieth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q263233" start="44520" end="44536" title="United States presidential inauguration" label="Inauguration Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443712" start="44547" end="44559" title="Second inauguration of Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="second terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="44573" end="44594" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q298991" start="44614" end="44631" title="John Nance Garner" label="John Nance Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680700" start="44854" end="44860" title="Recitation" label="recite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502117" start="44865" end="44892" title="Oath of office of the president of the United States" label="presidential Oath of Office"/>
<link wikidata="" start="44903" end="44953" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution#Clause 8: Oath or affirmation" label="Article II, Section 1, Clause8 of the Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="45095" end="45100" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="45326" end="45360" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="chief justice of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="45425" end="45442" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545908" start="45461" end="45477" title="George Washington&amp;#x27;s Farewell Address" label="Farewell Address"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="45612" end="45628" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="45737" end="45750" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="45755" end="45767" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="45812" end="45828" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945540" start="45854" end="45889" title="1880 Republican National Convention" label="1880 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="45993" end="46009" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="46041" end="46055" title="Allies of World War II" label="allied nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="46072" end="46083" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="46214" end="46226" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q214679" start="46424" end="46447" title="Twenty-second Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-second Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q193170" start="46452" end="46459" title="ratification" label="adopted"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="46647" end="46662" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="" start="47080" end="47118" title="Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution#Section 1: Presidential succession" label="Section1 of the Twenty-fifth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q115702285" start="47184" end="47203" title="Federal impeachment trial in the United States" label="removal from office"/>
<link wikidata="" start="47464" end="47495" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution#Clause 6: Vacancy and disability" label="Article II, Section 1, Clause 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676846" start="47812" end="47815" title="Acting (law)" label="act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057954" start="47857" end="47873" title="special election" label="special election"/>
<link wikidata="Q11869" start="47903" end="47925" title="William Henry Harrison" label="William Henry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11881" start="47950" end="47960" title="John Tyler" label="John Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009909" start="48380" end="48407" title="Presidential Succession Act" label="Presidential Succession Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050554" start="48580" end="48611" title="United States presidential line of succession" label="presidential line of succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q910252" start="48762" end="48791" title="United States federal executive departments" label="federal executive departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q639738" start="48822" end="48829" title="Cabinet of the United States" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123628" start="49505" end="49521" title="Acting president of the United States" label="acting president"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="49546" end="49566" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="speaker of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140848" start="49575" end="49622" title="President pro tempore of the United States Senate" label="president &amp;quot;pro tempore&amp;quot; of the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="49819" end="49832" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="49841" end="49855" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="49869" end="49878" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q639738" start="50038" end="50045" title="Cabinet of the United States" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="" start="50583" end="50604" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution#Section 4: Impeachment" label="Article II, Section 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="50722" end="50729" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q187436" start="50731" end="50738" title="bribery" label="bribery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757523" start="50749" end="50777" title="high crimes and misdemeanors" label="high crimes and misdemeanors"/>
<link wikidata="" start="50785" end="50814" title="Article One of the United States Constitution#Clause 5: Speaker and other officers; Impeachment" label="Article I, Section 2, Clause5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323789" start="50875" end="50885" title="grand jury" label="grand jury"/>
<link wikidata="" start="50953" end="50982" title="Article One of the United States Constitution#Clause 6: Trial of Impeachments" label="Article I, Section 3, Clause6"/>
<link wikidata="Q41487" start="51019" end="51024" title="court" label="court"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149795" start="51205" end="51209" title="Impeachment of Andrew Johnson" label="1868"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200400" start="51227" end="51231" title="Impeachment of Bill Clinton" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q79063280" start="51253" end="51257" title="First impeachment of Donald Trump" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q104713215" start="51262" end="51266" title="Second impeachment of Donald Trump" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131462" start="51326" end="51351" title="United States House Committee on the Judiciary" label="House Judiciary Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711778" start="51410" end="51417" title="Impeachment process against Richard Nixon" label="1973–74"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="51972" end="51985" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="52120" end="52132" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52229" end="52270" title="Presidency of Woodrow Wilson#Incapacity, 1919–1921" label="stroke that left him partly incapacitated"/>
<link wikidata="Q255169" start="52283" end="52295" title="Edith Wilson" label="Edith Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52374" end="52400" title="Edith Wilson#Increased role after husband&amp;#x27;s stroke" label="became the sole gatekeeper"/>
<link wikidata="" start="52828" end="52858" title="Article Two of the United States Constitution#Clause 7: Salary" label="Article II, Section 1, Clause7"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419918" start="53017" end="53036" title="Executive Residence" label="Executive Residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="53044" end="53055" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="53059" end="53075" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q481289" start="53084" end="53102" title="official residence" label="official residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q309202" start="53670" end="53680" title="Camp David" label="Camp David"/>
<link wikidata="Q501345" start="53767" end="53793" title="Frederick County, Maryland" label="Frederick County, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q881182" start="53960" end="53988" title="President&amp;#x27;s Guest House" label="President&amp;#x27;s Guest House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312965" start="54010" end="54046" title="Eisenhower Executive Office Building" label="Eisenhower Executive Office Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471523" start="54078" end="54092" title="Lafayette Square, Washington, D.C." label="Lafayette Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q645289" start="54466" end="54478" title="Boeing VC-25" label="Boeing VC-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="54520" end="54530" title="Boeing 747" label="Boeing 747"/>
<link wikidata="Q179969" start="54564" end="54577" title="Air Force One" label="Air Force One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908500" start="54970" end="54981" title="Boeing C-32" label="Boeing C-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383602" start="55134" end="55147" title="Executive One" label="Executive One"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="55235" end="55252" title="United States Marine Corps" label="U.S. Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125423" start="55295" end="55305" title="Marine One" label="Marine One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745015" start="55618" end="55640" title="Presidential state car (United States)" label="presidential state car"/>
<link wikidata="Q188475" start="55662" end="55671" title="limousine" label="limousine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27436" start="55696" end="55704" title="Cadillac" label="Cadillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068107" start="55733" end="55740" title="chassis" label="chassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q503224" start="55746" end="55765" title="United States Secret Service" label="U.S. Secret Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610858" start="55855" end="55879" title="Ground Force One" label="two armored motorcoaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994034" start="55910" end="55923" title="Whistle stop train tour" label="touring trips"/>
<link wikidata="Q503224" start="55949" end="55968" title="United States Secret Service" label="U.S. Secret Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q862444" start="56018" end="56030" title="First family of the United States" label="first family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="56073" end="56085" title="First Lady of the United States" label="first ladies"/>
<link wikidata="Q389761" start="56193" end="56216" title="Secret Service codename" label="Secret Service codename"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="56358" end="56367" title="Encryption" label="encrypted"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="56591" end="56610" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="56628" end="56662" title="chief justice of the United States" label="chief justice of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="56667" end="56681" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="56729" end="56741" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="56743" end="56759" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q699168" start="56796" end="56800" title="1888 United States presidential election" label="1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q72472" start="56850" end="56854" title="1892 United States presidential election" label="1892"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="56860" end="56872" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="56909" end="56913" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="56963" end="56967" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="57041" end="57058" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="57136" end="57150" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="57690" end="57702" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="57719" end="57731" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="57819" end="57836" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="57964" end="57974" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q456636" start="57977" end="57987" title="Laura Ling" label="Laura Ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q433087" start="57992" end="58000" title="Euna Lee" label="Euna Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="58007" end="58018" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="58162" end="58202" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami" label="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q43777" start="58320" end="58330" title="2010 Haiti earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="58458" end="58465" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5762559" start="58473" end="58477" title="Hillary Clinton 2008 presidential campaign" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872173" start="58482" end="58486" title="Hillary Clinton 2016 presidential campaign" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858123" start="58532" end="58556" title="Barack Obama 2012 presidential campaign" label="2012 reelection campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="58677" end="58686" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q63241885" start="58694" end="58716" title="Joe Biden 2020 presidential campaign" label="2020 election campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470110" start="59122" end="59143" title="Former Presidents Act" label="Former Presidents Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q115705182" start="59614" end="59625" title="Federal impeachment in the United States" label="impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="59662" end="59692" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160978" start="60608" end="60629" title="congressional pension" label="congressional pension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444571" start="60694" end="60702" title="franking" label="franking"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="61122" end="61136" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="61171" end="61183" title="First Spouse of the United States" label="first spouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="61305" end="61319" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065413" start="61334" end="61344" title="Institutional repository" label="repository"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546583" start="61356" end="61376" title="Presidential library system" label="presidential library"/>
<link wikidata="Q518155" start="61525" end="61569" title="National Archives and Records Administration" label="National Archives and Records Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q330237" start="61904" end="61951" title="Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum" label="Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="61982" end="61990" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508430" start="61999" end="62045" title="George W. Bush Presidential Center" label="George W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536258" start="62063" end="62092" title="Southern Methodist University" label="Southern Methodist University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507065" start="62101" end="62150" title="George H.W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum" label="George H. W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49212" start="62168" end="62192" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853779" start="62204" end="62257" title="Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum" label="Lyndon Baines Johnson Presidential Library and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="62279" end="62308" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q525981" start="62564" end="62611" title="Harry S. Truman Presidential Library and Museum" label="Harry S. Truman Presidential Library and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q24603" start="62615" end="62637" title="Independence, Missouri" label="Independence, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270206" start="62646" end="62712" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library, Museum and Boyhood Home" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library, Museum and Boyhood Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q321292" start="62716" end="62731" title="Abilene, Kansas" label="Abilene, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754354" start="62740" end="62785" title="Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum" label="Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q493518" start="62789" end="62812" title="Yorba Linda, California" label="Yorba Linda, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432360" start="62825" end="62870" title="Ronald Reagan Presidential Library and Museum" label="Ronald Reagan Presidential Library and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q323414" start="62874" end="62897" title="Simi Valley, California" label="Simi Valley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q81665" start="62979" end="62996" title="Political parties in the United States" label="Political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q330963" start="63012" end="63029" title="Politics of the United States" label="American politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="63080" end="63096" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393724" start="63347" end="63364" title="political faction" label="political faction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824580" start="63482" end="63507" title="Presidency of George Washington" label="Washington administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="63589" end="63605" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q42186" start="63661" end="63688" title="Democratic-Republican Party" label="Democratic-Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="63837" end="63849" title="Independent politician" label="unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124595" start="64320" end="64328" title="Bar chart" label="timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q60788444" start="64454" end="64482" title="Outline of American politics" label="Outline of American politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q50051" start="64819" end="64839" title="John William Tebbel" label="Tebbel, John William"/>
<link wikidata="Q15754501" start="65143" end="65173" title="Presidential Studies Quarterly" label="Presidential Studies Quarterly"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24115" wikidata="Q7311321" url="?curid=24115" title="Religious affiliations of presidents of the United States">
<text>Religious affiliations can affect the electability of the presidents of the United States and shape their stances on policy matters and their visions of society and also how they want to lead it. While no president has ever openly identified as an atheist, Thomas Jefferson, Abraham Lincoln, and William Howard Taft were speculated to be atheists by their opponents during political campaigns; in addition, a survey during the presidency of Donald Trump showed that 63% of Americans did not believe he was religious, despite his professed Christian affiliation. Conspiracy theorists also falsely circulated rumors that Barack Obama was a Muslim during his 2004 Senate campaign and later time as President. Conversely, other presidents, such as Jimmy Carter, used their faith as a defining aspect of their campaigns and tenure in office.

Essentially all of the presidents can be characterized as Christians, at least by upbringing, though some were unaffiliated with any specific religious body. Mainline Protestants predominate, with Episcopalians and Presbyterians being the most prevalent. John F. Kennedy and Joe Biden were the only Catholic presidents.

==Formal affiliation==

The pattern of religious adherence has changed dramatically over the course of United States history, so that the pattern of presidential affiliations is quite unrepresentative of modern membership numbers. For example, Episcopalians are extraordinarily well represented among the presidents compared to a current membership of about 2% of the population; this is partly because the Church of England, from which the Episcopal Church is derived, was the established church in some of the British Colonies (such as New York and Virginia) before the American Revolution. The Episcopal Church has been much larger previously, with its decline in membership occurring only in more recent decades. The first seven presidents listed as Episcopalians were all from Virginia. Unitarians are also overrepresented, reflecting the importance of those colonial churches. Conversely, Baptists are underrepresented, a reflection of their quite recent expansion in numbers; the list includes only two Catholic presidents, although they are currently the largest single denomination. There have been no Adventist, Anabaptist, Eastern Orthodox, Assyrian Church of the East, Oriental Orthodox, Lutheran, Latter Day Saint, or Pentecostal presidents.

While many presidents did not formally join a church until quite late in life, there is a genre of tales of deathbed conversions. Biographers usually doubt these, though the baptism of James K. Polk is well documented.

==Personal beliefs==
On the other hand, there are several presidents who considered themselves aligned with a particular church, but who withheld from formal affiliation for a time. James Buchanan, for instance, held himself allied with the Presbyterian church, but refrained from joining it until he left office.

===Deism and the Founding Fathers===
Deism was a religious philosophy in common currency in colonial times, and some Founding Fathers (most notably Thomas Paine, who was an explicit proponent of it, and Benjamin Franklin, who spoke of it in his Autobiography) are identified more or less with this system. Thomas Jefferson became a deist in later life, and George Washington, John Adams, Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, James Monroe, and John Tyler are often identified as having some degree of deistic beliefs.

===Unitarianism and nontrinitarianism===
Four presidents were affiliated with Unitarian churches and a fifth (Thomas Jefferson) was an exponent of ideas now commonly associated with Unitarianism. Unitarianism, the belief that God has a unitary nature, developed in opposition to Trinitarianism, the belief that God is three persons in one (the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit). In a letter to Benjamin Waterhouse in 1822, Jefferson said, &quot;I trust that there is not a young man now living in the US. who will not die an Unitarian.&quot; William Howard Taft, a Unitarian, said in a letter to a friend, &quot;I am interested in the spread of Christian civilization, but to go into a dogmatic discussion of creed I will not do whether I am defeated or not. ... If the American electorate is so narrow as not to elect a Unitarian, well and good. I can stand it.&quot;

While Abraham Lincoln never officially joined a church, there has been some research indicating that he may have had Quaker leanings. During his time in office, he had numerous meetings with Quakers and had investigated a supposed Quaker ancestry.

The only other president with any association with a definitely nontrinitarian body is Dwight D. Eisenhower, whose parents moved from the River Brethren to the antecedents of the Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses. Eisenhower himself was baptized in the Presbyterian church shortly after assuming the presidency, the only president thus far to undergo such a rite while in office; and his attendance at West Point was in sharp opposition to the tenets of the groups to which his parents belonged.

===Nonreligious presidents===

There are some presidents for whom there is little evidence as to the importance of religion in their lives. For example, almost no evidence exists for Monroe&#x27;s personal religious beliefs, though this may be the result of the destruction of most of his personal correspondence, in which religious sentiments may have been recorded. As with claims of deism, these identifications are not without controversy. No president has declared himself to be atheist.

==Civic religion==
St. John&#x27;s Episcopal Church (built 1815–1816) just across Lafayette Square and north of the White House, is the church nearest to the White House, and its services have been attended at least once by nearly every president since James Madison (1809–1817). Another Episcopal church, Washington National Cathedral, chartered by Congress in 1893, has hosted many funeral and memorial services of presidents and other dignitaries, as well as the site of interfaith presidential prayer services after their inaugurations, and the burial place of Woodrow Wilson.

Throughout history governmental proclamations often include religious language. In at least two cases, presidents saw fit to issue denials that they were atheists. At the same time, this was tempered, especially in early years, by a strong commitment to disestablishment. Several presidents especially stand out as exponents of this. Consideration of this has become increasingly contentious as topics such as civil rights and human sexuality have increasingly put churches at odds with each other and with the government.

==List of presidents by religious affiliation==
==List of presidents with details on their religious affiliation==
For each president, the formal affiliation at the time of his presidency is listed first, with other affiliations listed after. Further explanation follows if needed, as well as notable detail.

# George Washington – Episcopalian and Deist 
# John Adams – Unitarian
#* The Adamses were originally members of the state-supported Congregational churches in New England. By 1800, most Congregationalist churches in Boston had Unitarian preachers teaching the strict unity of God, the subordinate nature of Christ, and salvation by character. Adams himself preferred Unitarian preachers, but he was opposed to Joseph Priestley&#x27;s sympathies with the French Revolution, and would attend other churches if the only nearby Congregational/Unitarian one was composed of followers of Priestley.
#* Adams described himself as a &quot;church going animal&quot; in a letter to Benjamin Rush.
# Thomas Jefferson – None specified, likely Deist 
#*Jefferson was raised Anglican and served as a vestryman prior to the American Revolution, but as an adult he did not hold to the tenets of this church.
#* Modern Unitarian Universalists consider Jefferson&#x27;s views to be very close to theirs. The &quot;Famous UUs&quot; website says:
#:Like many others of his time (he died just one year after the founding of institutional Unitarianism in America), Jefferson was a Unitarian in theology, though not in church membership. He never joined a Unitarian congregation: there were none near his home in Virginia during his lifetime. He regularly attended Joseph Priestley&#x27;s Pennsylvania church when he was nearby, and said that Priestley&#x27;s theology was his own, and there is no doubt Priestley should be identified as Unitarian. Jefferson remained a member of the Episcopal congregation near his home, but removed himself from those available to become godparents, because he was not sufficiently in agreement with the Trinitarian theology. His work, the Jefferson Bible, was Unitarian in theology ...
#* In a letter to Benjamin Rush prefacing his &quot;Syllabus of an Estimate of the Merit of the Doctrines of Jesus&quot;, Jefferson wrote:
#:In some of the delightful conversations with you, in the evenings of 1798–99, and which served as an anodyne to the afflictions of the crisis through which our country was then laboring, the Christian religion was sometimes our topic; and I then promised you, that one day or other, I would give you my views of it. They are the result of a life of inquiry &amp; reflection, and very different from that anti-Christian system imputed to me by those who know nothing of my opinions. To the corruptions of Christianity I am indeed opposed; but not to the genuine precepts of Jesus himself. I am a Christian, in the only sense he wished any one to be; sincerely attached to his doctrines, in preference to all others; ascribing to himself every human excellence; &amp; believing he never claimed any other.
#*In a letter to John Adams dated August 22, 1813, Jefferson named Joseph Priestley and Conyers Middleton as the inspirations for his religious beliefs, writing that:
#:You are right in supposing, in one of yours, that I had not read much of Priestley&#x27;s Predestination, his No-soul system, or his controversy with Horsley. but I have read his Corruptions of Christianity, &amp; Early opinions of Jesus, over and over again; and I rest on them, and on Middleton&#x27;s writings, especially his letters from Rome, and to Waterland, as the basis of my own faith. these writings have never been answered, nor can be answered, by quoting historical proofs, as they have done. for these facts therefore I cling to their learning, so much superior to my own.
# James Madison – Episcopalian and Deist
#* Although Madison tried to keep a low profile in regards to religion, he seemed to hold religious opinions, like many of his contemporaries, that were closer to deism or Unitarianism in theology than conventional Christianity. He was raised in the Church of England and attended Episcopal services, despite his personal disputes with the theology.
# James Monroe – Episcopalian
#* Monroe was raised in a family that belonged to the Church of England when it was the state church in Virginia, and as an adult attended Episcopal churches.
#* &quot;When it comes to Monroe&#x27;s ... thoughts on religion&quot;, Bliss Isely comments in his &quot;The Presidents: Men of Faith&quot;, &quot;less is known than that of any other President.&quot; Monroe burned much of his correspondence with his wife, and no letters survive in which he discusses his religious beliefs; nor did his friends, family or associates write about his beliefs. Letters that do survive, such as ones written on the occasion of the death of his son, contain no discussion of religion.
#* Some authors conclude that Monroe&#x27;s writings show evidence of &quot;deistic tendencies&quot;.
# John Quincy Adams – Unitarian
#* Adams&#x27;s religious views shifted over the course of his life. In college and early adulthood he preferred trinitarian theology, and from 1818 to 1848 he served as vice president of the American Bible Society. However, as he grew older his views became more typically Unitarian, though he rejected some of the views of Joseph Priestley and the Transcendentalists.
#* He was a founding member of the First Unitarian Church of Washington (D.C.). However he regularly attended Presbyterian and Episcopal services as well.
#* Towards the end of his life, he wrote, &quot;I reverence God as my creator. As creator of the world. I reverence him with holy fear. I venerate Jesus Christ as my redeemer; and, as far as I can understand, the redeemer of the world. But this belief is dark and dubious.&quot;
# Andrew Jackson – Presbyterian
#* He became a member of the Presbyterian Church about a year after leaving the presidency.
# Martin Van Buren – Dutch Reformed
#* Van Buren is reported to have attended the Dutch Reformed church in his home town of Kinderhook, New York, and while in Washington, services at St. John&#x27;s Lafayette Square.
#* His funeral was held at the Reformed Dutch Church in Kinderhook with burial in a family plot at the nearby church cemetery.
# William Henry Harrison – Episcopalian
#* Harrison was a vestryman of Christ Episcopal Church in Cincinnati, Ohio after resigning his military commission in 1814.
# John Tyler – Episcopalian
#*Although affiliated with the Episcopal church, he did not take &quot;a denominational approach to God.&quot; Tyler was a strong supporter of religious tolerance and separation of church and state.
# James K. Polk – Methodist
#*Polk came from a Presbyterian upbringing but was not baptized as a child, due to a dispute with the local Presbyterian minister in rural North Carolina. Polk&#x27;s father and grandfather were Deists, and the minister refused to baptize James unless his father affirmed Christianity, which he would not do. Polk had a conversion experience at a Methodist camp meeting when he was thirty-eight, and thereafter considered himself Methodist. Nevertheless, he continued to attend Presbyterian services with his wife, though he went to the local Methodist chapel when she was ill or out of town. On his deathbed, he summoned the Rev. John B. McFerrin, who had converted him years before, to baptize him.
# Zachary Taylor – Episcopalian
#* Although raised an Episcopalian and married to a devout Episcopalian, he never became a full communicant member in the church.
# Millard Fillmore – Unitarian
# Franklin Pierce – Episcopalian
# James Buchanan – Presbyterian
#* Buchanan, raised a Presbyterian, attended and supported various churches throughout his life. He joined the Presbyterian Church after leaving the presidency.
# Abraham Lincoln – Christianity, no branch specified.
#* Life before the presidency
#** Some believe that for much of his life, Lincoln was a Deist.
#** Rev. Dr. Phineas D. Gurley, pastor of the New York Avenue Presbyterian church in Washington D.C., which Lincoln attended with his wife when he attended any church, never claimed a conversion. According to D. James Kennedy in his booklet, &quot;What They Believed: The Faith of Washington, Jefferson, and Lincoln&quot;, &quot;Dr. Gurley said that Lincoln had wanted to make a public profession of his faith on Easter Sunday morning. But then came Ford&#x27;s Theater.&quot; (p. 59, Published by Coral Ridge Ministries, 2003) Though this is possible, we have no way of verifying the truth of the report. The chief evidence against it is that Dr. Gurley, so far as we know, never mentioned it publicly. The determination to join, if accurate, would have been extremely newsworthy. It would have been reasonable for Dr. Gurley to have mentioned it at the funeral in the White House, in which he delivered the sermon which has been preserved. The only evidence we have is an affidavit signed more than sixty years later by Mrs. Sidney I. Lauck, then a very old woman. In her affidavit signed under oath in Essex County, New Jersey, February 15, 1928, she said, &quot;After Mr. Lincoln&#x27;s death, Dr. Gurley told me that Mr. Lincoln had made all the necessary arrangements with him and the Session of the New York Avenue Presbyterian Church to be received into the membership of the said church, by confession of his faith in Christ, on the Easter Sunday following the Friday night when Mr. Lincoln was assassinated.&quot; Mrs. Lauck was, she said, about thirty years of age at the time of the assassination.
# Andrew Johnson – No formal affiliation
#* He accompanied his wife Eliza McCardle Johnson to Methodist services sometimes, belonged to no church himself, and sometimes attended Catholic services—remarking favorably that there was no reserved seating.
# Ulysses S. Grant – Methodist
#* Grant was never baptized into any church, though he accompanied his wife Julia Grant to Methodist services. Many sources list his religious affiliation as Methodist based on a Methodist minister&#x27;s account of a deathbed conversion. He did leave a note for his wife in which he hoped to meet her again in a better world.
#* In his 1875 State of the Union address, during conflicts over Catholic parochial schooling, Grant called for a constitutional amendment that would require all states to establish free public schools while &quot;forbidding the teaching in said schools of religious, atheistic, or pagan tenets; and prohibiting the granting of any school funds or school taxes ... for the benefit ... of any religious sect or denomination.&quot; The proposed Blaine Amendment to the Constitution followed.
# Rutherford B. Hayes – Unspecified Protestant
#* Hayes came from a Presbyterian family, but attended Methodist schools as a youth.
#* Many sources list him as Methodist; in general, however, it is agreed that he held himself to be a Christian, but of no specific church.
#*In his diary entry for May 17, 1890, he states: &quot;Writing a few words for Mohonk Negro Conference, I find myself using the word Christian. I am not a subscriber to any creed. I belong to no church. But in a sense, satisfactory to myself and believed by me to be important, I try to be a Christian, or rather I want to be a Christian and to help do Christian work.&quot;
#* Hayes&#x27; wife, Lucy, was a Methodist, a temperance advocate, and deeply opposed to slavery; he generally attended church with her.
# James Garfield – Churches of Christ
#* He was baptized at age eighteen.
#* Through his twenties, Garfield preached and held revival meetings, though he was never formally a minister within the church.
#* Charles J. Guiteau attempted to assassinate Garfield at a sermon.
# Chester A. Arthur – Episcopalian
#* His father was a Baptist preacher.
#* Upon his wife&#x27;s death in 1880, he commissioned a memorial window for the south transept of St. John&#x27;s, Lafayette Square, visible from the White House and lighted from within at his behest.
# Grover Cleveland – Presbyterian
# Benjamin Harrison – Presbyterian
#* Harrison became a church elder, and taught Sunday school.
# Grover Cleveland – Presbyterian
# William McKinley – Methodist
#* Early in life, he planned to become a Methodist minister.
#* James Rusling, a McKinley supporter, related a story that McKinley had addressed a church delegation and had stated that one of the objectives of the Spanish–American War was &quot;to educate the Filipinos, and uplift and civilize and Christianize them&quot;. Recent historians have judged this account unreliable, especially in light of implausible statements Rusling made about Lincoln&#x27;s religion.
#* McKinley is the only president to include exclusively Christian language in his Thanksgiving Day proclamation.
# Theodore Roosevelt – Dutch Reformed
#* Roosevelt always stated that he was Dutch Reformed; however, he attended Episcopal churches where there was no Reformed church nearby. (His second wife Edith was Episcopalian from birth.) As there was no Dutch Reformed church in Oyster Bay, New York, he attended Christ Church Oyster Bay when in residence there, and it was in that church that his funeral was held.
#* His mother was Presbyterian and as a child he attended Presbyterian churches with her.
# William Howard Taft – Unitarian
#* Before becoming president, Taft was offered the presidency of Yale University, at that time affiliated with the Congregationalist Church; Taft turned the post down, saying, &quot;I do not believe in the divinity of Christ.&quot;
#* Taft&#x27;s beliefs were the subject of some controversy, and in 1908 he found it necessary to refute a rumor that he was an atheist.
#* During his presidency he attended All Souls Church
# Woodrow Wilson – Presbyterian
#* Wilson&#x27;s father was a Presbyterian minister and professor of theology.
#* Prior to being governor of New Jersey and president of the United States, Wilson served as president of Princeton University, which was at the time affiliated with the Presbyterian Church.
# Warren G. Harding – Northern Baptist
# Calvin Coolidge – Congregationalist
#* Coolidge attended Edwards Congregational Church in Northampton, Massachusetts, which was affiliated with the National Council of Congregational Churches.
# Herbert Hoover – Quaker
#* As Quakers customarily do not swear oaths, it was expected that Hoover would affirm the oath of office, and most sources state that he did so. However, a &quot;Washington Post&quot; article dated February 27, 1929, stated that he planned to swear, rather than affirm, the oath.
# Franklin D. Roosevelt – Episcopalian
# Harry S. Truman – Baptist
#* Truman kept his religious beliefs private and alienated some Baptist leaders by doing so.
# Dwight D. Eisenhower – Presbyterian
#* Eisenhower&#x27;s religious upbringing is the subject of some controversy, due to the conversion of his parents to the Bible Student movement, the forerunner of the Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, in the late 1890s. Originally, the family belonged to the River Brethren, a Mennonite sect. According to the Eisenhower Presidential Library, there is no evidence that Eisenhower participated in either the Bible Student group or the Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, and there are records that show he attended Sunday school at a River Brethren church.
#* Until he became president, Eisenhower had no formal church affiliation, a circumstance he attributed to the frequent moves demanded of an Army officer. He was baptized, confirmed, and became a communicant in the Presbyterian church in a single ceremony February 1, 1953, just 12 days after his first inauguration, the only president to undergo any of these rites while in office.
#* Eisenhower was instrumental in the addition of the words &quot;&quot;under God&quot; to the Pledge of Allegiance in 1954 (an act highly promoted by the Knights of Columbus), and the 1956 adoption of &quot;In God We Trust&quot;&quot; as the motto of the US, and its 1957 introduction on paper currency. He composed a prayer for his first inauguration, began his Cabinet meetings with silent prayer, and met frequently with a wide range of religious leaders while in office.
#* His presidential library includes an inter-denominational chapel in which he, his wife Mamie, and his firstborn son (who died in childhood) are buried.
# John F. Kennedy – Roman Catholic
#* Kennedy was the first Catholic president. 
# Lyndon B. Johnson – Disciples of Christ
# Richard M. Nixon – Quaker
#* Contrary to Quaker custom, Nixon swore the oath of office at both of his inaugurations. He also engaged in military service, contrary to the Quaker doctrine of pacifism.
# Gerald R. Ford – Episcopalian
# Jimmy Carter – Baptist
#* In 2000, Carter publicly disassociated himself from the Southern Baptist Convention, which he had previously been associated with for 65 years, after the denomination voted at its national convention that women should not serve as pastors. Carter continued to teach Sunday school at Maranatha Baptist Church in his hometown of Plains, Georgia, which he had done since the 1980s. In 2007, Carter founded the New Baptist Covenant organization for social justice.
# Ronald Reagan – Presbyterian
#* Reagan&#x27;s father was Catholic, but Reagan was raised in his mother&#x27;s Disciples of Christ denomination and was baptized there on September 21, 1922. Nancy and Ronald Reagan were married in the Disciples of Christ &quot;Little Brown Church&quot; in Studio City, California on March 4, 1952. Beginning in 1963 Reagan generally attended Presbyterian church services at Bel Air Presbyterian Church, Bel-Air, California. During his presidency he rarely attended church services, due to the inconvenience to others in the congregation. He became an official member of Bel Air Presbyterian after leaving the presidency. Reagan stated that he considered himself a &quot;born-again Christian&quot;.
# George H. W. Bush – Episcopalian
#* Bush was born to an Episcopalian family and raised in the denomination; though he briefly attended Presbyterian services after moving to Houston in the 1950s, he soon joined St. Martin&#x27;s Episcopal Church, which he affiliated with for the rest of his life. While living in Washington, he attended services at St. John&#x27;s Episcopal Church.
# Bill Clinton – Baptist
#* Clinton, during his presidency, attended a Methodist church in Washington along with his wife Hillary Clinton, who is Methodist from childhood.
# George W. Bush – Methodist
#* Bush was raised in the Episcopal Church but converted to Methodism upon his marriage in 1977.
#* Bush has been noted as one the most religious US presidents. He attributes his deep faith to a 1985 meeting with Billy Graham, an influential preacher in the evangelical movement, and researchers have debated his closeness to Evangelicals and his true religious views. Although considered an ally of the American evangelical movement in office, and claimed as an evangelical by some in the movement, Bush has never claimed to be born again and has not fully embraced standard evangelical doctrines. NBC News interviewed several theologians and colleagues of Bush, and their descriptions of his religious views varied, including &quot;mainstream evangelical with a higher-than-normal tolerance of dissent&quot;, &quot;conservative Christian [but] less doctrinaire than his faith would suggest&quot;, ecumenical &quot;mere Christian&quot;, and &quot;indigenous West Texas evangelical piety&quot;.
# Barack Obama – Unspecified Protestant
#*Obama&#x27;s resignation from Trinity United Church of Christ in the course of the Jeremiah Wright controversy ended more than 20 years of affiliation with the United Church of Christ. As president he attended several different Christian churches. For the most part, he has attended Methodist churches. In his childhood Obama sometimes attended Sunday school at the First Unitarian Church of Honolulu.
#*A widespread conspiracy theory stated that Obama is Muslim. His stepfather Lolo Soetoro was a liberal Muslim, and his biological father Barack Obama Sr., was raised a Muslim before turning atheist, but there is no evidence that Obama was raised in the faith. During his childhood in Indonesia, Obama attended a Catholic school and later a secular public school that provided Christian religious education, and the claim that he attended an Islamic madrasa is considered debunked.
# Donald Trump – Unspecified Protestant
# Joe Biden – Roman Catholic
#*Biden is a lifelong Catholic, with Reuters describing his religious beliefs as &quot;well-known and documented&quot;. Catholic social teaching has been cited as a major influence on his political views. In 2008, he was reported to regularly attend Sunday Mass at St. Joseph on the Brandywine in Greenville, Delaware. He has continued to attend services there, or at other Catholic churches, during most weeks of his presidency.
#Donald Trump – Unspecified Protestant

==Affiliation totals==

==See also==

*Religious affiliations of vice presidents of the United States
*Religious affiliation in the United States House of Representatives
*Religious affiliation in the United States Senate

;Other countries
*List of prime ministers of Canada by religious affiliation
*Religious affiliations of chancellors of Germany
*Religious affiliations of presidents of Lebanon
*Religious affiliations of prime ministers of the Netherlands
*Religious backgrounds of prime ministers of the United Kingdom

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
*Adherents.com&#x27;s list
*Abraham Lincoln was a Deist
*&quot;Six Historic Americans&quot; by John Remsburg, 1906, examines religious views of Paine, Jefferson, Washington, Franklin, Lincoln, and Grant
*U.S. Library of Congress site: James Hutson article, &quot;James Madison and the Social Utility of Religion&quot;
*Shapell Manuscript Foundation: &quot;We Have a Catholic for President&quot; U.S. Presidents&#x27; Personal Correspondence and Historical Documents
*George Washington as Deist</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q35073" start="58" end="89" title="presidents of the United States" label="presidents of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="248" end="255" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="257" end="273" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="275" end="290" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="296" end="315" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="441" end="453" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858125" start="619" end="644" title="Barack Obama religion conspiracy theories" label="Barack Obama was a Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="744" end="756" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121095" start="996" end="1016" title="Mainline Protestants" label="Mainline Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="1035" end="1048" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopalians"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="1053" end="1066" title="Presbyterians" label="Presbyterians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="1093" end="1108" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="1113" end="1122" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1137" end="1145" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="1403" end="1416" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopalians"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="1566" end="1583" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="1637" end="1655" title="state religion" label="established church"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="1731" end="1750" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="1951" end="1961" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="2054" end="2062" title="Baptists" label="Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2169" end="2177" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q215168" start="2270" end="2279" title="Adventism" label="Adventist"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="2281" end="2291" title="Anabaptist" label="Anabaptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="2293" end="2309" title="Eastern Orthodox" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q203179" start="2311" end="2338" title="Assyrian Church of the East" label="Assyrian Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="2340" end="2357" title="Oriental Orthodox" label="Oriental Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="2359" end="2367" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="2369" end="2385" title="Latter Day Saint" label="Latter Day Saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="2390" end="2401" title="Pentecostal" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11891" start="2600" end="2613" title="James K. Polk" label="James K. Polk"/>
<link wikidata="Q12325" start="2817" end="2831" title="James Buchanan" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="2987" end="2992" title="Deism" label="Deism"/>
<link wikidata="Q126462" start="3098" end="3110" title="Thomas Paine" label="Thomas Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="3153" end="3170" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="3256" end="3272" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="3307" end="3324" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="3326" end="3336" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="3338" end="3356" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="3358" end="3371" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="3373" end="3385" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11881" start="3391" end="3401" title="John Tyler" label="John Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843054" start="3544" end="3562" title="American Unitarian Association" label="Unitarian churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="3648" end="3660" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="3745" end="3759" title="Trinitarianism" label="Trinitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243324" start="4114" end="4136" title="Christian civilization" label="Christian civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q584205" start="4652" end="4666" title="Nontrinitarianism" label="nontrinitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="4675" end="4695" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394042" start="4726" end="4740" title="River Brethren" label="River Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="4767" end="4791" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="4981" end="4991" title="United States Military Academy" label="West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="5259" end="5272" title="James Monroe" label="Monroe&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="5462" end="5467" title="deism" label="deism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="5560" end="5567" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588667" start="5589" end="5621" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church, Lafayette Square" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471523" start="5652" end="5668" title="Lafayette Square, Washington, D.C." label="Lafayette Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="5728" end="5739" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="5823" end="5836" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q668710" start="5876" end="5905" title="Washington National Cathedral" label="Washington National Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6068" end="6083" title="Prayers at United States presidential inaugurations#Public prayer service" label="prayer services"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="6135" end="6149" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="6406" end="6422" title="disestablishment" label="disestablishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="6562" end="6574" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q154136" start="6579" end="6594" title="human sexuality" label="human sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="6988" end="7005" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="7008" end="7020" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="7025" end="7030" title="Deist" label="Deist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="7034" end="7044" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="7047" end="7056" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="7119" end="7142" title="Congregational churches" label="Congregational churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="7146" end="7157" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q584205" start="7247" end="7266" title="Nontrinitarianism" label="strict unity of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="7397" end="7413" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="7441" end="7458" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q656478" start="7659" end="7672" title="Benjamin Rush" label="Benjamin Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="7676" end="7692" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="7718" end="7723" title="Deist" label="Deist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="7748" end="7756" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923504" start="7773" end="7779" title="vestry" label="vestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="7796" end="7815" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622507" start="7889" end="7912" title="Unitarian Universalism" label="Unitarian Universalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="8329" end="8345" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="8703" end="8714" title="Trinitarianism" label="Trinitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q266362" start="8739" end="8754" title="Jefferson Bible" label="Jefferson Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q656478" start="8804" end="8817" title="Benjamin Rush" label="Benjamin Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="9798" end="9814" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q979071" start="9819" end="9836" title="Conyers Middleton" label="Conyers Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="10490" end="10503" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="10506" end="10518" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="10523" end="10528" title="Deist" label="Deist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="10881" end="10893" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="10896" end="10908" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="10963" end="10980" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="11687" end="11704" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="11707" end="11716" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="11830" end="11841" title="Trinitarianism" label="trinitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q463561" start="11909" end="11931" title="American Bible Society" label="American Bible Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="12042" end="12058" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q331563" start="12067" end="12084" title="Transcendentalist" label="Transcendentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="12523" end="12537" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="12540" end="12552" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11820" start="12647" end="12663" title="Martin Van Buren" label="Martin Van Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136834" start="12666" end="12680" title="Reformed Church in America" label="Dutch Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307504" start="12727" end="12765" title="Reformed Dutch Church (Kinderhook, New York)" label="Dutch Reformed church in his home town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478629" start="12769" end="12789" title="Kinderhook (village), New York" label="Kinderhook, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588667" start="12828" end="12860" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church, Lafayette Square (Washington, D.C.)" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s Lafayette Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q11869" start="12991" end="13013" title="William Henry Harrison" label="William Henry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="13016" end="13028" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923504" start="13047" end="13053" title="vestry" label="vestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="13087" end="13103" title="Cincinnati, Ohio" label="Cincinnati, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q11881" start="13155" end="13165" title="John Tyler" label="John Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="13168" end="13180" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11891" start="13382" end="13395" title="James K. Polk" label="James K. Polk"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="13398" end="13407" title="Methodism" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11896" start="14111" end="14125" title="Zachary Taylor" label="Zachary Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="14128" end="14140" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12306" start="14273" end="14289" title="Millard Fillmore" label="Millard Fillmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="14292" end="14301" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12312" start="14304" end="14319" title="Franklin Pierce" label="Franklin Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="14322" end="14334" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12325" start="14337" end="14351" title="James Buchanan" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="14354" end="14366" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="14530" end="14545" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="14548" end="14560" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q15492224" start="14691" end="14708" title="Phineas D. Gurley" label="Phineas D. Gurley"/>
<link wikidata="Q152002" start="14710" end="14716" title="pastor" label="pastor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="16290" end="16304" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q234295" start="16356" end="16378" title="Eliza McCardle Johnson" label="Eliza McCardle Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="16542" end="16558" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="16561" end="16570" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q233641" start="16647" end="16658" title="Julia Grant" label="Julia Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842707" start="17341" end="17357" title="Blaine Amendment" label="Blaine Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q35686" start="17390" end="17409" title="Rutherford B. Hayes" label="Rutherford B. Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="17424" end="17434" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q234275" start="18057" end="18061" title="Lucy Webb Hayes" label="Lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934208" start="18082" end="18092" title="Temperance movement in the United States" label="temperance"/>
<link wikidata="Q34597" start="18175" end="18189" title="James Garfield" label="James Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272775" start="18192" end="18210" title="Churches of Christ" label="Churches of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q364232" start="18379" end="18397" title="Charles J. Guiteau" label="Charles J. Guiteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q35498" start="18447" end="18464" title="Chester A. Arthur" label="Chester A. Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="18467" end="18479" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q202949" start="18605" end="18613" title="transept" label="transept"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588667" start="18617" end="18650" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church, Lafayette Square (Washington, D.C.)" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s, Lafayette Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="18669" end="18680" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="18722" end="18738" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="18741" end="18753" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35678" start="18756" end="18773" title="Benjamin Harrison" label="Benjamin Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="18776" end="18788" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35041" start="18886" end="18902" title="William McKinley" label="William McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="18905" end="18914" title="Methodism" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="19129" end="19149" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="19500" end="19518" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136834" start="19521" end="19535" title="Reformed Church in America" label="Dutch Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="19612" end="19621" title="ECUSA" label="Episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q237590" start="19691" end="19696" title="Edith Roosevelt" label="Edith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477026" start="19768" end="19788" title="Oyster Bay (hamlet), New York" label="Oyster Bay, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108757" start="19802" end="19826" title="Christ Church Oyster Bay" label="Christ Church Oyster Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="19997" end="20016" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="20094" end="20109" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="20144" end="20168" title="Congregational church" label="Congregationalist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729652" start="20435" end="20451" title="All Souls Church, Unitarian (Washington, D.C.)" label="All Souls Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="20454" end="20468" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="20471" end="20483" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112728" start="20581" end="20603" title="governor of New Jersey" label="governor of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="20670" end="20690" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q35286" start="20757" end="20774" title="Warren G. Harding" label="Warren G. Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q463455" start="20777" end="20793" title="American Baptist Churches USA" label="Northern Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q36023" start="20796" end="20811" title="Calvin Coolidge" label="Calvin Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865626" start="20814" end="20831" title="National Council of Congregational Churches" label="Congregationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="20886" end="20912" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="20991" end="21005" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="21008" end="21014" title="Religious Society of Friends" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="21021" end="21027" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="21178" end="21193" title="Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="21298" end="21319" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="21322" end="21334" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="21337" end="21352" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="21355" end="21362" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="21458" end="21478" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="21481" end="21493" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q343029" start="21616" end="21638" title="Bible Student movement" label="Bible Student movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="21662" end="21686" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394042" start="21746" end="21760" title="River Brethren" label="River Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="21764" end="21773" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q661513" start="21991" end="22004" title="Sunday school" label="Sunday school"/>
<link wikidata="Q875611" start="22511" end="22531" title="Pledge of Allegiance (United States)" label="Pledge of Allegiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046799" start="22571" end="22590" title="Knights of Columbus" label="Knights of Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q270871" start="22624" end="22639" title="In God We Trust" label="In God We Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q42470" start="22659" end="22664" title="motto" label="motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q233686" start="22982" end="22987" title="Mamie Eisenhower" label="Mamie"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="23049" end="23064" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="23067" end="23081" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="23130" end="23147" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541206" start="23150" end="23169" title="Disciples of Christ" label="Disciples of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="23172" end="23188" title="Richard M. Nixon" label="Richard M. Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="23191" end="23197" title="Religious Society of Friends" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23201" end="23226" title="Oath#Christian tradition" label="Contrary to Quaker custom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="23373" end="23387" title="Gerald R. Ford" label="Gerald R. Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="23390" end="23402" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="23405" end="23417" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="23420" end="23427" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="23487" end="23514" title="Southern Baptist Convention" label="Southern Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q419529" start="23636" end="23669" title="Ordination of women" label="women should not serve as pastors"/>
<link wikidata="Q661513" start="23697" end="23710" title="Sunday school" label="Sunday school"/>
<link wikidata="Q608527" start="23758" end="23773" title="Plains, Georgia" label="Plains, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005430" start="23838" end="23858" title="New Baptist Covenant" label="New Baptist Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="23876" end="23890" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="23894" end="23907" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="23910" end="23922" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541206" start="24004" end="24023" title="Disciples of Christ" label="Disciples of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881721" start="24300" end="24327" title="Bel Air Presbyterian Church" label="Bel Air Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="24626" end="24643" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="24646" end="24658" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="24799" end="24806" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590017" start="24836" end="24870" title="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church (Houston)" label="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588667" start="24975" end="25007" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church, Lafayette Square" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="25011" end="25023" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="25026" end="25033" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="25131" end="25146" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="25183" end="25197" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="25200" end="25209" title="Methodism" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q213550" start="25423" end="25435" title="Billy Graham" label="Billy Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="25468" end="25479" title="Evangelicalism" label="evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q25108476" start="25614" end="25643" title="Evangelicalism in the United States" label="American evangelical movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="25739" end="25749" title="born again" label="born again"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366374" start="26027" end="26049" title="conservative Christian" label="conservative Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="26109" end="26119" title="ecumenical" label="ecumenical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078487" start="26126" end="26140" title="Mere Christianity" label="mere Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="26207" end="26219" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="26234" end="26244" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q10703919" start="26277" end="26308" title="Trinity United Church of Christ" label="Trinity United Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6181018" start="26330" end="26357" title="Jeremiah Wright controversy" label="Jeremiah Wright controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q426316" start="26407" end="26430" title="United Church of Christ" label="United Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="26619" end="26628" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858125" start="26664" end="26709" title="Barack Obama religion conspiracy theories" label="conspiracy theory stated that Obama is Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115068" start="26726" end="26738" title="Lolo Soetoro" label="Lolo Soetoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q649593" start="26787" end="26803" title="Barack Obama Sr." label="Barack Obama Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q132834" start="27099" end="27106" title="madrasa" label="madrasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="27133" end="27145" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="27160" end="27170" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="27173" end="27182" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="27185" end="27199" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="27237" end="27244" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q16334344" start="27320" end="27344" title="Catholic social teaching" label="Catholic social teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589240" start="27465" end="27493" title="St. Joseph on the Brandywine" label="St. Joseph on the Brandywine"/>
<link wikidata="Q755754" start="27497" end="27517" title="Greenville, Delaware" label="Greenville, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="27631" end="27643" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="27658" end="27668" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603532" start="27709" end="27771" title="Religious affiliations of vice presidents of the United States" label="Religious affiliations of vice presidents of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q65087506" start="27773" end="27840" title="Religious affiliation in the United States House of Representatives" label="Religious affiliation in the United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q15220065" start="27842" end="27891" title="Religious affiliation in the United States Senate" label="Religious affiliation in the United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594974" start="27911" end="27969" title="List of prime ministers of Canada by religious affiliation" label="List of prime ministers of Canada by religious affiliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908242" start="27971" end="28019" title="Religious affiliations of chancellors of Germany" label="Religious affiliations of chancellors of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871444" start="28021" end="28068" title="Religious affiliations of presidents of Lebanon" label="Religious affiliations of presidents of Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311322" start="28070" end="28130" title="Religious affiliations of prime ministers of the Netherlands" label="Religious affiliations of prime ministers of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28132" end="28194" title="Records of prime ministers of the United Kingdom#Religious background" label="Religious backgrounds of prime ministers of the United Kingdom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24116" wikidata="Q215028" url="?curid=24116" title="Peer review">
<text>Peer review is the evaluation of work by one or more people with similar competencies as the producers of the work (peers). It functions as a form of self-regulation by qualified members of a profession within the relevant field. Peer review methods are used to maintain quality standards, improve performance, and provide credibility. In academia, scholarly peer review is often used to determine an academic paper&#x27;s suitability for publication. Peer review can be categorized by the type of activity and by the field or profession in which the activity occurs, e.g., medical peer review. It can also be used as a teaching tool to help students improve writing assignments.

Henry Oldenburg (1619–1677) was a German-born British philosopher who is seen as the &#x27;father&#x27; of modern scientific peer review. It developed over the following centuries with, for example, the journal &quot;Nature&quot; making it standard practice in 1973. The term &quot;peer review&quot; was first used in the early 1970s. A monument to peer review has been at the Higher School of Economics in Moscow since 2017.

== Professional ==
Professional peer review focuses on the performance of professionals, with a view to improving quality, upholding standards, or providing certification. In academia, peer review is used to inform decisions related to faculty advancement and tenure.

A prototype professional peer review process was recommended in the &quot;Ethics of the Physician&quot; written by Ishāq ibn ʻAlī al-Ruhāwī (854–931). He stated that a visiting physician had to make duplicate notes of a patient&#x27;s condition on every visit. When the patient was cured or had died, the notes of the physician were examined by a local medical council of other physicians, who would decide whether the treatment had met the required standards of medical care.

Professional peer review is common in the field of health care, where it is usually called &quot;clinical peer review&quot;. Further, since peer review activity is commonly segmented by clinical discipline, there is also physician peer review, nursing peer review, dentistry peer review, etc. Many other professional fields have some level of peer review process: accounting, law, engineering (e.g., software peer review, technical peer review), aviation, and even forest fire management.

Peer review is used in education to achieve certain learning objectives, particularly as a tool to reach higher order processes in the affective and cognitive domains as defined by Bloom&#x27;s taxonomy. This may take a variety of forms, including closely mimicking the scholarly peer review processes used in science and medicine.

== Scholarly ==
==Medical==

Medical peer review may be distinguished in four classifications:
# Clinical peer review is a procedure for assessing a patient&#x27;s involvement with experiences of care. It is a piece of progressing proficient practice assessment and centered proficient practice assessment—significant supporters of supplier credentialing and privileging.
# Peer evaluation of clinical teaching skills for both physicians and nurses.
# Scientific peer review of journal articles.
# A secondary round of peer review for the clinical value of articles concurrently published in medical journals.

Additionally, &quot;medical peer review&quot; has been used by the American Medical Association to refer not only to the process of improving quality and safety in health care organizations, but also to the process of rating clinical behavior or compliance with professional society membership standards. The clinical network believes it to be the most ideal method of guaranteeing that distributed exploration is dependable and that any clinical medicines that it advocates are protected and viable for individuals. Thus, the terminology has poor standardization and specificity, particularly as a database search term.

==Technical==

In engineering, technical peer review is a type of engineering review. Technical peer reviews are a well defined review process for finding and fixing defects, conducted by a team of peers with assigned roles. Technical peer reviews are carried out by peers representing areas of life cycle affected by material being reviewed (usually limited to 6 or fewer people). Technical peer reviews are held within development phases, between milestone reviews, on completed products or completed portions of products.

==Government policy==

The European Union has been using peer review in the &quot;Open Method of Co-ordination&quot; of policies in the fields of active labour market policy since 1999. In 2004, a program of peer reviews started in social inclusion. Each program sponsors about eight peer review meetings in each year, in which a &quot;host country&quot; lays a given policy or initiative open to examination by half a dozen other countries and the relevant European-level NGOs. These usually meet over two days and include visits to local sites where the policy can be seen in operation. The meeting is preceded by the compilation of an expert report on which participating &quot;peer countries&quot; submit comments. The results are published on the web.

The United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, through UNECE Environmental Performance Reviews, uses peer review, referred to as &quot;peer learning&quot;, to evaluate progress made by its member countries in improving their environmental policies.

The State of California is the only U.S. state to mandate scientific peer review. In 1997, the Governor of California signed into law Senate Bill 1320 (Sher), Chapter 295, statutes of 1997, which mandates that, before any CalEPA Board, Department, or Office adopts a final version of a rule-making, the scientific findings, conclusions, and assumptions on which the proposed rule are based must be submitted for independent external scientific peer review. This requirement is incorporated into the California Health and Safety Code Section 57004.

== Pedagogical ==

Peer review, or student peer assessment, is the method by which editors and writers work together in hopes of helping the author establish and further flesh out and develop their own writing. Peer review is widely used in secondary and post-secondary education as part of the writing process. This collaborative learning tool involves groups of students reviewing each other&#x27;s work and providing feedback and suggestions for revision. Rather than a means of critiquing each other&#x27;s work, peer review is often framed as a way to build connection between students and help develop writers&#x27; identity. While widely used in English and composition classrooms, peer review has gained popularity in other disciplines that require writing as part of the curriculum including the social and natural sciences.

Peer review in classrooms helps students become more invested in their work, and the classroom environment at large. Understanding how their work is read by a diverse readership before it is graded by the teacher may also help students clarify ideas and understand how to persuasively reach different audience members via their writing. It also gives students professional experience that they might draw on later when asked to review the work of a colleague prior to publication. The process can also bolster the confidence of students on both sides of the process. It has been found that students are more positive than negative when reviewing their classmates&#x27; writing. Peer review can help students not get discouraged but rather feel determined to improve their writing.

Critics of peer review in classrooms say that it can be ineffective due to students&#x27; lack of practice giving constructive criticism, or lack of expertise in the writing craft at large. Peer review can be problematic for developmental writers, particularly if students view their writing as inferior to others in the class as they may be unwilling to offer suggestions or ask other writers for help. Peer review can impact a student&#x27;s opinion of themselves as well as others as sometimes students feel a personal connection to the work they have produced, which can also make them feel reluctant to receive or offer criticism. Teachers using peer review as an assignment can lead to rushed-through feedback by peers, using incorrect praise or criticism, thus not allowing the writer or the editor to get much out of the activity. As a response to these concerns, instructors may provide examples, model peer review with the class, or focus on specific areas of feedback during the peer review process. Instructors may also experiment with in-class peer review vs. peer review as homework, or peer review using technologies afforded by learning management systems online. Students that are older can give better feedback to their peers, getting more out of peer review, but it is still a method used in classrooms to help students young and old learn how to revise. With evolving and changing technology, peer review will develop as well. New tools could help alter the process of peer review.

== Peer seminar ==
Peer seminar is a method that involves a speaker that presents ideas to an audience that also acts as a &quot;contest&quot;. To further elaborate, there are multiple speakers that are called out one at a time and given an amount of time to present the topic that they have researched. Each speaker may or may not talk about the same topic but each speaker has something to gain or lose which can foster a competitive atmosphere. This approach allows speakers to present in a more personal tone while trying to appeal to the audience while explaining their topic.

Peer seminars may be somewhat similar to what conference speakers do, however, there is more time to present their points, and speakers can be interrupted by audience members to provide questions and feedback upon the topic or how well the speaker did in presenting their topic.

== Peer review in writing ==
Professional peer review focuses on the performance of professionals, with a view to improving quality, upholding standards, or providing certification. Peer review in writing is a pivotal component among various peer review mechanisms, often spearheaded by educators and involving student participation, particularly in academic settings. It constitutes a fundamental process in academic and professional writing, serving as a systematic means to ensure the quality, effectiveness, and credibility of scholarly work. However, despite its widespread use, it is one of the most scattered, inconsistent, and ambiguous practices associated with writing instruction. Many scholars questioning its effectiveness and specific methodologies. Critics of peer review in classrooms express concerns about its ineffectiveness due to students&#x27; lack of practice in giving constructive criticism or their limited expertise in the writing craft overall.

== Critiques of peer review ==
Academic peer review has faced considerable criticism, with many studies highlighting inherent issues in the peer review process.

The editorial peer review process has been found to be strongly biased against &#x27;negative studies,&#x27; i.e. studies that do not work. This then biases the information base of medicine. Journals become biased against negative studies when values come into play. &quot;Who wants to read something that doesn&#x27;t work?&quot; asks Richard Smith in the Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine. &quot;That&#x27;s boring.&quot;

This is also particularly evident in university classrooms, where the most common source of writing feedback during student years often comes from teachers, whose comments are often highly valued. Students may become influenced to provide research in line with the professor&#x27;s viewpoints, because of the teacher&#x27;s position of high authority. The effectiveness of feedback largely stems from its high authority. Benjamin Keating, in his article &quot;A Good Development Thing: A Longitudinal Analysis of Peer Review and Authority in Undergraduate Writing,&quot; conducted a longitudinal study comparing two groups of students (one majoring in writing and one not) to explore students&#x27; perceptions of authority. This research, involving extensive analysis of student texts, concludes that students majoring in non-writing fields tend to undervalue mandatory peer review in class, while those majoring in writing value classmates&#x27; comments more. This reflects that peer review feedback has a certain threshold, and effective peer review requires a certain level of expertise. For non-professional writers, peer review feedback may be overlooked, thereby affecting its effectiveness.

Elizabeth Ellis Miller, Cameron Mozafari, Justin Lohr and Jessica Enoch state, &quot;While peer review is an integral part of writing classrooms, students often struggle to effectively engage in it.&quot; The authors illustrate some reasons for the inefficiency of peer review based on research conducted during peer review sessions in university classrooms:

# Lack of Training: Students and even some faculty members may not have received sufficient training to provide constructive feedback. Without proper guidance on what to look for and how to provide helpful comments, peer reviewers may find it challenging to offer meaningful insights.
# Limited Engagement: Students may participate in peer review sessions with minimal enthusiasm or involvement, viewing them as obligatory tasks rather than valuable learning opportunities. This lack of investment can result in superficial feedback that fails to address underlying issues in the writing.
# Time Constraints: Instructors often allocate limited time for peer review activities during class sessions, which may not be adequate for thorough reviews of peers&#x27; work. Consequently, feedback may be rushed or superficial, lacking the depth required for meaningful improvement.

This research demonstrates that besides issues related to expertise, numerous objective factors contribute to students&#x27; poor performance in peer review sessions, resulting in feedback from peer reviewers that may not effectively assist authors. Additionally, this study highlights the influence of emotions in peer review sessions, suggesting that both peer reviewers and authors cannot completely eliminate emotions when providing and receiving feedback. This can lead to peer reviewers and authors approaching the feedback with either positive or negative attitudes towards the text, resulting in selective or biased feedback and review, further impacting their ability to objectively evaluate the article. It implies that subjective emotions may also affect the effectiveness of peer review feedback.

Pamela Bedore and Brian O&#x27;Sullivan also hold a skeptical view of peer review in most writing contexts. The authors conclude, based on comparing different forms of peer review after systematic training at two universities, that &quot;the crux is that peer review is not just about improving writing but about helping authors achieve their writing vision.&quot; Feedback from the majority of non-professional writers during peer review sessions often tends to be superficial, such as simple grammar corrections and questions. This precisely reflects the implication in the conclusion that the focus is only on improving writing skills. Meaningful peer review involves understanding the author&#x27;s writing intent, posing valuable questions and perspectives, and guiding the author to achieve their writing goals.

== Comparison and improvement ==
Magda Tigchelaar compares peer review with self-assessment through an experiment that divided students into three groups: self-assessment, peer review, and no review. Across four writing projects, she observed changes in each group, with surprising results showing significant improvement only in the self-assessment group. The author&#x27;s analysis suggests that self-assessment allows individuals to clearly understand the revision goals at each stage, as the author is the most familiar with their writing. Thus, self-checking naturally follows a systematic and planned approach to revision. In contrast, the effectiveness of peer review is often limited due to the lack of structured feedback, characterized by scattered, meaningless summaries and evaluations that fail to meet the author&#x27;s expectations for revising their work.

Stephanie Conner and Jennifer Gray highlight the value of most students&#x27; feedback during peer review. They argue that many peer review sessions fail to meet students&#x27; expectations, as students, even as reviewers themselves, feel uncertain about providing constructive feedback due to their lack of confidence in their writing. The authors offer numerous improvement strategies. For instance, the peer review process can be segmented into groups, where students present the papers to be reviewed while other group members take notes and analyze them. Then, the review scope can be expanded to the entire class. This widens the review sources and further enhances the level of professionalism.

With evolving technology, peer review is also expected to evolve. New tools have the potential to transform the peer review process. Mimi Li discusses the effectiveness and feedback of an online peer review software used in their freshman writing class. Unlike traditional peer review methods commonly used in classrooms, the online peer review software offers many tools for editing articles and comprehensive guidance. For instance, it lists numerous questions peer reviewers can ask and allows various comments to be added to the selected text. Based on observations over a semester, students showed varying degrees of improvement in their writing skills and grades after using the online peer review software. Additionally, they highly praised the technology of online peer review.

==See also==
* Objectivity (philosophy)
* Academic publishing
* Scientific literature
* Peer critique

==References==
==Further reading==
* Baldwin, Melinda (2018). &quot;&quot;. &quot;Isis&quot;. 109 (3): 538–558.
* 
* 

==External links==
* What is Peer review? at Elsevier</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q215028" start="0" end="11" title="Peer review" label="Peer review"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="116" end="121" title=":wiktionary:peer#Etymology 2" label="peers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862829" start="223" end="228" title="Field of study" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="339" end="347" title="academia" label="academia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096397" start="349" end="370" title="scholarly peer review" label="scholarly peer review"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246046" start="401" end="415" title="academic paper" label="academic paper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="574" end="593" title="#Medical" label="medical peer review"/>
<link wikidata="Q700422" start="681" end="696" title="Henry Oldenburg" label="Henry Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="898" end="904" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959511" start="1058" end="1084" title="Higher School of Economics" label="Higher School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678324" start="1451" end="1474" title="Adab al-Tabib" label="Ethics of the Physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155256" start="1492" end="1516" title="Al-Ruhawi" label="Ishāq ibn ʻAlī al-Ruhāwī"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133842" start="1952" end="1972" title="clinical peer review" label="clinical peer review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7554342" start="2255" end="2275" title="software peer review" label="software peer review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692349" start="2277" end="2298" title="technical peer review" label="technical peer review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774565" start="2526" end="2547" title="Bloom&amp;#x27;s taxonomy" label="Bloom&amp;#x27;s taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133842" start="2775" end="2795" title="Clinical peer review" label="Clinical peer review"/>
<link wikidata="Q16024164" start="3270" end="3285" title="medical journal" label="medical journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q465697" start="3356" end="3384" title="American Medical Association" label="American Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="3929" end="3940" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="4464" end="4478" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742795" start="4583" end="4610" title="active labour market policy" label="active labour market policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853064" start="4669" end="4685" title="social inclusion" label="social inclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="4910" end="4914" title="Non-governmental organization" label="NGOs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3683791" start="5075" end="5088" title="expert report" label="expert report"/>
<link wikidata="Q659012" start="5199" end="5244" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Europe" label="United Nations Economic Commission for Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18718739" start="5254" end="5293" title="UNECE Environmental Performance Reviews" label="UNECE Environmental Performance Reviews"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020479" start="5671" end="5677" title="California Environmental Protection Agency" label="CalEPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020534" start="5948" end="5981" title="California Health and Safety Code" label="California Health and Safety Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q27968" start="6651" end="6658" title="English studies" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791145" start="6663" end="6674" title="Composition studies" label="composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="6803" end="6809" title="Social science" label="social"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="6814" end="6829" title="natural science" label="natural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396191" start="17993" end="18017" title="Objectivity (philosophy)" label="Objectivity (philosophy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246046" start="18020" end="18039" title="Academic publishing" label="Academic publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12042160" start="18042" end="18063" title="Scientific literature" label="Scientific literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160399" start="18066" end="18079" title="Peer critique" label="Peer critique"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24117" wikidata="Q319145" url="?curid=24117" title="Prime Minister of Australia">
<text>The prime minister of Australia is the head of government of the Commonwealth of Australia. The prime minister is the chair of the Cabinet of Australia and thus the head of the federal executive government. Under the principles of responsible government, the prime minister is both responsible to and a member of the Commonwealth Parliament. The current prime minister is Anthony Albanese of the Australian Labor Party, who assumed the office on 23 May 2022.

The role and duties of the prime minister are not described by the Australian constitution but rather defined by constitutional convention deriving from the Westminster system and responsible government. The prime minister is formally appointed by the governor-general, who is ordinarily constrained by convention to choose the parliamentarian able to command the confidence of the House of Representatives (the lower house). Since Federation, this has almost always been the leader of the majority party or coalition. In practice, this means the prime minister most often changes after an election results in a different party gaining control of the lower house or as a result of the majority party changing its leader internally between elections.

The office of prime minister comes with various privileges, including the use of two official residences: The Lodge in Canberra and Kirribilli House in Sydney, as well as an office at Parliament House.

Thirty-one people (thirty men and one woman) have served as prime minister, the first of whom was Edmund Barton taking office on 1 January 1901 following federation of the British colonies in Australia. The longest-serving prime minister was Robert Menzies, who served over 18 years, and the shortest-serving was Frank Forde, who served one week.

== Powers and responsibilities ==
In common with other political systems based on the Westminster system, the prime minister both leads the executive government and wields significant power in Parliament.

=== Executive role ===
Cabinet, the primary decision-making body of the executive government, is chaired by the prime minister. While the prime minister has been described as the &quot;first among equals&quot; of the other ministers that make up cabinet, they nevertheless wield primary influence in the body. They set the agenda and processes of cabinet meetings and has the final word where a collective decision cannot be reached. Ministers making up the cabinet are chosen by the prime minister and may be removed at any time. Additionally, the prime minister chooses the portfolio of each minister and a prime minister&#x27;s resignation or dismissal leads by convention to the resignation of all other ministers. The precise authority of each individual prime minister within cabinet is uncertain, as their deliberations are secret. The prime minister also has the authority to make independent policy decisions independently from Cabinet, with such decisions colloquially called &quot;captain&#x27;s calls&quot;. The prime minister also has significant influence in the setting of foreign policy, through their role as chair of the National Security Committee, a sub-committee of cabinet whose decisions do not need to be endorsed by the cabinet as a whole.

The prime minister is also one of the responsible ministers for the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, whose tasks include general policy development across the government, inter-governmental communications, honours and symbols policy and Indigenous programmes. 

=== Legislative role ===
Since the emergence of the strong party system in Australia in the 1920s, prime ministers have almost always been the parliamentary leader of the party (or leader of the senior party in a coalition of parties) that has a majority in the House of Representatives (which has been either the Labor Party or the Liberal Party since the 1940s). Responsible government has always required the prime minister and government to have the confidence of a majority of the lower house in order to govern, however the emergence of strong parties with members strongly punished for voting against party policy (also known as crossing the floor) has meant that most prime ministers and governments have significant control over the passage of bills in this house. However, bills must also be passed by the Senate (the upper house) in order to become law and the government rarely has a majority in this house, leading to some checks on the legislative powers of the government. The prime minister also controls the date of elections, through formal advice to the governor-general, with such elections usually occurring within a 6-month period prior to the maximum 3-year term of the House of Representatives expiring.

=== Other responsibilities ===
National Cabinet, the primary inter-governmental decision-making forum between the federal government and the states, is also chaired by the prime minister. While called a cabinet, the body is merely a discussion forum and the principles of secrecy and collective decision making do not apply. 

Since the 1940s, the prime minister has asserted their authority to select the governor-general alone, instead of this being a cabinet decision. The power is exercised through advice to the King of Australia, who holds the de jure power to make the appointment and is by convention bound to accept such advice. The prime minister can also advise the monarch to dismiss the governor-general, though it remains unclear how quickly the monarch would act on such advice in a constitutional crisis. This uncertainty, and the possibility of a race between the governor-general and prime minister to dismiss the other, was a key question in the 1975 constitutional crisis. 

==Selection and constitutional basis==

In ordinary circumstances, the leader of the party or coalition that has the confidence of the House of Representatives is entitled to become prime minister and form a government. Generally, a party or coalition will have a majority in the lower house in order to provide confidence, however in periods of minority government, the larger party will rely on confidence and supply from minor parties or independents. By convention, the prime minister must be a member of the lower house. The only case where a member of the Senate was appointed prime minister was John Gorton, who subsequently resigned his Senate position and was elected as the member for Higgins in the House of Representatives. The prime minister is formally appointed to the role by the governor-general under section 64 of the Australian Constitution, however their choice is limited in normal circumstances to the individual with the confidence of the lower house. However, the prime minister (and all other ministers) must be a parliamentarians or become one within three months to be a minister. 

There are no term limits for the prime minister, and they are generally entitled to continue in their role whilst they retain the confidence of the lower house. Individuals most commonly cease to become prime minister after losing an election by not obtaining a majority in the lower house (at which point they generally become leader of the opposition or resign) or through replacement by their parliamentary party colleagues. This later method has become increasingly common, with the office changing hands four times due to parliamentary spill and only twice due to an election in the period following the election defeat of John Howard in 2007 to the election of Anthony Albanese in 2022. 

A prime minister may also lose their position following a vote of no confidence in the government or due to a failure to pass supply through the lower house. In either event, the prime minister is required by convention to either resign or call an election. Whether a prime minister is required to resign or call an election following an inability to pass supply through the Senate was the animating issue of the 1975 constitutional crisis. In that event, governor-general Sir John Kerr dismissed the Whitlam government following the Senate&#x27;s deferral of the government&#x27;s budget and demand that they would not pass supply until the government called an election. The constitutional propriety of the governor-general&#x27;s action during that period remains subject to vigorous debate.

Despite the importance of the office of prime minister, the Constitution does not mention the office by name. The conventions of the Westminster system were thought to be sufficiently entrenched in Australia by the authors of the Constitution that it was deemed unnecessary to detail these. Indeed, prior to Federation in 1901 the terms &quot;premier&quot; and &quot;prime minister&quot; were used interchangeably for the head of government in a colony.

Following a resignation in other circumstances or the death of a prime minister, the governor-general generally appoints the deputy prime minister as the new prime minister, until or if such time as the governing party or senior coalition party elects an alternative party leader. This has resulted in the party leaders from the Country Party (now named National Party) being appointed as prime minister, despite being the smaller party of their coalition. This occurred when Earle Page became caretaker prime minister following the death of Joseph Lyons in 1939, and when John McEwen became caretaker prime minister following the disappearance of Harold Holt in 1967. However, in 1941, Arthur Fadden became the leader of the Coalition and subsequently prime minister by the agreement of both coalition parties, despite being the leader of the smaller party in coalition, following the resignation of UAP leader Robert Menzies.

Excluding the brief transition periods during changes of government or leadership elections, there have only been a handful of cases where someone other than the leader of the majority party or coalition in the House of Representatives was prime minister:
* Federation occurred on 1 January 1901, but elections for the first parliament were not scheduled until late March. In the interim, an unelected caretaker government was necessary. In what is now known as the Hopetoun Blunder, the governor-general, Lord Hopetoun, invited Sir William Lyne, the premier of the most populous state, New South Wales, to form a government. However, no politician would agree to be a member of his Cabinet and Lyne returned his commission before Federation actually took place. The governor-general instead then commissioned the much more popular Edmund Barton, who became the first prime minister on Federation and led the inaugural government into and beyond the election.
* During the second parliament, three parties (Free Trade, Protectionist and Labor) had roughly equal representation in the House of Representatives. The leaders of the three parties, Alfred Deakin, George Reid and Chris Watson each served as prime minister before losing a vote of confidence.
* As a result of the Labor Party&#x27;s split over conscription, Billy Hughes and his supporters were expelled from the Labor Party in November 1916. He subsequently continued on as prime minister at the head of the new National Labor Party, which had only 14 members out of a total of 75 in the House of Representatives. The Commonwealth Liberal Party – despite still forming the official Opposition – provided confidence and supply until February 1917, when the two parties agreed to merge and formed the Nationalist Party.
* During the 1975 constitutional crisis, on 11 November 1975, the governor-general, Sir John Kerr, dismissed the Labor Party&#x27;s Gough Whitlam as prime minister. Despite Labor holding a majority in the House of Representatives, Kerr appointed the Leader of the Opposition, Liberal leader Malcolm Fraser as caretaker prime minister, conditional on the passage of the Whitlam government&#x27;s Supply bills through the Senate and the calling of an election for both houses of parliament. Fraser accepted these terms and immediately advised a double dissolution. An election was called for 13 December, which the Liberal Party won in its own right (although the Liberals governed in a coalition with the Country Party).

Compared to other Westminster systems such as those of Canada&#x27;s federal and provincial governments, the transition from an outgoing prime minister to an incoming prime minister has been brief in Australia since the 1970s. Prior to that, in accordance with longstanding Australian constitutional practice, convention held that an outgoing prime minister would stay on as a caretaker until the full election results were tallied. Starting with the 1972 Australian federal election on 2 December 1972, Gough Whitlam and his deputy were sworn in on 5 December 1972 to form an interim government for two weeks, as the vote was being finalised and the full ministry makeup was being determined. On 23 May 2022 Anthony Albanese became prime minister with an interim four person ministry, two days after his victory in the election. This rapid shift was done in order for the new PM to attend a Quad meeting scheduled shortly after the election. When the results of the election were more clearly known the entire ministry was sworn in on 1 June 2022.

==Amenities of office==

===Salary===
 Australia&#x27;s prime minister is paid a total salary of . This is made up of the &#x27;base salary&#x27; received by all members of parliament () plus a 160 percent &#x27;additional salary&#x27; for the role of prime minister. Increases in the base salary of MPs and senators are determined annually by the independent Remuneration Tribunal.

===Residences and transport===
The prime minister has two official residences. The primary official residence is the Lodge in Canberra. Most prime ministers have chosen the Lodge as their primary residence because of its security facilities and close proximity to Parliament House. There have been some exceptions, however. James Scullin preferred to live at the Hotel Canberra (now the Hyatt Hotel) and Ben Chifley lived in the Hotel Kurrajong. More recently, John Howard used the Sydney prime ministerial residence, Kirribilli House, as his primary accommodation. On her appointment on 24 June 2010, Julia Gillard said she would not be living in the Lodge until such time as she was returned to office by popular vote at the next general election, as she became prime minister by replacing an incumbent during a parliamentary term. Tony Abbott was never able to occupy the Lodge during his term (2013–15) because it was undergoing extensive renovations, which continued into the early part of his successor Malcolm Turnbull&#x27;s term. Instead, Abbott resided in dedicated rooms at the Australian Federal Police College when in Canberra.

During his first term, Rudd had a staff at the Lodge consisting of a senior chef and an assistant chef, a child carer, one senior house attendant, and two junior house attendants. At Kirribilli House in Sydney, there are a full-time chef and a full-time house attendant. The official residences are fully staffed and catered for both the prime minister and their family. In addition, both have extensive security facilities. These residences are regularly used for official entertaining, such as receptions for Australian of the Year finalists.

The prime minister receives a number of transport amenities for official business. A Royal Australian Air Force operated Airbus KC-30A, transports the prime minister overseas, with two Boeing 737 MAX 8 planes available for shorter flights. For ground travel, the prime minister is transported in an armoured BMW 7 Series model. It is referred to as &quot;C-1&quot;, or Commonwealth One, because of its number plate. It is escorted by police vehicles from state and federal authorities.

===After office===
Politicians, including prime ministers, are usually granted certain privileges after leaving office, such as office accommodation, staff assistance, and a Life Gold Pass which entitles the holder to travel within Australia for non-commercial purposes at government expense. In 2017, then prime minister Malcolm Turnbull said the pass should be available only to former prime ministers, though he would not use it when he was no longer PM.

Only one prime minister who had left the Federal Parliament ever returned. Stanley Bruce was defeated in his own seat in 1929 while prime minister but was re-elected to parliament in 1931. Other prime ministers were elected to parliaments other than the Australian federal parliament: Sir George Reid was elected to the UK House of Commons (after his term as High Commissioner to the UK), and Frank Forde was re-elected to the Queensland Parliament (after his term as High Commissioner to Canada, and a failed attempt to re-enter the Federal Parliament).

As well as Reid and Forde, five other prime ministers went on to hold diplomatic posts.

Andrew Fisher, Joseph Cook and Stanley Bruce also served as High Commissioners to the United Kingdom, Gough Whitlam had served as Ambassador to UNESCO and Kevin Rudd is currently the Ambassador to the United States.

==Acting prime ministers and succession==
The deputy prime minister becomes acting prime minister if the prime minister is unable to undertake the role for a short time, for example if they are ill, overseas or on leave (and if both are unavailable, then another senior minister takes on this role). The &quot;Acts Interpretation Act 1901&quot; confers upon acting ministers &quot;the same power and authority with respect to the absent Minister&#x27;s statutory responsibilities&quot;.

If the prime minister were to die, then the deputy prime minister would be appointed prime minister by the governor-general until the government votes for another member to be its leader. This happened when Harold Holt disappeared in 1967, when John McEwen was appointed prime minister. On the other two occasions that the prime minister has died in office, in 1939 and 1945, Earle Page and Frank Forde, respectively, were appointed prime minister.

In the early 20th century, overseas travel generally required long journeys by ship. As a result, some held the position of acting prime minister for significant periods of time, including William Watt (16 months, 1918–1919), George Pearce (7 months, 1916), Alfred Deakin (6 months, 1902), Joseph Cook (5 months, 1921), James Fenton (19 weeks, 1930–1931), John Forrest (4 months, 1907), and Arthur Fadden (4 months, 1941). Fadden was acting prime minister for a cumulative total of 676 days (over 22 months) between 1941 and 1958.

==Honours==
Prime ministers have been granted numerous honours, typically after their period as prime minister has concluded, with a few exceptions.

Nine former prime ministers were awarded knighthoods: Barton (GCMG, 1902), Reid (GCMG, 1911), Cook (GCMG, 1918), Page (GCMG, 1938), Menzies (KT, 1963), Fadden (KCMG, 1951), McEwen (GCMG, 1971), Gorton (GCMG, 1977), and McMahon (GCMG, 1977). Of those awarded, Barton and Menzies were knighted while still serving as prime minister, with Page awarded his before becoming prime minister, and the remainder awarded after leaving office. Reid (GCB, 1916), Menzies (AK, 1976) and Fadden (GCMG, 1958) were awarded a second knighthood after leaving office.

Non-titular honours were also bestowed on former prime ministers, usually the Order of the Companions of Honour. This honour was awarded to Bruce (1927), Lyons (1936), Hughes (1941), Page (1942), Menzies (1951), Holt (1967), McEwen (1969), Gorton (1971), McMahon (1972), and Fraser (1977), mostly during office as prime minister.

In almost all occasions these honours were only accepted by non-Labor/conservative prime ministers. However, appointment to the Privy Council of the United Kingdom was accepted by all prime ministers until 1983 (with the exception of Alfred Deakin, Chris Watson and Gough Whitlam), with Malcolm Fraser being the last prime ministerial appointee.

Since its introduction in 1975, former prime ministers of Australia have been appointed to the Order of Australia and to its highest level – Companion: Whitlam (1978), Fraser (1988), Gorton (1988), Howard (2008), Gillard (2017), Rudd (2019), Abbott (2020), and Turnbull (2021). Keating refused appointment in the 1997 Australia Day Honours, saying that he had long believed honours should be reserved for those whose work in the community went unrecognised and that having been Prime Minister was sufficient public recognition. Bob Hawke was appointed a Companion in 1979, for service to trade unionism and industrial relations, before becoming prime minister in 1983. Menzies was appointed to the higher grade of Knight of the Order, which is no longer awarded, in 1976.

John Howard was also appointed to the Order of Merit in 2012, whose appointments are within the personal gift of the monarch. Menzies&#x27; Knight of the Order of the Thistle awarding was also in the personal gift of Queen Elizabeth II in 1963.

Although not strictly an honour, one former prime minister was raised to the peerage; Stanley Bruce was created 1st Viscount Bruce of Melbourne in the 1947 New Year Honours.

In addition to these honours, all deceased former prime ministers of Australia currently have federal electorates named after them. The most newly created of these electorates is the Division of Hawke, named in honour of the recently deceased Bob Hawke in 2021.

== Lists relating to the prime ministers of Australia ==
The longest-serving prime minister was Robert Menzies, who served in office twice: from 26 April 1939 to 28 August 1941, and again from 19 December 1949 to 26 January 1966. In total Robert Menzies spent 18 years, 5 months and 12 days in office. He served under the United Australia Party and the Liberal Party respectively.

The shortest-serving prime minister was Frank Forde, who was appointed to the position on 6 July 1945 after the death of John Curtin, and served until 13 July 1945 when Ben Chifley was elected leader of the Australian Labor Party.

The most recent prime minister to serve out a full government term in the office was Scott Morrison, who won the 2019 election and led his party to the 2022 election, but was defeated and lost his title as prime minister.

Lists of the 31 people who have so far held the premiership:
* List of prime ministers of Australia
* List of prime ministers of Australia by birthplace
* List of prime ministers of Australia by time in office

==See also==
* Historical rankings of prime ministers of Australia
* List of Commonwealth heads of government
* List of prime ministers of Australia by time in office
* List of prime ministers of Elizabeth II
* List of prime ministers of Charles III
* Prime Ministers Avenue in Horse Chestnut Avenue in the Ballarat Botanical Gardens contains a collection of bronze busts of former Australian prime ministers.
* Prime Ministers&#x27; Corridor of Oaks in Faulconbridge, New South Wales contains a corridor of oaks of former Australian prime ministers.
* Prime Minister&#x27;s XI
* Spouse of the prime minister of Australia
* Leader of the Opposition (Australia)

== Notes ==
== References ==

=== Specific references ===
=== General references ===
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* Official website of the prime minister of Australia
* Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet
* Australia&#x27;s Prime Ministers – National Archives of Australia reference site and research portal
* Biographies of Australia&#x27;s Prime Ministers / National Museum of Australia
* Classroom resources on Australian Prime Ministers
* Museum of Australian Democracy website about Australian prime ministers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="4" end="31" title="Prime Minister of Australia" label="prime minister of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="39" end="57" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="65" end="90" title="Commonwealth of Australia" label="Commonwealth of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028178" start="131" end="151" title="Cabinet of Australia" label="Cabinet of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991162" start="177" end="205" title="Australian Government" label="federal executive government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="231" end="253" title="responsible government" label="responsible government"/>
<link wikidata="Q382118" start="317" end="340" title="Parliament of Australia" label="Commonwealth Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q335697" start="372" end="388" title="Anthony Albanese" label="Anthony Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="396" end="418" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Australian Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144614" start="527" end="550" title="Australian constitution" label="Australian constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720142" start="573" end="598" title="Constitutional convention (political custom)" label="constitutional convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="617" end="635" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="640" end="662" title="responsible government" label="responsible government"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="712" end="728" title="Governor-General of Australia" label="governor-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q21406588" start="812" end="834" title="Confidence and supply" label="command the confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q783401" start="842" end="866" title="House of Representatives (Australia)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310872" start="892" end="902" title="Federation of Australia" label="Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628075" start="959" end="964" title="Political parties of Australia" label="party"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="968" end="977" title="Coalition government" label="coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q493955" start="1317" end="1326" title="The Lodge (Australia)" label="The Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="1330" end="1338" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369561" start="1343" end="1359" title="Kirribilli House" label="Kirribilli House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="1363" end="1369" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858105" start="1395" end="1411" title="Parliament House, Canberra" label="Parliament House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549251" start="1414" end="1431" title="List of prime ministers of Australia" label="Thirty-one people"/>
<link wikidata="Q23342" start="1512" end="1525" title="Edmund Barton" label="Edmund Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310872" start="1568" end="1615" title="Federation of Australia" label="federation of the British colonies in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594964" start="1621" end="1636" title="List of prime ministers of Australia by time in office" label="longest-serving"/>
<link wikidata="Q214438" start="1656" end="1670" title="Robert Menzies" label="Robert Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q459146" start="1727" end="1738" title="Frank Forde" label="Frank Forde"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="1848" end="1866" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="1902" end="1922" title="Executive (government)" label="executive government"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="1955" end="1965" title="Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028178" start="1991" end="1998" title="Cabinet of Australia" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q309477" start="2153" end="2171" title="first among equals" label="first among equals"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220534" start="3107" end="3134" title="National Security Committee (Australia)" label="National Security Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191489" start="3302" end="3346" title="Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (Australia)" label="Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q928764" start="3652" end="3672" title="parliamentary leader" label="parliamentary leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="3680" end="3685" title="Political party" label="party"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="3823" end="3834" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="3842" end="3855" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="3874" end="3896" title="Responsible government" label="Responsible government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188683" start="4145" end="4163" title="crossing the floor" label="crossing the floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q783330" start="4325" end="4331" title="Australian Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q91091935" start="4769" end="4785" title="National Cabinet (Australia)" label="National Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q669459" start="5255" end="5272" title="King of Australia" label="King of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q380552" start="5536" end="5557" title="constitutional crisis" label="constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q575834" start="5703" end="5729" title="1975 Australian constitutional crisis" label="1975 constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q783330" start="6295" end="6301" title="Australian Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q356411" start="6335" end="6346" title="John Gorton" label="John Gorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006578" start="6402" end="6409" title="1968 Higgins by-election" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973648" start="6417" end="6435" title="Division of Higgins" label="member for Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q575834" start="7952" end="7978" title="1975 Australian constitutional crisis" label="1975 constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="8468" end="8486" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261065" start="8915" end="8936" title="Deputy Prime Minister of Australia" label="deputy prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q946040" start="9144" end="9158" title="National Party of Australia" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q370926" start="9266" end="9276" title="Earle Page" label="Earle Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q370966" start="9332" end="9344" title="Joseph Lyons" label="Joseph Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q23386" start="9363" end="9374" title="John McEwen" label="John McEwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q47654909" start="9421" end="9449" title="disappearance of Harold Holt" label="disappearance of Harold Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23369" start="9477" end="9490" title="Arthur Fadden" label="Arthur Fadden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310872" start="9977" end="9987" title="Federation of Australia" label="Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586876" start="10020" end="10054" title="1901 Australian federal election" label="elections for the first parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112663" start="10121" end="10141" title="caretaker government" label="caretaker government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5899972" start="10185" end="10201" title="Hopetoun Blunder" label="Hopetoun Blunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q335178" start="10225" end="10238" title="John Hope, 7th Earl of Hopetoun" label="Lord Hopetoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158950" start="10252" end="10264" title="William Lyne" label="William Lyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527950" start="10270" end="10277" title="Premier of New South Wales" label="premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="10306" end="10321" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q23342" start="10551" end="10564" title="Edmund Barton" label="Edmund Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q313805" start="10863" end="10876" title="Alfred Deakin" label="Alfred Deakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23352" start="10878" end="10889" title="George Reid" label="George Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q23347" start="10894" end="10906" title="Chris Watson" label="Chris Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q23020258" start="10994" end="11036" title="Australian Labor Party split of 1916" label="Labor Party&amp;#x27;s split over conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q152666" start="11038" end="11050" title="Billy Hughes" label="Billy Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q839205" start="11193" end="11213" title="National Labor Party" label="National Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117010" start="11299" end="11325" title="Commonwealth Liberal Party" label="Commonwealth Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516976" start="11480" end="11497" title="Nationalist Party (Australia)" label="Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q575834" start="11512" end="11538" title="1975 Australian constitutional crisis" label="1975 constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354851" start="11587" end="11596" title="John Kerr (governor-general)" label="John Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q23333" start="11631" end="11644" title="Gough Whitlam" label="Gough Whitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="11775" end="11782" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q315979" start="11790" end="11804" title="Malcolm Fraser" label="Malcolm Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q21406588" start="11894" end="11900" title="Confidence and supply" label="Supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q783330" start="11919" end="11925" title="Australian Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300018" start="12042" end="12060" title="double dissolution" label="double dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q609541" start="12089" end="12100" title="1975 Australian federal election" label="13 December"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="12238" end="12256" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="12275" end="12281" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q427994" start="12671" end="12703" title="1972 Australian federal election" label="1972 Australian federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q335697" start="12929" end="12945" title="Anthony Albanese" label="Anthony Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091319" start="13036" end="13048" title="2022 Australian federal election" label="the election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268405" start="13112" end="13116" title="Quadrilateral Security Dialogue" label="Quad"/>
<link wikidata="Q493955" start="13767" end="13776" title="The Lodge (Australia)" label="the Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="13780" end="13788" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q23362" start="13978" end="13991" title="James Scullin" label="James Scullin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10930619" start="14017" end="14031" title="Hotel Canberra" label="Hotel Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q23379" start="14058" end="14069" title="Ben Chifley" label="Ben Chifley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18165792" start="14083" end="14098" title="Hotel Kurrajong" label="Hotel Kurrajong"/>
<link wikidata="Q51330" start="14115" end="14126" title="John Howard" label="John Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="14136" end="14142" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369561" start="14172" end="14188" title="Kirribilli House" label="Kirribilli House"/>
<link wikidata="Q41563" start="14256" end="14269" title="Julia Gillard" label="Julia Gillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q665929" start="14381" end="14402" title="2010 Australian federal election" label="next general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q348577" start="14488" end="14499" title="Tony Abbott" label="Tony Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q927550" start="14663" end="14679" title="Malcolm Turnbull" label="Malcolm Turnbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q781401" start="14743" end="14776" title="Australian Federal Police" label="Australian Federal Police College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369561" start="14979" end="14995" title="Kirribilli House" label="Kirribilli House"/>
<link wikidata="Q782788" start="15307" end="15329" title="Australian of the Year" label="Australian of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="15427" end="15453" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6492" start="15463" end="15476" title="Airbus KC-30A" label="Airbus KC-30A"/>
<link wikidata="Q139289" start="15527" end="15543" title="Boeing 737 MAX" label="Boeing 737 MAX 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q26678" start="15650" end="15653" title="BMW" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q23358" start="16363" end="16376" title="Stanley Bruce" label="Stanley Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586885" start="16409" end="16413" title="1929 Australian federal election" label="1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q776380" start="16471" end="16475" title="1931 Australian federal election" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q23352" start="16577" end="16588" title="George Reid" label="George Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="16608" end="16627" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="UK House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q459146" start="16681" end="16692" title="Frank Forde" label="Frank Forde"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261065" start="17196" end="17217" title="Deputy Prime Minister of Australia" label="deputy prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676862" start="17226" end="17247" title="acting prime minister" label="acting prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q47654909" start="17845" end="17868" title="Disappearance of Harold Holt" label="Harold Holt disappeared"/>
<link wikidata="Q23386" start="17883" end="17894" title="John McEwen" label="John McEwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q370966" start="17999" end="18003" title="Joseph Lyons" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q23375" start="18008" end="18012" title="John Curtin" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q370926" start="18014" end="18024" title="Earle Page" label="Earle Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q459146" start="18029" end="18040" title="Frank Forde" label="Frank Forde"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020091" start="18277" end="18289" title="William Watt (Australian politician)" label="William Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q364568" start="18314" end="18327" title="George Pearce" label="George Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q313805" start="18346" end="18359" title="Alfred Deakin" label="Alfred Deakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q356230" start="18378" end="18389" title="Joseph Cook" label="Joseph Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133824" start="18408" end="18420" title="James Fenton (Australian politician)" label="James Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q921617" start="18444" end="18456" title="John Forrest" label="John Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q23369" start="18479" end="18492" title="Arthur Fadden" label="Arthur Fadden"/>
<link wikidata="Q585087" start="18832" end="18836" title="Order of St Michael and St George" label="GCMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q721030" start="18911" end="18913" title="Order of the Thistle" label="KT"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="19209" end="19212" title="Order of the Bath" label="GCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="19230" end="19232" title="Knight of the Order of Australia" label="AK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137694" start="19398" end="19431" title="Order of the Companions of Honour" label="Order of the Companions of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="19779" end="19814" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Council of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="20093" end="20111" title="Order of Australia" label="Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q94056" start="20809" end="20823" title="Order of Merit" label="Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q721030" start="20911" end="20945" title="Knight of the Order of the Thistle" label="Knight of the Order of the Thistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="20988" end="21006" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875975" start="21168" end="21189" title="1947 New Year Honours" label="1947 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q107393285" start="21375" end="21392" title="Division of Hawke" label="Division of Hawke"/>
<link wikidata="Q214438" start="21551" end="21565" title="Robert Menzies" label="Robert Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q459146" start="21877" end="21888" title="Frank Forde" label="Frank Forde"/>
<link wikidata="Q23375" start="21958" end="21969" title="John Curtin" label="John Curtin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23379" start="22006" end="22017" title="Ben Chifley" label="Ben Chifley"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="22044" end="22066" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Australian Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436908" start="22154" end="22168" title="Scott Morrison" label="Scott Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549251" start="22355" end="22391" title="List of prime ministers of Australia" label="List of prime ministers of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562747" start="22394" end="22444" title="List of prime ministers of Australia by birthplace" label="List of prime ministers of Australia by birthplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594964" start="22447" end="22501" title="List of prime ministers of Australia by time in office" label="List of prime ministers of Australia by time in office"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774361" start="22518" end="22569" title="Historical rankings of prime ministers of Australia" label="Historical rankings of prime ministers of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247874" start="22572" end="22612" title="List of Commonwealth heads of government" label="List of Commonwealth heads of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594964" start="22615" end="22669" title="List of prime ministers of Australia by time in office" label="List of prime ministers of Australia by time in office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626201" start="22672" end="22711" title="List of prime ministers of Elizabeth II" label="List of prime ministers of Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q113895734" start="22714" end="22752" title="List of prime ministers of Charles III" label="List of prime ministers of Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243322" start="22755" end="22777" title="Prime Ministers Avenue" label="Prime Ministers Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851467" start="22810" end="22836" title="Ballarat Botanical Gardens" label="Ballarat Botanical Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243319" start="22915" end="22953" title="Prime Ministers&amp;#x27; Corridor of Oaks" label="Prime Ministers&amp;#x27; Corridor of Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438095" start="22957" end="22987" title="Faulconbridge, New South Wales" label="Faulconbridge, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352889" start="23056" end="23080" title="Prime Minister&amp;#x27;s XI" label="Prime Minister&amp;#x27;s XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580156" start="23083" end="23124" title="Spouse of the prime minister of Australia" label="Spouse of the prime minister of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460433" start="23127" end="23163" title="Leader of the Opposition (Australia)" label="Leader of the Opposition (Australia)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24118" wikidata="Q7142812" url="?curid=24118" title="Passive management">
<text>Passive management (also called passive investing) is an investing strategy that tracks a market-weighted index or portfolio. Passive management is most common on the equity market, where index funds track a stock market index, but it is becoming more common in other investment types, including bonds, commodities and hedge funds. There has been a substantial increase in passive investing over the last twenty years.

The most popular method is to mimic the performance of an externally specified index by buying an index fund. By tracking an index, an investment portfolio typically gets good diversification, low turnover (good for keeping down internal transaction costs), and low management fees. With low fees, an investor in such a fund would have higher returns than a similar fund with similar investments but higher management fees and/or turnover/transaction costs.

The bulk of money in Passive index funds are invested with the three passive asset managers: BlackRock, Vanguard and State Street. A major shift from assets to passive investments has taken place since 2008. 

Passively managed funds consistently outperform actively managed funds. More than three-quarters of active mutual fund managers are falling behind the S&amp;P 500 and the Dow Jones Industrial Average. The S&amp;P Indices versus Active (SPIVA) scorecard, which tracks the performance of actively managed funds against their respective category benchmarks, recently showed 79% of fund managers underperformed the S&amp;P last year. It reflects an 86% jump over the past 10 years. In general, actively managed funds have failed to survive and beat their benchmarks, especially over longer time horizons; only 25% of all active funds topped the average of their passive rivals over the 10-year period ended June 2021. Investors, academicians, and authors such as Warren Buffett, John C. Bogle, Jack Brennan, Paul Samuelson, Burton Malkiel, David Swensen, Benjamin Graham, Gene Fama, William J. Bernstein, and Andrew Tobias have long been strong proponents of passive investing.

== History ==
The first US market indexes date to the 1800s. The Dow Jones Transportation Average was established in 1884 with eleven stocks, mostly railroads. The Dow Jones Industrial Average was created in 1896 with 12 stocks in industrial manufacturing, energy and related industries. Both are still in use with modifications, but the Industrial Average, commonly called &quot;The Dow&quot; or &quot;Dow Jones&quot;, is more prominent and came to be regarded as an important measure for the American economy as a whole. Other influential US indexes include the S&amp;P 500 (1957), a curated list of 500 stocks selected by committee, and the Russell 1000 (1984) which tracks the largest 1,000 stocks by market capitalization. The FTSE 100 (1984) represents the largest publicly traded in the UK, while the MSCI World index (1969) tracks stock markets of the entire developed world.

Unit investment trusts (UITs) are a type of U.S. investment vehicle that prohibits or severely restricts changes to the assets held in the trust. One such UIT is the Voya Corporate Leaders Trust (LEXCX), which as of 2019 was the oldest passively managed investment fund still in existence in the United States according to John Rekenthaler of Morningstar, Inc. Founded in 1935 as the Lexington Corporate Leaders Trust, LEXCX initially held 30 stocks, closely modeled on the Dow Industrials. LEXCX prohibited the purchase of new assets apart from those related directly to the original 30 (as with spin-offs or Mergers and acquisitions) and prohibited the sale of assets except when a stock eliminated dividends or was at risk of de-listing from the stock exchange. Unlike later index funds that are usually cap weighted, with greater proportional holdings in larger companies, LEXCX is share weighted: &quot;holding the same number of shares in each company regardless of price.&quot; An evaluation by &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; found the fund was passively managed: &quot;for all intents and purposes, this fund&#x27;s portfolio is on autopilot.&quot;

The theory underlying passive management, the efficient-market hypothesis, was developed at the Chicago Graduate School of Business in the 1960s.

During this same period, researchers first began to discuss the concept of an &quot;unmanaged investment company.&quot; In 1969, Arthur Lipper III became the first to try to turn theory into practice by petitioning the Securities and Exchange Commission to create a fund tracking the 30 stocks Dow Industrial Average. According to Lipper, the SEC did not respond. The first index funds were launched in the early 1970s, by American National Bank in Chicago, Batterymarch, and Wells Fargo; they were available only to large pension plans. The first index fund for individual investors was launched in 1976. The Vanguard First Index Investment Fund (now the Vanguard 500 Index Fund) was the brainchild of John (Jack) Bogle.

== Investment in passive strategies ==

Research conducted by the World Pensions Council (WPC) suggests that 15% to 20% of overall assets held by large pension funds and national social security funds are invested in various forms of passive funds- as opposed to the more traditional actively managed mandates which still constitute the largest share of institutional investments. The proportion invested in passive funds varies widely across jurisdictions and fund type.

The relative appeal of passive funds such as ETFs and other index-replicating investment vehicles has grown rapidly for various reasons ranging from disappointment with underperforming actively managed mandates to the broader tendency towards cost reduction across public services and social benefits that followed the 2008-2012 Great Recession. Public-sector pensions and national reserve funds have been among the early adopters of passive management strategies.

At the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, YiLi Chien, Senior Economist wrote about return-chasing behavior. The average equity mutual fund investor tends to buy MUTUAL FUNDS with high past returns and sell otherwise. Buying MUTUAL FUNDS with high returns is called a &quot;return-chasing behavior.&quot; Equity mutual fund flows have a positive correlation with past performance, with a return-flow correlation coefficient of 0.49. Stock market returns are almost unpredictable in the short term. Stock market returns tend to go back to the long-term average. The tendency to buy MUTUAL FUNDS with high returns and sell those with low returns can reduce profit.

Unsophisticated short-term investors sell passive ETFs during extreme market times. Passive funds affect the price of stocks.

== Rationale for passive investing ==
The concept of passive management is counterintuitive to many investors. The rationale behind indexing stems from the following concepts of financial economics:

# In the long term, the average investor will have an average before-costs performance equal to the market average. Therefore, the average investor will benefit more from reducing investment costs than from trying to beat the average, and passive investments generally charge lower fees than actively-managed investments. This argument is commonly known as William Sharpe&#x27;s zero-sum game theory.
# The efficient-market hypothesis postulates that equilibrium market prices fully reflect all available information, or to the extent there is some information not reflected, there is nothing that can be done to exploit that fact. It is widely interpreted as suggesting that it is impossible to systematically &quot;beat the market&quot; through active management, although this is not a correct interpretation of the hypothesis in its weak form. Stronger forms of the hypothesis are controversial, and there is some debatable evidence against it in its weak form too. For further information see behavioural finance.
# The principal–agent problem: an investor (the principal) who allocates money to a portfolio manager (the agent) must properly give incentives to the manager to run the portfolio in accordance with the investor&#x27;s risk/return appetite, and must monitor the manager&#x27;s performance.

Advocates for passive management argue that performance results provide support for Sharpe&#x27;s zero-sum game theory. There are two prominent reports that compare the performance of index funds with the performance of actively-managed funds, the SPIVA (S&amp;P Indexes Versus Active Funds) report and the Morningstar Active-Passive Barometer. 

==Concerns about passive investing==
Criticism has been leveled at passive investment by investors like Howard Marks Carl Icahn, Michael Burry and Jeffrey Gundlach who argue that asset bubbles can be considered a byproduct of the increasing popularity of passive investing. John C. Bogle of The Vanguard Group, while a staunch advocate for passive investing overall, also argued in 2018 that the growth in passive management firms would soon result in a concentration of over half of American stock ownership, and associated proxy voting power, among three large firms (Vanguard, State Street Global Advisors and BlackRock). Bogle stated: &quot;I do not believe such a concentration would serve the national interest&quot;.

In 2017, Robert Shiller, a Nobel Prize winning economist at Yale University, stated passive index funds are a &quot;chaotic system&quot; and &quot;kind of pseudoscience&quot; due to what he described as an over-reliance on computer models and a neglect of the businesses whose stocks make up index funds.

According to researchers with the Federal Reserve who published their findings in 2020, the growing popularity of passive investing has increased some risks for investors and the economy generally, but reduced other risks. &quot;Some passive strategies amplify market volatility, and the shift [towards passive investing] has increased industry concentration, but it has diminished some liquidity and redemption risks.&quot;

Passive investing may contribute to shareholder apathy, whereby investors are less engaged in the corporate governance process.

Benjamin Braun suggests that, since American stock ownership is concentrated on few big asset managers which are very diversified and do not have a direct interest in the performance of the companies, this emerging &quot;asset manager capitalism&quot; is distinct from the earlier shareholder primacy.
The asset managers usually vote with company managers.
Also, as funds invest in most companies in the sector, they would benefit from monopolistic prices.
In an extreme case, there could be economy-wide monopolies where asset managers have &quot;bought the economy&quot;.
In a regime of common ownership, while asset ownership is diversified, it is a small part of the population who invest in funds and a top 1% of the wealth distribution owning 50% of corporate equity and mutual funds.
Wage stagnation would be an expected externality.
Asset managers have an incentive to increase the assets value and influence monetary policy.

In response, defenders of passive investing argue that some claims against the strategy are incorrect, and that other claims are partially accurate but overstated.

==Implementation ==

The first step to implementing an index-based passive investment strategy is choosing a rules-based, transparent, and investable index consistent with the investment strategy&#x27;s desired market exposure. Investment strategies are defined by their objectives and constraints, which are stated in their Investment Policy Statements. For equity passive investment strategies, the desired market exposures could vary by equity market segment (broad market vs. industry sectors, domestic vs. international), by style (value, growth, blend/core), or by other factors (high or low momentum, low volatility, quality).

Index rules could include the frequency at which index constituents are re-balanced, and criteria for including such constituents. These rules should be objective, consistent and predictable. Index transparency means that index constituents and rules are clearly disclosed, which ensures that investors can replicate the index. Index investability means that the index performance can be reasonably replicated by investing in the market. In the simplest case, investability means that all constituents of an index can be purchased on a public exchange.

Once an index has been chosen, an index fund can be implemented through various methods, financial instruments, and combinations thereof.

===Implementation vehicles===
Passive management can be achieved through holding the following instruments or a combination of the following instruments.

Index funds are mutual funds that try to replicate the returns of an index by purchasing securities in the same proportion as in the stock market index. Some funds replicate index returns through sampling (e.g., buying stocks of each kind and sector in the index but not necessarily some of each individual stock), and there are sophisticated versions of sampling (e.g., those that seek to buy those particular shares that have the best chance of good performance). Investment funds that employ passive investment strategies to track the performance of a stock market index are known as index funds.

Exchange-traded funds are open-ended, pooled, registered funds that are traded on public exchanges. A fund manager manages the underlying portfolio of the ETF much like an index fund, and tracks a particular index or particular indices. &quot;Authorized participant&quot; acts as market makers for the ETF and delivers securities with the same allocation of the underlying fund to the fund manager in exchange for ETF units and vice versa. ETFs usually offer investors easy trading, low management fees, tax efficiency, and the ability to leverage using borrowed margin.

Index futures contracts are futures contacts on the price of particular indices. Stock market index futures offer investors easy trading, ability to leverage through notional exposure, and no management fees. However, futures contracts expire, so they must be rolled over periodically for a cost. As well, only relatively popular stock market indices have futures contracts, so portfolio managers might not get exactly the exposure they want using available futures contracts. The use of futures contracts is also highly regulated, given the amount leverage they allow investors. Portfolio managers sometimes uses stock market index futures contracts as short-term investment vehicles to quickly adjust index exposure, while replacing those exposures with cash exposures over longer periods.

Options on Index Futures Contracts are options on futures contracts of particular indices. Options offer investors asymmetric payoffs that could limit their risk of loss (or gain, depending on the option) to just the premiums they paid for the option. They also offer investors the ability to leverage their exposure to stock market indices since option premiums are lower than the amount of index exposure afforded by the options.

Stock Market Index Swaps are swap contracts typically negotiated between two parties to swap for a stock market index return in exchange for another source of return, typically a fixed income or money market return. Swap contracts exposure investors to counterparty credit risk, low liquidity risk, interest rate risk, and tax policy risk. However, swap contracts can be negotiated for whatever index the parties agree to use as underlying index, and for however long the parties agree to set the contract, so investors could potentially negotiate swaps more compatible with their investment needs than funds, ETFs, and futures contracts.

===Implementation methods===
Full replication in index investing means that manager holds all securities represented by the index in weights that closely match the index weights. Full replication is easy to comprehend and explain to investors, and mechanically tracks the index performance. However, full replication requires that all the index components have sufficient investment capacity and liquidity, and that the assets under investment management is large enough to make investments in all components of the index.

Stratified sampling in index investing means that managers hold sub-sets of securities sampled from distinct sub-groups, or strata, of stocks in the index. The various strata imposed on the index should be mutually exclusive, exhaustive (sum to make up the whole index), and reflective of the characteristics and performance of the entire index. Common stratification techniques include industrial sector membership (such as sector membership defined by Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS)), equity style characteristics, and country affiliation. Sampling within each strata could be based on minimum market-cap criteria, or other criteria that mimics the weighting scheme of the index.

Optimization sampling in index investing means that managers hold a sub-set of securities generated from an optimization process that minimizes the index tracking error of a portfolio subject to constraints. These sub-sets of securities do not have to adhere to common stock sub-groups. Common constraints include the number of securities, market-cap limits, stock liquidity, and stock lot size.

Globally diversified portfolios of index funds are used by investment advisors who invest passively for their clients based on the principle that underperforming markets will be balanced by other markets that outperform. A Loring Ward report in Advisor Perspectives showed how international diversification worked over the 10-year period from 2000–2010, with the Morgan Stanley Capital Index for emerging markets generating ten-year returns of 154% balancing the S&amp;P 500 index, which declined 9.1% over the same period – a historically rare event. The report noted that passive portfolios diversified in international asset classes generate more stable returns, particularly if rebalanced regularly.

State Street Global Advisors has long engaged companies on issues of corporate governance. Passive managers can vote against a board of directors using a large number of shares. Being forced to own stock on certain companies by the funds&#x27; charters, State Street pressures about principles of diversity, including gender diversity.

The Bank of America estimated in 2017 that 37 percent of the value of U.S. funds (not including privately held assets) were in passive investments such as index funds and index ETFs. The same year, BlackRock estimated that 17.5 percent of the global stock market was managed passively; in contrast, 25.6 percent was managed by active funds or institutional accounts, and 57 percent was privately held and presumably does not track an index. Similarly, Vanguard stated in 2018 that index funds own &quot;15% of the value of all global equities&quot;.

==See also==
*Investment management
*Active management
*Exchange-traded fund
*Buy and hold
*Index fund
*Enhanced indexing
*Relative return
*Value investing
*Investment style

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* Burton G. Malkiel, A Random Walk Down Wall Street, W. W. Norton, 1996, 
* John Bogle, &quot;Bogle on Mutual Funds: New Perspectives for the Intelligent Investor&quot;, Dell, 1994, 
* M. Nicolas J. Firzli, &quot;Passive Play: Disenchanted Asset Owners Going Low-Cost as the ‘Age of Austerity’ Lingers&quot;, Revue Analyse Financière 54 (2015): 68-70.
* Mark T. Hebner, &quot;Index Funds: The 12-Step Program for Active Investors&quot;, IFA Publishing, 2007, 

==External links==
*The Active vs Passive - unresolved issues.
*The Future of Investment Management
* Lazy portfolios on Bogleheads.org
*Glossary of Key Investment Terms - PIMCO</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7142812" start="0" end="18" title="Passive management" label="Passive management"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142812" start="32" end="49" title="Passive management" label="passive investing"/>
<link wikidata="Q475000" start="167" end="180" title="stock market" label="equity market"/>
<link wikidata="Q223371" start="208" end="226" title="stock market index" label="stock market index"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693" start="296" end="300" title="bond (finance)" label="bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q317088" start="303" end="314" title="Commodity" label="commodities"/>
<link wikidata="Q105611" start="319" end="329" title="hedge fund" label="hedge fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272475" start="499" end="504" title="Index (economics)" label="index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195348" start="518" end="528" title="index fund" label="index fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q877496" start="658" end="674" title="transaction cost" label="transaction cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q219635" start="972" end="981" title="BlackRock" label="BlackRock"/>
<link wikidata="Q849363" start="983" end="991" title="The Vanguard Group" label="Vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037125" start="996" end="1008" title="State Street Corporation" label="State Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q242345" start="1240" end="1251" title="S&amp;amp;P 500" label="S&amp;amp;P 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q180816" start="1260" end="1288" title="Dow Jones Industrial Average" label="Dow Jones Industrial Average"/>
<link wikidata="Q47213" start="1848" end="1862" title="Warren Buffett" label="Warren Buffett"/>
<link wikidata="Q504824" start="1864" end="1877" title="John C. Bogle" label="John C. Bogle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223068" start="1879" end="1891" title="John J. Brennan (businessman)" label="Jack Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q102454" start="1893" end="1907" title="Paul Samuelson" label="Paul Samuelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072872" start="1909" end="1923" title="Burton Malkiel" label="Burton Malkiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174392" start="1925" end="1938" title="David Swensen" label="David Swensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q290560" start="1940" end="1955" title="Benjamin Graham" label="Benjamin Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q359317" start="1957" end="1966" title="Gene Fama" label="Gene Fama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578033" start="1968" end="1988" title="William J. Bernstein" label="William J. Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758748" start="1994" end="2007" title="Andrew Tobias" label="Andrew Tobias"/>
<link wikidata="Q688712" start="2129" end="2161" title="Dow Jones Transportation Average" label="Dow Jones Transportation Average"/>
<link wikidata="Q180816" start="2228" end="2256" title="Dow Jones Industrial Average" label="Dow Jones Industrial Average"/>
<link wikidata="Q242345" start="2628" end="2639" title="S&amp;amp;P 500" label="S&amp;amp;P 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q466496" start="2796" end="2804" title="FTSE 100" label="FTSE 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881843" start="2872" end="2882" title="MSCI World" label="MSCI World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887132" start="2949" end="2970" title="Unit investment trust" label="Unit investment trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972276" start="3115" end="3119" title="Voya Financial" label="Voya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389504" start="3292" end="3309" title="Morningstar, Inc." label="Morningstar, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q731112" start="3559" end="3583" title="Mergers and acquisitions" label="Mergers and acquisitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="3957" end="3985" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q724931" start="4163" end="4190" title="efficient-market hypothesis" label="efficient-market hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="4483" end="4517" title="Securities and Exchange Commission" label="Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878925" start="5053" end="5081" title="World Pensions &amp;amp; Investments Forum" label="World Pensions Council (WPC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q182103" start="5139" end="5151" title="pension fund" label="pension fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="5166" end="5181" title="social security" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q845477" start="5505" end="5509" title="Exchange-traded fund" label="ETFs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454688" start="5703" end="5717" title="cost reduction" label="cost reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="5789" end="5804" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392407" start="5842" end="5849" title="reserve (accounting)" label="reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383730" start="5933" end="5966" title="Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis" label="Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q483372" start="6791" end="6807" title="counterintuitive" label="counterintuitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q724931" start="7323" end="7350" title="efficient-market hypothesis" label="efficient-market hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677563" start="7663" end="7680" title="active management" label="active management"/>
<link wikidata="Q647525" start="7914" end="7933" title="behavioural finance" label="behavioural finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053211" start="7941" end="7964" title="principal–agent problem" label="principal–agent problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290" start="7969" end="7977" title="Investment" label="investor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414816" start="8068" end="8077" title="incentive" label="incentive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8154" end="8158" title="Risk#In finance" label="risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q939134" start="8159" end="8165" title="Return on investment" label="return"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631875" start="8677" end="8689" title="Howard Marks" label="Howard Marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q981479" start="8690" end="8700" title="Carl Icahn" label="Carl Icahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828961" start="8702" end="8715" title="Michael Burry" label="Michael Burry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052228" start="8720" end="8736" title="Jeffrey Gundlach" label="Jeffrey Gundlach"/>
<link wikidata="Q207781" start="8752" end="8765" title="economic bubble" label="asset bubbles"/>
<link wikidata="Q504824" start="8847" end="8860" title="John C. Bogle" label="John C. Bogle"/>
<link wikidata="Q849363" start="8864" end="8882" title="The Vanguard Group" label="The Vanguard Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433039" start="9098" end="9110" title="proxy voting" label="proxy voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603552" start="9153" end="9181" title="State Street Global Advisors" label="State Street Global Advisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q219635" start="9186" end="9195" title="BlackRock" label="BlackRock"/>
<link wikidata="Q338151" start="9307" end="9321" title="Robert Shiller" label="Robert Shiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="9325" end="9336" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="9358" end="9373" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="9453" end="9466" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q925667" start="9521" end="9536" title="computer models" label="computer models"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="9638" end="9653" title="Federal Reserve" label="Federal Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10066" end="10084" title="shareholder apathy" label="shareholder apathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q380767" start="10128" end="10148" title="corporate governance" label="corporate governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q873442" start="10247" end="10260" title="asset manager" label="asset manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489581" start="10440" end="10459" title="shareholder primacy" label="shareholder primacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="10595" end="10607" title="monopoly" label="monopolistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117368" start="10748" end="10764" title="common ownership" label="common ownership"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10915" end="10931" title="corporate equity" label="corporate equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932544" start="10950" end="10965" title="Wage stagnation" label="Wage stagnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q275372" start="10987" end="10998" title="externality" label="externality"/>
<link wikidata="Q178476" start="11076" end="11091" title="monetary policy" label="monetary policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060889" start="11789" end="11794" title="Investment style" label="style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361817" start="11796" end="11801" title="value investing" label="value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746791" start="11803" end="11809" title="growth stock" label="growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142067" start="11845" end="11865" title="Momentum investing" label="high or low momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q85782505" start="11867" end="11881" title="Low-volatility investing" label="low volatility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195348" start="12482" end="12492" title="index fund" label="index fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q169489" start="12831" end="12841" title="Security (finance)" label="securities"/>
<link wikidata="Q223371" start="12875" end="12893" title="stock market index" label="stock market index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196314" start="12961" end="12966" title="stock" label="stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201895" start="13208" end="13223" title="Investment fund" label="Investment fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q223371" start="13297" end="13315" title="stock market index" label="stock market index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195348" start="13329" end="13339" title="index fund" label="index fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q845477" start="13343" end="13363" title="Exchange-traded fund" label="Exchange-traded fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q183984" start="13943" end="13959" title="Futures contracts" label="futures contacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628939" start="16759" end="16805" title="Global Industry Classification Standard" label="Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17624" end="17635" title="Loring Ward" label="Loring Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q242345" start="17864" end="17875" title="S&amp;amp;P 500" label="S&amp;amp;P 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603552" start="18106" end="18134" title="State Street Global Advisors" label="State Street Global Advisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q380767" start="18175" end="18195" title="corporate governance" label="corporate governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="18233" end="18251" title="board of directors" label="board of directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501335" start="18424" end="18440" title="gender diversity" label="gender diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q487907" start="18447" end="18462" title="Bank of America" label="Bank of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q14864997" start="19008" end="19029" title="Investment management" label="Investment management"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677563" start="19031" end="19048" title="Active management" label="Active management"/>
<link wikidata="Q845477" start="19050" end="19070" title="Exchange-traded fund" label="Exchange-traded fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q827009" start="19072" end="19084" title="Buy and hold" label="Buy and hold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195348" start="19086" end="19096" title="Index fund" label="Index fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378803" start="19098" end="19115" title="Enhanced indexing" label="Enhanced indexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310799" start="19117" end="19132" title="Relative return" label="Relative return"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361817" start="19134" end="19149" title="Value investing" label="Value investing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060889" start="19151" end="19167" title="Investment style" label="Investment style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072872" start="19211" end="19228" title="Burton Malkiel" label="Burton G. Malkiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659148" start="19230" end="19260" title="A Random Walk Down Wall Street" label="A Random Walk Down Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282208" start="19262" end="19274" title="W. W. Norton" label="W. W. Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q504824" start="19285" end="19295" title="John Bogle" label="John Bogle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970040" start="19842" end="19847" title="PIMCO" label="PIMCO"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24119" wikidata="Q83159" url="?curid=24119" title="Pope Clement VII">
<text>Pope Clement VII (; ; born Giulio di Giuliano de&#x27; Medici; 26 May 1478 – 25 September 1534) was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 19 November 1523 to his death on 25 September 1534. Deemed &quot;the most unfortunate of the popes&quot;, Clement VII&#x27;s reign was marked by a rapid succession of political, military, and religious struggles—many long in the making—which had far-reaching consequences for Christianity and world politics.

Elected in 1523 at the end of the Italian Renaissance, Clement came to the papacy with a high reputation as a statesman. He had served with distinction as chief advisor to Pope Leo X (1513–1521, his cousin), Pope Adrian VI (1522–1523), and commendably as gran maestro of Florence (1519–1523). Assuming leadership at a time of crisis, with the Protestant Reformation spreading, the Church nearing bankruptcy, and large foreign armies invading Italy, Clement initially tried to unite Christendom by making peace among the many Christian leaders then at odds. He later attempted to liberate Italy from foreign occupation, believing that it threatened the Church&#x27;s freedom.

The complex political situation of the 1520s thwarted Clement&#x27;s efforts. Inheriting unprecedented challenges, including Martin Luther&#x27;s Protestant Reformation in Northern Europe; a vast power struggle in Italy between Europe&#x27;s two most powerful kings, Charles V of the Holy Roman Empire and Francis I of France, each of whom demanded that the Pope choose a side; Turkish invasions of Eastern Europe led by Suleiman the Magnificent. Clement&#x27;s problems were exacerbated by souring relations with Charles V in 1527, which led to the violent Sack of Rome, during which Clement was imprisoned. After escaping confinement in the Castel Sant&#x27;Angelo, Clement—with few economic, military, or political options remaining—compromised the Church&#x27;s and the Papal States&#x27; independence by allying with his former enemy, Charles V. However, his problems continued during Henry VIII of England&#x27;s contentious divorce, resulting in England breaking away from the Catholic Church.

In contrast to his tortured pontificate, Clement was personally respectable and devout, possessing a &quot;dignified propriety of character&quot;, &quot;great acquirements both theological and scientific&quot;, as well as &quot;extraordinary address and penetration—Clement VII, in serener times, might have administered the Papal power with high reputation and enviable prosperity. But with all of his profound insight into the political affairs of Europe, Clement does not seem to have comprehended the altered position of the Pope&quot; in relation to Europe&#x27;s emerging nation-states and Protestantism.

Clement left a significant cultural legacy in the Medici tradition. He commissioned artworks by Raphael, Benvenuto Cellini, and Michelangelo, including Michelangelo&#x27;s &quot;The Last Judgment&quot; in the Sistine Chapel. In matters of science, Clement is best known for approving, in 1533, Nicolaus Copernicus&#x27;s theory that the Earth revolves around the Sun—99 years before Galileo Galilei&#x27;s heresy trial for similar ideas.

==Early life==

Giulio de&#x27; Medici&#x27;s life began under tragic circumstances. On 26 April 1478—exactly one month before his birth—his father, Giuliano de Medici (brother of Lorenzo the Magnificent) was murdered in the Florence Cathedral by enemies of his family, in what is now known as the &quot;Pazzi conspiracy&quot;. He was born illegitimately on 26 May 1478, in Florence; the exact identity of his mother remains unknown, although a plurality of scholars contend that it was Fioretta Gorini, the daughter of a professor, Antonio Gorini. Giulio spent the first seven years of life with his godfather, the architect Antonio da Sangallo the Elder.

Thereafter, Lorenzo the Magnificent raised him as one of his own sons, alongside his children Giovanni (the future Pope Leo X), Piero, and Giuliano. Educated at the Palazzo Medici in Florence by humanists like Angelo Poliziano, and alongside prodigies like Michelangelo, Giulio became an accomplished musician. In personality he was reputed to be shy, and in physical appearance, handsome.

Giulio&#x27;s natural inclination was for the clergy, but his illegitimacy barred him from high-ranking positions in the Church. So Lorenzo the Magnificent helped him carve out a career as a soldier. He was enrolled in the Knights of Rhodes, but also became Grand Prior of Capua. In 1492, when Lorenzo the Magnificent died and Giovanni de&#x27; Medici assumed his duties as a cardinal, Giulio became more involved in Church affairs. He studied canon law at the University of Pisa, and accompanied Giovanni to the conclave of 1492, where Rodrigo Borgia was elected Pope Alexander VI.

Following the misfortunes of Lorenzo the Magnificent&#x27;s firstborn son, Piero the Unfortunate, the Medici were expelled from Florence in 1494. Over the next six years, Cardinal Giovanni and Giulio wandered throughout Europe together—twice getting arrested (first in Ulm, and later in Rouen). Each time Piero the Unfortunate bailed them out. In 1500, both returned to Italy and concentrated their efforts on re-establishing their family in Florence. Both were present at the Battle of Ravenna in 1512, where Cardinal Giovanni was captured by the French but Giulio escaped; this led to Giulio becoming an emissary to Pope Julius II. That same year, with the assistance of Pope Julius and the Spanish troops of Ferdinand II of Aragon, the Medici retook control of Florence.

===Paternity of Alessandro de&#x27; Medici===
In 1510, while the Medici were living near Rome, a servant in their household—identified in documents as Simonetta da Collevecchio—became pregnant, ultimately giving birth to a son, Alessandro de&#x27; Medici. Nicknamed &quot;il Moro&quot; (&quot;the Moor&quot;) due to his dark complexion, Alessandro was officially recognized as the illegitimate son of Lorenzo II de Medici, but at the time and to this day, various scholars suggest that Alessandro was the illegitimate son of Giulio de&#x27; Medici. The truth of his lineage remains unknown and debated.

Regardless of his paternity, throughout Alessandro&#x27;s brief life, Giulio—as Pope Clement VII—showed him great favoritism, elevating Alessandro over Ippolito de Medici as Florence&#x27;s first hereditary monarch, despite the latter&#x27;s comparable qualifications.

== Cardinal ==
===Under Pope Leo X===
Giulio de&#x27; Medici appeared on the world stage in March 1513, at the age of 35, when his cousin Giovanni de&#x27; Medici was elected Pope, taking the name Leo X. Pope Leo X reigned until his death on 1 December 1521.

&quot;Learned, clever, respectable, and industrious&quot;, Giulio de&#x27; Medici&#x27;s reputation and responsibilities grew at a rapid pace, unusual even for the Renaissance. Within three months of Leo X&#x27;s election, he was named Archbishop of Florence. Later that autumn, all barriers to his attaining the Church&#x27;s highest offices were removed by a papal dispensation declaring his birth legitimate. It stated that his parents had been betrothed (i.e. &quot;wed according to the word of those present&quot;). Whether or not this was true, it allowed Leo X to create him cardinal during the first papal consistory on 23 September 1513. On 29 September, he was appointed Cardinal Deacon of Santa Maria in Domnica—a position that had been vacated by the Pope.

Cardinal Giulio&#x27;s reputation during the reign of Leo X is recorded by contemporary Marco Minio, the Venetian ambassador to the Papal Court, who wrote in a letter to the Venetian Senate in 1519: &quot;Cardinal de&#x27; Medici, the Pope&#x27;s cardinal nephew, who is not legitimate, has great power with the Pope; he is a man of great competence and great authority; he resides with the Pope, and does nothing of importance without first consulting him. But he is returning to Florence to govern the city.&quot;

====Statesmanship====
While Cardinal Giulio was not officially appointed Vice-Chancellor of the Church (second-in-command) until 9 March 1517, in practice Leo X governed in partnership with his cousin from the beginning. Initially, his duties centered primarily on administering Church affairs in Florence and conducting international relations. In January 1514, Henry VIII of England appointed him Cardinal protector of England. The following year, Francis I of France nominated him to become Archbishop of Narbonne, and in 1516 named him cardinal protector of France. In a scenario typical of Cardinal Giulio&#x27;s independent-minded statesmanship, the respective kings of England and France, recognizing a conflict of interest in Giulio protecting both countries simultaneously, brought pressure to bear on him to resign his other protectorship; to their dismay, he refused.

Cardinal Giulio&#x27;s foreign policy was shaped by the idea of , which aimed to free Italy and the Church from French and Imperial domination. This became clear in 1521, when a personal rivalry between King Francis I and Holy Roman Emperor Charles V boiled over into war in northern Italy. Francis I expected Giulio, France&#x27;s cardinal protector, to support him; but Giulio perceived Francis as threatening the Church&#x27;s independence—particularly the latter&#x27;s control of Lombardy, and his use of the Concordat of Bologna to control the Church in France. At the time, the Church wanted Emperor Charles V to combat Lutheranism, then growing in Germany. So Cardinal Giulio negotiated an alliance on behalf of the Church, to support the Holy Roman Empire against France. That autumn, Giulio helped lead a victorious Imperial-Papal army over the French in Milan and Lombardy. While his strategy of shifting alliances to liberate the Church and Italy from foreign domination proved disastrous during his reign as Pope Clement VII, during the reign of Leo X it skillfully maintained a balance of power among the competing international factions seeking to influence the Church.

====Armed conflicts====

Giulio de&#x27; Medici led numerous armed conflicts as a cardinal. Commenting on this, his contemporary Francesco Guicciardini wrote that Cardinal Giulio was better suited to arms than to the priesthood. He served as papal legate to the army in a campaign against Francis I in 1515, alongside inventor Leonardo da Vinci.

====Achievements====

Cardinal Giulio&#x27;s other endeavors on behalf of Pope Leo X were similarly successful, such that &quot;he had the credit of being the prime mover of papal policy throughout the whole of Leo&#x27;s pontificate&quot;. In 1513, he was member of the Fifth Lateran Council, assigned the task of healing the schism caused by conciliarism. In 1515, his &quot;most significant act of ecclesiastical government&quot; regulated prophetic preaching in the manner of Girolamo Savonarola. He later organized and presided over the Florentine Synod of 1517, where he became the first member of the Church to implement the reforms recommended by the Fifth Lateran Council. These included prohibiting priests from carrying arms, frequenting taverns, and dancing provocatively – while urging them to attend weekly confession. Similarly, Cardinal Giulio&#x27;s artistic patronage was admired (e.g., his commissioning Raphael&#x27;s &quot;Transfiguration&quot; and Michelangelo&#x27;s &quot;Medici Chapel&quot;, among other works), particularly for what goldsmith Benvenuto Cellini later called its &quot;excellent taste&quot;.

===Gran Maestro of Florence===
Cardinal Giulio governed Florence between 1519 and 1523, following the death of its civic ruler, Lorenzo II de Medici, in 1519. There &quot;he was permitted to assume almost autocratic control of State affairs&quot;, and &quot;did very much to place public interests upon a firm and practical basis&quot;. U.S. President John Adams later characterized Giulio&#x27;s administration of Florence as &quot;very successful and frugal&quot;. Adams chronicles the cardinal as having &quot;reduced the business of the magistrates, elections, customs of office, and the mode of expenditure of public money, in such a manner that it produced a great and universal joy among the citizens&quot;.

On the death of Pope Leo X in 1521, Adams writes there was a &quot;ready inclination in all of the principal citizens [of Florence], and a universal desire among the people, to maintain the state in the hands of the Cardinal de&#x27; Medici; and all this felicity arose from his good government, which since the death of the Duke Lorenzo, had been universally agreeable.&quot;

===Under Pope Adrian VI===
When Pope Leo X died on 1 December 1521, Cardinal Giulio was &quot;widely expected to succeed him&quot;—but instead, during the conclave of 1522, the College of Cardinals elected a compromise candidate, Adrian VI of the Netherlands. Of why this happened, historian Paul Strathern writes, &quot;it was common knowledge that [Cardinal Giulio] had been Leo X&#x27;s most able adviser, as well as manager of the pope&#x27;s financial affairs. The fact that Leo X had blithely ignored his cousin&#x27;s advice, on so many occasions, was widely seen as being responsible for the plight of the papacy—not the influence of Cardinal Giulio de&#x27; Medici. On the contrary, Cardinal Giulio appeared to be everything that Leo X was not: he was handsome, thoughtful, saturnine and gifted with good taste. Despite this, many remained steadfast in their opposition to his candidacy.&quot;

In conclave, Cardinal Giulio controlled the largest voting bloc, but his enemies forced the election to a stalemate. Among them were Cardinal Francesco Soderini, a Florentine whose family had lost a power struggle to the Medici &quot;and held a grudge&quot;; Cardinal Pompeo Colonna, a Roman nobleman who wanted to become Pope himself; and a group of French cardinals who &quot;were unwilling to forget Leo X&#x27;s treachery to their King&quot;.

Realizing that his candidacy was in jeopardy, &quot;Cardinal Giulio now chose to make an astute tactical move. He declared modestly that he was unworthy of such high office; instead, he suggested the little-known Dutch scholar Cardinal Adriaan Boeyens, an ascetic and deeply spiritual man who had been tutor to the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V. Cardinal Giulio was sure that Cardinal Boeyens would be rejected—on the grounds of his obscurity, his lack of political expertise and the fact that he was not Italian. The selfless suggestion that had been made by Cardinal Giulio de&#x27; Medici would then demonstrate to all that he was in fact the ideal candidate. But this move backfired badly, Cardinal Giulio&#x27;s bluff was called and Cardinal Boeyens was elected as Pope Adrian VI.&quot;
During his 20-month papacy, Adrian VI &quot;seemed to set great store by Cardinal Medici&#x27;s opinions ... And all the other cardinals were kept distinctly at arm&#x27;s-length.&quot; In this way, Cardinal Giulio &quot;wielded formidable influence&quot; throughout Adrian&#x27;s reign. Splitting time between the Palazzo Medici in Florence and the Palazzo della Cancelleria in Rome, Cardinal Giulio &quot;lived there as a generous Medici was expected to live, a patron of artists and musicians, a protector of the poor, a lavish host&quot;.

====Assassination plot of 1522====
In 1522, rumors began to swirl that Cardinal Giulio—lacking legitimate successors to rule Florence—planned to abdicate rule of the city and &quot;leave the government freely in the people&quot;. When it became clear that these rumors were untrue, a faction of mostly elite Florentines hatched a plot to assassinate him and then install their own government under his &quot;great adversary&quot;, Cardinal Francesco Soderini. Soderini encouraged the plot, exhorting both Adrian and Francis I of France to strike against Giulio and invade his allies in Sicily. This did not happen. Instead of breaking with Giulio, Adrian had Cardinal Soderini imprisoned. Afterward, the principal conspirators were &quot;declared rebels&quot;, and some were &quot;apprehended and beheaded; by which means Giulio was again secured [as leader of Florence].&quot;

==Pope==
Following Adrian VI&#x27;s death on 14 September 1523, Cardinal Giulio overcame the opposition of the French king and finally succeeded in being elected Pope Clement VII in the next conclave (19 November 1523).

Pope Clement VII brought to the papal throne a high reputation for political ability and possessed in fact all the accomplishments of a wily diplomat. But his contemporaries considered him worldly and indifferent to the perceived dangers of the Protestant Reformation.

At his accession, Clement VII sent the Archbishop of Capua, Nikolaus von Schönberg, to the kings of France, Spain, and England, in order to bring the Italian War to an end. An early report from the Protonotary Marino Caracciolo to the Emperor records: &quot;As the Turks threaten to conquer Christian states, it seems to him that it is his first duty as Pope to bring about a general peace of all Christian princes, and he begs him (the Emperor), as the firstborn son of the Church, to aid him in this pious work.&quot; But the pope&#x27;s attempt failed.

===Continental and Medici politics===

Francis I of France&#x27;s conquest of Milan in 1524, during his Italian campaign of 1524–1525, prompted the Pope to quit the Imperial–Spanish side and to ally himself with other Italian princes, including the Republic of Venice, and France through a treaty of January 1525. This treaty granted the definitive acquisition of Parma and Piacenza for the Papal States, the rule of Medici over Florence and the free passage of the French troops to Naples. This policy in itself was sound and patriotic, but Clement VII&#x27;s zeal soon cooled; by his want of foresight and unseasonable economy, he laid himself open to an attack from the turbulent Roman barons, which obliged him to invoke the mediation of the emperor, Charles V. One month later, Francis I was crushed and imprisoned in the Battle of Pavia, and Clement VII went deeper in his former engagements with Charles V, signing an alliance with the viceroy of Naples.

But deeply concerned about Imperial arrogance, he was to pick up with France again when Francis I was freed after the Treaty of Madrid (1526): the Pope entered into the League of Cognac together with France, Venice, and Francesco II Sforza of Milan. Clement VII issued an invective against Charles V, who in reply defined him a &quot;wolf&quot; instead of a &quot;shepherd&quot;, menacing the summoning of a council about the Lutheran question.

Like his cousin Pope Leo X, Clement was considered too generous to his Medici relatives, draining the Vatican treasuries. This included the assignment of positions all the way up to Cardinal, lands, titles, and money. These actions prompted reform measures after Clement&#x27;s death to help prevent such excessive nepotism.

===Evangelization===
In his 1529 bull &quot;Intra Arcana&quot; Clement VII gave a grant of permissions and privileges to Charles V and the Spanish Empire, which included the power of patronage within their colonies in the Americas.

===Sack of Rome===

The Pope&#x27;s wavering politics also caused the rise of the Imperial party inside the Curia: Cardinal Pompeo Colonna&#x27;s soldiers pillaged Vatican Hill and gained control of the whole of Rome in his name. The humiliated Pope promised therefore to bring the Papal States to the Imperial side again. But soon after, Colonna left the siege and went to Naples, not keeping his promises and dismissing the Cardinal from his charge. From this point on, Clement VII could do nothing but follow the fate of the French party to the end.

Soon he found himself alone in Italy too, as Alfonso I d&#x27;Este, duke of Ferrara, had supplied artillery to the Imperial army, causing the League Army to keep a distance behind the horde of Landsknechts led by Charles III, Duke of Bourbon and Georg von Frundsberg, allowing them to reach Rome without harm.
Charles of Bourbon died while mounting a ladder during the short siege and his starving troops, unpaid and left without a guide, felt free to ravage Rome from 6 May 1527. The many incidents of murder, rape, and vandalism that followed ended the splendours of Renaissance Rome forever. Clement VII, who had displayed no more resolution in his military than in his political conduct, was shortly afterwards (6 June) obliged to surrender himself together with the Castel Sant&#x27;Angelo, where he had taken refuge. He agreed to pay a ransom of 400,000 ducats in exchange for his life; conditions included the cession of Parma, Piacenza, Civitavecchia, and Modena to the Holy Roman Empire. (Only the last could be occupied in fact.) At the same time, Venice took advantage of his situation to capture Cervia and Ravenna while Sigismondo Malatesta returned to Rimini.

Clement was kept as a prisoner in Castel Sant&#x27;Angelo for six months. After having bought off some Imperial officers, he escaped disguised as a peddler and took shelter in Orvieto and then in Viterbo. He came back to a depopulated and devastated Rome only in October 1528.

Meanwhile, in Florence, Republican enemies of the Medici took advantage of the chaos to again expel the Pope&#x27;s family from the city.

In June 1529 the warring parties signed the Peace of Barcelona. The Papal States regained some cities and Charles V agreed to restore the Medici to power in Florence. In 1530, after an eleven-month siege, the Tuscan city capitulated and Clement VII installed his illegitimate nephew Alessandro as duke. Subsequently, the Pope followed a policy of subservience to the emperor, endeavouring on the one hand to induce him to act with severity against the Lutherans in Germany and on the other to avoid his demands for a general council.

====Appearance====

During his half-year imprisonment in 1527, Clement VII grew a full beard as a sign of mourning for the sack of Rome. This was in contradiction to Catholic canon law, which required priests to be clean-shaven, but had as precedent the beard Pope Julius II wore for nine months in 1511–12 as a sign of mourning for the papal city of Bologna.

Unlike Julius II, however, Clement kept his beard until his death in 1534. His example in wearing a beard was followed by his successor, Paul III, and indeed by 24 popes after him, down to Innocent XII, who died in 1700. Clement was thus the unintentional originator of a fashion that lasted well over a century.

====Ancona====
In 1532, Clement VII took possession of Ancona, which definitively lost its freedom and became part of the Papal States, ending hundreds of years when the Republic of Ancona was an important maritime power.

===English Reformation===

By the late 1520s, King Henry VIII wanted to have his marriage to Charles&#x27;s aunt Catherine of Aragon annulled. The couple&#x27;s sons died in infancy, threatening the future of the House of Tudor, although Henry did have a daughter, Mary Tudor. Henry claimed that this lack of a male heir was because his marriage was &quot;blighted in the eyes of God&quot;. Catherine had been his brother&#x27;s widow, but the marriage had been childless, so the marriage was not against Old Testament law, which forbids such unions only if the brother had children. Moreover, Pope Julius II had given a dispensation to allow the wedding. Henry now argued that this had been wrong and that his marriage had never been valid. In 1527 Henry asked Clement to annul the marriage, but the Pope, possibly acting under pressure from Catherine&#x27;s nephew, Holy Roman Emperor Charles V, whose effective prisoner he was, refused. According to Catholic teaching, a validly contracted marriage is indivisible until death, and thus the pope cannot annul a marriage on the basis of an impediment previously dispensed. Many people close to Henry wished simply to ignore Clement, but in October 1530 a meeting of clergy and lawyers advised that the Parliament of England could not empower the Archbishop of Canterbury to act against the Pope&#x27;s prohibition. In Parliament, Bishop John Fisher was the Pope&#x27;s champion.

Henry subsequently underwent a marriage ceremony with Anne Boleyn, in either late 1532 or early 1533. The marriage was made easier by the death of the Archbishop of Canterbury William Warham, a stalwart friend of the Pope, after which Henry persuaded Clement to appoint Thomas Cranmer, a friend of the Boleyn family, as his successor. The Pope granted the papal bulls necessary for Cranmer&#x27;s promotion to Canterbury, and also demanded that Cranmer take the customary oath of allegiance to the pope before his consecration. Laws made under Henry already declared that bishops would be consecrated even without papal approval. Cranmer was consecrated, while declaring beforehand that he did not agree with the oath he would take. Cranmer was prepared to grant the annulment of the marriage to Catherine as Henry required. The Pope responded to the marriage by excommunicating both Henry and Cranmer from the Catholic Church.

Consequently, in England, in the same year, the Act of Conditional Restraint of Annates transferred the taxes on ecclesiastical income from the Pope to the Crown. The Peter&#x27;s Pence Act outlawed the annual payment by landowners of one penny to the Pope. This act also reiterated that England had &quot;no superior under God, but only your Grace&quot; and that Henry&#x27;s &quot;imperial crown&quot; had been diminished by the Pope&#x27;s &quot;unreasonable and uncharitable usurpations and exactions&quot;. Ultimately, in 1534, Henry led the English Parliament to pass the Act of Supremacy that established the independent Church of England and broke from the Catholic Church.

===Marriage of Catherine de&#x27; Medici===

In 1533, Clement married his cousin&#x27;s granddaughter, Catherine de&#x27; Medici, to the future King Henry II of France, son of King Francis I. Due to an illness, before setting out to Marseille for the wedding, Clement issued a Bull on 3 September 1533 giving instructions on what to do if he died outside Rome. The wedding ceremony took place at Église Saint-Ferréol les Augustins on 28 October 1533 and was conducted by Clement himself. It was &quot;followed by nine days of lavish banquets, pageants, and festivities.&quot; On 7 November in Marseille, Clement created four new cardinals, all of them French. He also held separate, private meetings with Francis I and Charles V. Charles&#x27; daughter, Margaret of Austria was set to marry Clement&#x27;s relative—Alessandro de&#x27; Medici, Duke of Florence—in 1536.

According to Medici historian Paul Strathern, Clement marrying Catherine into France&#x27;s royal family and Alessandro becoming Duke of Florence and marrying into the Hapsburg family &quot;marked perhaps the most significant turning point in the history of the Medici family—the ascent into nobility in Florence, and the joining of the French royal family. Without the guiding hand of Clement VII, the Medici would never have been able to achieve the pinnacles of greatness that were yet to come&quot; in the following centuries.

==Death==
On 10 December 1533, Clement returned to Rome with a fever and complaining of stomach problems. Strathern writes of how he had been ill for months: &quot;[he] was aging rapidly...his liver was failing and his skin turned yellow; he also lost the sight of one eye and became partially blind in the other.&quot; He was so ill at the beginning of August 1534 that Cardinal Agostino Trivulzio wrote to King Francis that the Pope&#x27;s doctors feared for his life.

On 23 September 1534, Clement wrote a long letter of farewell to Emperor Charles. He also affirmed, just days before his death, that Michelangelo should paint &quot;The Last Judgment&quot; above the altar in the Sistine Chapel. Clement VII died just two days later, on 25 September 1534, having lived 56 years and four months, reigning for 10 years, 10 months, and 7 days. His body was interred in Saint Peter&#x27;s Basilica, and later transferred to a tomb in Santa Maria sopra Minerva in Rome, which was designed by Baccio Bandinelli.

Clement&#x27;s biographer Emmanuel Rodocanachi writes that &quot;in accordance with the custom of those times, people attributed his death to poison&quot;—specifically, poisoning by death cap mushroom. Clement&#x27;s symptoms and the length of his illness do not, however, support the hypothesis that he had been poisoned.

==Legacy==

=== Political legacy ===

Clement VII&#x27;s papacy is generally regarded as one of history&#x27;s most tumultuous; opinions of Clement himself are often nuanced. For example, Clement&#x27;s contemporary Francesco Vettori writes that he &quot;endured a great labor to become, from a great and respected cardinal, a small and little-esteemed pope&quot;, but also that &quot;if one considers the lives of previous popes one may truly say that, for more than a hundred years, no better man than Clement VII sat upon the Throne. Nevertheless, it was in his day that the disaster took place while these others, who were filled with all vices, lived and died in felicity—as the world sees it. Neither should we seek to question the Lord, our God, who will punish—or not punish–in what manner and in what time it pleases him.&quot;

The disasters of Clement&#x27;s pontificate—the Sack of Rome and the English Reformation—are regarded as turning points in the histories of Catholicism, Europe, and the Renaissance. Modern historian Kenneth Gouwens writes, &quot;Clement&#x27;s failures must be viewed above all in the context of major changes in the dynamics of European politics. As warfare on the Italian peninsula intensified in the mid-1520s, the imperative of autonomy [for the Catholic Church and Italy] required enormous financial outlays to field standing armies. Political survival perforce eclipsed ecclesiastical reform as a short-term goal, and the costs of war necessitated the curtailment of expenditure on culture. Clement pursued policies consistent with those of his illustrious predecessors Julius II and Leo X; but in the 1520s, those policies could but fail... Reform of the Church, to which his successors would turn, required resources and concerted secular support that the second Medici pope was unable to muster.&quot;

Regarding Clement&#x27;s struggle to liberate Italy and the Catholic Church from foreign domination, historian Fred Dotolo writes that &quot;one might see in his papacy a vigorous defense of papal rights against the growth of monarchial power, a diplomatic and even pastoral struggle to retain the ancient division within Christendom of the priestly and kingly offices. Should the new monarchs of the early modern period reduce the papacy to a mere appendage of secular authority, religious issues would become little more than state policy... Clement VII attempted to restrain the expansion of royal power and maintain the independence of Rome and of papal prerogatives.&quot;

Ecclesiastically, Clement is remembered for orders protecting Jews from the Inquisition, approving the Theatine, Barnabite, and Capuchin Orders, and securing the island of Malta for the Knights of Malta.

In a final analysis of Clement&#x27;s papacy, historian E.R. Chamberlin writes, &quot;in all but his personal attributes, Clement VII was a protagonist in a Greek tragedy, the victim called upon to endure the results of actions committed long before. Each temporal claim of his predecessors had entangled the Papacy just a little more in the lethal game of politics, even while each moral debasement divorced it just a little more from the vast body of Christians from whom ultimately it drew its strength.&quot; More charitably, modern historian James Grubb writes, &quot;indeed, at a certain point it is difficult to see how he might have fared much better, given the obstacles he faced. Certainly his predecessors since the end of the Schism had experienced their share of opposition, but did any have to fight on so many fronts as Clement, and against such overwhelming odds? At one time or another he battled the Holy Roman Empire (now fueled by precious metals from America), the French, the Turks, rival Italian powers, fractious forces within the papal states, and entrenched interests within the Curia itself. That the precious liberta d&#x27;Italia (freedom from outside domination) should have been lost irrevocably seems more an inevitability than a product of Clement&#x27;s particular failings. He tried his utmost...&quot;

===Portrayals===
The life of the second Medici pope has been portrayed numerous times in films and television, notably the Netflix series &quot;Medici: The Magnificent&quot;, where the figure is portrayed by British actor Jacob Dudman.

=== Patronage ===

As both a cardinal and Pope, Giulio de&#x27; Medici &quot;commissioned or supervised many of the best-known artistic undertakings of the cinquecento.&quot; Of those works, he&#x27;s best known for Michelangelo&#x27;s monumental fresco in the Sistine Chapel, &quot;The Last Judgment&quot;; Raphael&#x27;s iconic altarpiece &quot;The Transfiguration&quot;; Michelangelo&#x27;s sculptures for the &quot;Medici Chapel&quot; in Florence; Raphael&#x27;s architectural &quot;Villa Madama&quot; in Rome; and Michelangelo&#x27;s innovative &quot;Laurentian Library&quot; in Florence. &quot;As a patron, [Giulio de&#x27; Medici] proved extraordinarily confident in technical affairs,&quot; which allowed him to suggest workable architectural and artistic solutions for commissions ranging from Michelangelo&#x27;s &quot;Laurentian Library&quot; to Benvenuto Cellini&#x27;s celebrated Papal Morse. As Pope, he appointed goldsmith Cellini head of the Papal Mint; and painter Sebastiano del Piombo keeper of the Papal Seal. Sebastiano&#x27;s tour de force, &quot;The Raising of Lazarus&quot;, was produced via a contest arranged by Cardinal Giulio, pitting Sebastiano in direct competition with Raphael over who could produce the better altarpiece for the Narbonne Cathedral.

Giulio de&#x27; Medici&#x27;s patronage extended to theology, literature, and science. Some of the best known works associated with him are Erasmus&#x27; &quot;On Free Will&quot;, which he encouraged in response to Martin Luther&#x27;s critiques of the Catholic Church; Machiavelli&#x27;s &quot;Florentine Histories&quot;, which he commissioned; and Copernicus&#x27; heliocentric idea, which he personally approved in 1533. When Johann Widmanstetter explained the Copernican system to him, he was so grateful that he gave Widmanstetter a valuable gift. In 1531 Clement issued rules for the oversight of human cadaver dissection and medical test trials, a sort of primitive code of medical ethics. Humanist and author Paolo Giovio was his personal physician.

Giulio de&#x27; Medici was a talented musician, and his circle included many well-known artists and thinkers of the Italian High Renaissance. For example, &quot;in the days before his papacy, the future Clement VII had been close to Leonardo da Vinci,&quot; with Leonardo gifting him a painting, the &quot;Madonna of the Carnation&quot;. He was a patron of the satirist Pietro Aretino, who &quot;wrote a series of viciously satirical lampoons supporting the candidacy of Giulio de&#x27; Medici for the papacy.&quot; As Pope, he appointed author Baldassare Castiglione as Papal diplomat to Holy Roman Emperor Charles V; and historian Francesco Guicciardini as governor of the Romagna, the northernmost province of the Papal States.

==== The Clementine Style ====
Italian Renaissance artistic trends from 1523 to 1527 are sometimes called the &quot;Clementine style&quot;, and notable for their technical virtuosity. In 1527, the Sack of Rome &quot;put a brutal end to an artistic golden age, the Clementine style that had developed in Rome since the coronation of the Medici Pope&quot;. André Chastel describes the artists who worked in the Clementine style as Parmigianino, Rosso Fiorentino, Sebastiano del Piombo, Benvenuto Cellini, Marcantonio Raimondi, and numerous associates of Raphael: Giulio Romano, Giovanni da Udine; Perino del Vaga; and Polidoro da Caravaggio. During the Sack, several of these artists were either killed, made prisoner, or took part in the fighting.

=== Character ===
Clement was renowned for his intelligence and counsel, but maligned for his inability to take timely and decisive action. Historian G.F. Young writes, &quot;he spoke with equal knowledge of his subject whether that were philosophy and theology, or mechanics and hydraulic architecture. In all affairs he displayed an extraordinary acuteness; the most perplexing questions were unravelled, the most difficult circumstances penetrated to the very bottom, by his extreme sagacity. No man could debate a point with more address.&quot; Historian Paul Strathern writes, &quot;his inner life was illuminated by an unwavering faith;&quot; he was also in &quot;surprisingly close contact with the ideals [of Renaissance humanism], and even more surprisingly was deeply sympathetic to them.&quot; For example, &quot;Clement VII had no difficulty in accepting Copernicus&#x27;s heliocentric idea, and appeared to see no challenge to his faith in its implications; his Renaissance humanism was open to such progressive theories.&quot; Of Clement&#x27;s other qualities, Strathern writes &quot;he had inherited his murdered father&#x27;s good looks, though these tended to lapse into a dark scowl rather than a smile. He also inherited something of his great-grandfather Cosimo de&#x27; Medici&#x27;s skill with accounts, as well as a strong inclination to his legendary caution, making the new pope hesitant when it came to taking important decisions; and unlike his cousin Leo X, he possessed a deep understanding of art.&quot;

Of Clement&#x27;s limitations, historian Francesco Guicciardini writes, &quot;although he had a most capable intelligence and marvelous knowledge of world affairs, he lacked the corresponding resolution and execution... He remained almost always in suspension and ambiguous when he was faced with deciding those things that from afar he had many times foreseen, considered, and almost revealed.&quot; Strathern writes that Clement was &quot;a man of almost icy self-control, but in him the Medici trait of self-contained caution had deepened into a flaw... If anything, Clement VII had too much understanding—he could always see both sides of any particular argument. This had made him an excellent close adviser to his cousin Leo X, but hampered his ability to take matters into his own hands.&quot; The &quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot; notes that while his &quot;private life was free from reproach and he had many excellent impulses ... despite good intention, all qualities of heroism and greatness must emphatically be denied him.&quot;
==See also==
*Republic of Florence
*Italian Wars
*Medici family
*List of popes from the Medici family
*Cardinals created by Clement VII
*Tour Grimaldi 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 


==References==
==Sources==
*

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Rodocanachi, Emmanuel. &quot;Histoire de Rome. Les pontificats d&#x27;Adrien VI et de Clément VII&quot;. Paris : Hachette, 1933.
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* Catholic Hierarchy, Popes Clement VII
* Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church, Cardinal Medici
*His son Alessandro de Medici
*Paradoxplace Medici Popes&#x27; Page
* Adriano Prosperi, &quot;Clemente VII,&quot; &quot;Enciclopedia dei Papi&quot; (2000) [in Italian]
*Pope Clement VII in Catholic Encyclopedia
*Pope Clement VII - a key player in the historical and artistic events of the high renaissance</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q83159" start="0" end="16" title="Pope Clement VII" label="Pope Clement VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q83159" start="27" end="61" title="Pope Clement VII" label="Giulio di Giuliano de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="112" end="127" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="145" end="157" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="507" end="526" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q49237" start="645" end="655" title="Pope Leo X" label="Pope Leo X"/>
<link wikidata="Q57087" start="681" end="695" title="Pope Adrian VI" label="Pope Adrian VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594074" start="728" end="740" title="gran maestro" label="gran maestro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="744" end="752" title="Florence, Italy" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="816" end="838" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q273348" start="891" end="920" title="Italian Wars" label="foreign armies invading Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="1274" end="1287" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="1416" end="1425" title="Holy Roman Emperor Charles V" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1433" end="1450" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="1455" end="1474" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1527" end="1534" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8474" start="1570" end="1594" title="Suleiman the Magnificent" label="Suleiman the Magnificent"/>
<link wikidata="Q465627" start="1707" end="1719" title="Sack of Rome (1527)" label="Sack of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q486382" start="1792" end="1815" title="Castel Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Castel Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="2039" end="2060" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645505" start="2102" end="2148" title="English Reformation" label="England breaking away from the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q170022" start="2813" end="2819" title="House of Medici" label="Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="2859" end="2866" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q190116" start="2868" end="2885" title="Benvenuto Cellini" label="Benvenuto Cellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="2891" end="2903" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q567861" start="2941" end="2958" title="The Last Judgment (Michelangelo)" label="The Last Judgment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943" start="2972" end="2986" title="Sistine Chapel" label="Sistine Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="3057" end="3076" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="3146" end="3161" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517983" start="3176" end="3199" title="Galileo affair" label="trial for similar ideas"/>
<link wikidata="Q298877" start="3351" end="3369" title="Giuliano de Medici" label="Giuliano de Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q177854" start="3382" end="3405" title="Lorenzo the Magnificent" label="Lorenzo the Magnificent"/>
<link wikidata="Q191739" start="3427" end="3445" title="Florence Cathedral" label="Florence Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q772874" start="3506" end="3522" title="Pazzi conspiracy" label="Pazzi conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493798" start="3689" end="3704" title="Fioretta Gorini" label="Fioretta Gorini"/>
<link wikidata="Q456861" start="3828" end="3857" title="Antonio da Sangallo the Elder" label="Antonio da Sangallo the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q49237" start="3975" end="3985" title="Pope Leo X" label="Pope Leo X"/>
<link wikidata="Q262212" start="3988" end="3993" title="Piero the Unfortunate" label="Piero"/>
<link wikidata="Q333340" start="3999" end="4007" title="Giuliano de&amp;#x27; Medici, Duke of Nemours" label="Giuliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q911047" start="4025" end="4039" title="Palazzo Medici" label="Palazzo Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="4055" end="4064" title="Humanism" label="humanists"/>
<link wikidata="Q250414" start="4070" end="4086" title="Angelo Poliziano" label="Angelo Poliziano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="4117" end="4129" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="4474" end="4491" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights of Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q830337" start="4509" end="4520" title="Grand Prior" label="Grand Prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q58477" start="4524" end="4529" title="Capua" label="Capua"/>
<link wikidata="Q645663" start="4712" end="4730" title="University of Pisa" label="University of Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q177258" start="4764" end="4780" title="conclave of 1492" label="conclave of 1492"/>
<link wikidata="Q108316" start="4788" end="4802" title="Rodrigo Borgia" label="Rodrigo Borgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q108316" start="4815" end="4832" title="Pope Alexander VI" label="Pope Alexander VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q262212" start="4910" end="4931" title="Piero the Unfortunate" label="Piero the Unfortunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012" start="5104" end="5107" title="Ulm" label="Ulm"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="5122" end="5127" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137980" start="5312" end="5329" title="Battle of Ravenna (1512)" label="Battle of Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q80516" start="5453" end="5467" title="Pope Julius II" label="Pope Julius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="5546" end="5568" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961302" start="5761" end="5786" title="Simonetta da Collevecchio" label="Simonetta da Collevecchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q378232" start="5838" end="5864" title="Alessandro de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Alessandro de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q312612" start="6011" end="6031" title="Lorenzo II de Medici" label="Lorenzo II de Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q378185" start="6366" end="6384" title="Ippolito de Medici" label="Ippolito de Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q770085" start="6980" end="7002" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Florence" label="Archbishop of Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="7326" end="7334" title="cardinal (Catholicism)" label="cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060055" start="7444" end="7466" title="Santa Maria in Domnica" label="Santa Maria in Domnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q890269" start="7761" end="7776" title="cardinal nephew" label="cardinal nephew"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="8394" end="8415" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038641" start="8430" end="8459" title="Cardinal protector of England" label="Cardinal protector of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="8481" end="8500" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365121" start="8525" end="8547" title="Archbishop of Narbonne" label="Archbishop of Narbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="8707" end="8714" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="8719" end="8725" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="9133" end="9161" title="Holy Roman Emperor Charles V" label="Holy Roman Emperor Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="9396" end="9404" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627409" start="9425" end="9445" title="Concordat of Bologna" label="Concordat of Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="9538" end="9549" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44601" start="10226" end="10248" title="Francesco Guicciardini" label="Francesco Guicciardini"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="10424" end="10441" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q542845" start="10715" end="10736" title="Fifth Lateran Council" label="Fifth Lateran Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163981" start="10788" end="10800" title="conciliarism" label="conciliarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q164823" start="10924" end="10943" title="Girolamo Savonarola" label="Girolamo Savonarola"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="11367" end="11374" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344437" start="11388" end="11403" title="Transfiguration (Raphael)" label="Transfiguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="11414" end="11426" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357573" start="11440" end="11453" title="Medici Chapels" label="Medici Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q190116" start="11513" end="11530" title="Benvenuto Cellini" label="Benvenuto Cellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q312612" start="11706" end="11726" title="Lorenzo II de Medici" label="Lorenzo II de Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="11920" end="11940" title="President John Adams" label="President John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q57087" start="12902" end="12911" title="Adrian VI" label="Adrian VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312178" start="12964" end="12978" title="Paul Strathern" label="Paul Strathern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420669" start="13718" end="13736" title="Francesco Soderini" label="Francesco Soderini"/>
<link wikidata="Q176545" start="13844" end="13858" title="Pompeo Colonna" label="Pompeo Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031943" start="15165" end="15190" title="Palazzo della Cancelleria" label="Palazzo della Cancelleria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420669" start="15799" end="15817" title="Francesco Soderini" label="Francesco Soderini"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="15875" end="15894" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771837" start="16429" end="16437" title="Papal conclave, 1523" label="conclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="16704" end="16726" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364294" start="16768" end="16787" title="Archbishop of Capua" label="Archbishop of Capua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361165" start="16789" end="16811" title="Nikolaus von Schönberg" label="Nikolaus von Schönberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q69461" start="16829" end="16835" title="Early modern France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="16837" end="16842" title="Habsburg Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="16848" end="16855" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q698281" start="16879" end="16890" title="Italian War of 1521–1526" label="Italian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q620175" start="16927" end="16938" title="Protonotary apostolic" label="Protonotary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622185" start="16939" end="16956" title="Marino Caracciolo" label="Marino Caracciolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="17325" end="17344" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093105" start="17390" end="17419" title="Italian campaign of 1524–1525" label="Italian campaign of 1524–1525"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="17451" end="17459" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="17535" end="17553" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683" start="17650" end="17655" title="Parma" label="Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q13329" start="17660" end="17668" title="Piacenza" label="Piacenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="17677" end="17689" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="17769" end="17775" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q63468" start="18113" end="18128" title="Battle of Pavia" label="Battle of Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q695489" start="18229" end="18246" title="Charles de Lannoy" label="viceroy of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q698281" start="18367" end="18390" title="Treaty of Madrid (1526)" label="Treaty of Madrid (1526)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429256" start="18418" end="18434" title="League of Cognac" label="League of Cognac"/>
<link wikidata="Q378868" start="18469" end="18488" title="Francesco II Sforza" label="Francesco II Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q153529" start="18492" end="18497" title="Duchy of Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="18675" end="18683" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q20666940" start="19065" end="19077" title="Intra Arcana" label="Intra Arcana"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="19160" end="19174" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q520032" start="19204" end="19213" title="Jus patronatus" label="patronage"/>
<link wikidata="Q108169" start="19362" end="19367" title="Roman Curia" label="Curia"/>
<link wikidata="Q176545" start="19378" end="19392" title="Pompeo Colonna" label="Pompeo Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053000" start="19418" end="19430" title="Vatican Hill" label="Vatican Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="19536" end="19548" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q188346" start="19853" end="19874" title="Alfonso I d&amp;#x27;Este" label="Alfonso I d&amp;#x27;Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q156733" start="20001" end="20012" title="Landsknecht" label="Landsknecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q506466" start="20021" end="20049" title="Charles III, Duke of Bourbon" label="Charles III, Duke of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44990" start="20054" end="20074" title="Georg von Frundsberg" label="Georg von Frundsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="20377" end="20393" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Renaissance Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q486382" start="20579" end="20602" title="Castel Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Castel Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q202018" start="20668" end="20673" title="ducat" label="ducat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683" start="20736" end="20741" title="Parma" label="Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q13329" start="20743" end="20751" title="Piacenza" label="Piacenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q242533" start="20753" end="20766" title="Civitavecchia" label="Civitavecchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q279" start="20772" end="20778" title="Modena" label="Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q52975" start="20916" end="20922" title="Cervia" label="Cervia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13364" start="20927" end="20934" title="Ravenna" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512161" start="20941" end="20961" title="Sigismondo Malatesta" label="Sigismondo Malatesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q13369" start="20974" end="20980" title="Rimini" label="Rimini"/>
<link wikidata="Q541" start="21159" end="21166" title="Orvieto" label="Orvieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q13395" start="21179" end="21186" title="Viterbo" label="Viterbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429256" start="21444" end="21462" title="Peace of Barcelona" label="Peace of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q981042" start="21598" end="21603" title="Siege of Florence (1529–1530)" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q378232" start="21683" end="21693" title="Alessandro de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Alessandro"/>
<link wikidata="Q465627" start="22058" end="22070" title="Sack of Rome (1527)" label="sack of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="22110" end="22119" title="canon law" label="canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q80516" start="22195" end="22209" title="Pope Julius II" label="Pope Julius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="22286" end="22293" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q133001" start="22433" end="22441" title="Paul III" label="Paul III"/>
<link wikidata="Q132708" start="22485" end="22497" title="Innocent XII" label="Innocent XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415" start="22665" end="22671" title="Ancona" label="Ancona"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="22732" end="22744" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627613" start="22780" end="22798" title="Republic of Ancona" label="Republic of Ancona"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="22884" end="22894" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q162819" start="22946" end="22965" title="Catherine of Aragon" label="Catherine of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299585" start="22966" end="22974" title="Declaration of nullity" label="annulled"/>
<link wikidata="Q101978" start="23046" end="23060" title="House of Tudor" label="House of Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="23098" end="23108" title="Mary I of England" label="Mary Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q711801" start="23247" end="23254" title="Arthur, Prince of Wales" label="brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q80516" start="23427" end="23441" title="Pope Julius II" label="Pope Julius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q564137" start="23454" end="23466" title="Dispensation (Catholic canon law)" label="dispensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033369" start="23924" end="23934" title="Impediment (Catholic canon law)" label="impediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="24086" end="24107" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="24130" end="24154" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q317149" start="24221" end="24232" title="John Fisher" label="John Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q80823" start="24318" end="24329" title="Anne Boleyn" label="Anne Boleyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q744845" start="24440" end="24454" title="William Warham" label="William Warham"/>
<link wikidata="Q199894" start="24534" end="24548" title="Thomas Cranmer" label="Thomas Cranmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="24620" end="24630" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210856" start="25127" end="25142" title="Excommunication (Catholic Church)" label="excommunicating"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676608" start="25241" end="25280" title="Act Concerning Ecclesiastical Appointments and Absolute Restraint of Annates" label="Act of Conditional Restraint of Annates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676609" start="25360" end="25382" title="Act Concerning Peter&amp;#x27;s Pence and Dispensations" label="Peter&amp;#x27;s Pence Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049175" start="25428" end="25437" title="Peter&amp;#x27;s Pence" label="one penny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775981" start="25536" end="25541" title="Grace (style)" label="Grace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25771" end="25787" title="Acts of Supremacy#First Act of Supremacy 1534" label="Act of Supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="25821" end="25838" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q131552" start="25979" end="26004" title="Catherine de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Catherine de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="26025" end="26043" title="Henry II of France" label="Henry II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="26109" end="26118" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q3585891" start="26272" end="26306" title="Église Saint-Ferréol les Augustins" label="Église Saint-Ferréol les Augustins"/>
<link wikidata="Q307815" start="26630" end="26649" title="Margaret of Parma" label="Margaret of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q378232" start="26691" end="26735" title="Alessandro de&amp;#x27; Medici, Duke of Florence" label="Alessandro de&amp;#x27; Medici, Duke of Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313020" start="26875" end="26891" title="Duke of the Florentine Republic" label="Duke of Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q395738" start="27658" end="27676" title="Agostino Trivulzio" label="Agostino Trivulzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="27883" end="27895" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q567861" start="27915" end="27932" title="The Last Judgment (Michelangelo)" label="The Last Judgment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943" start="27962" end="27976" title="Sistine Chapel" label="Sistine Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="28148" end="28175" title="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q823685" start="28212" end="28237" title="Santa Maria sopra Minerva" label="Santa Maria sopra Minerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q358348" start="28269" end="28286" title="Baccio Bandinelli" label="Baccio Bandinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052858" start="28315" end="28335" title="Emmanuel Rodocanachi" label="Emmanuel Rodocanachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q188643" start="28471" end="28489" title="death cap mushroom" label="death cap mushroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317800" start="28829" end="28846" title="Francesco Vettori" label="Francesco Vettori"/>
<link wikidata="Q312214" start="31204" end="31208" title="Marrano" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q965842" start="31218" end="31229" title="Portuguese Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414924" start="31245" end="31253" title="Theatine" label="Theatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q620456" start="31255" end="31264" title="Barnabite" label="Barnabite"/>
<link wikidata="Q124862" start="31270" end="31278" title="Capuchin Franciscan Order" label="Capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="31314" end="31319" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q190353" start="31328" end="31344" title="Knights of Malta" label="Knights of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q21079531" start="32830" end="32853" title="Medici (TV series)" label="Medici: The Magnificent"/>
<link wikidata="Q88712007" start="32908" end="32920" title="Jacob Dudman" label="Jacob Dudman"/>
<link wikidata="Q847706" start="33079" end="33090" title="cinquecento" label="cinquecento"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943" start="33184" end="33198" title="Sistine Chapel" label="Sistine Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q567861" start="33206" end="33223" title="The Last Judgment (Michelangelo)" label="The Last Judgment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="33231" end="33238" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344437" start="33270" end="33289" title="Transfiguration (Raphael)" label="The Transfiguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357573" start="33342" end="33355" title="Medici Chapels" label="Medici Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267485" start="33410" end="33422" title="Villa Madama" label="Villa Madama"/>
<link wikidata="Q856419" start="33479" end="33497" title="Laurentian Library" label="Laurentian Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q190116" start="33780" end="33797" title="Benvenuto Cellini" label="Benvenuto Cellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q285423" start="33905" end="33926" title="Sebastiano del Piombo" label="Sebastiano del Piombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933578" start="33992" end="34014" title="The Raising of Lazarus (Sebastiano del Piombo)" label="The Raising of Lazarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q473121" start="34185" end="34203" title="Narbonne Cathedral" label="Narbonne Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="34346" end="34353" title="Erasmus" label="Erasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q846306" start="34366" end="34378" title="De libero arbitrio diatribe sive collatio" label="On Free Will"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="34421" end="34434" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="34476" end="34487" title="Machiavelli" label="Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q691766" start="34501" end="34521" title="Florentine Histories" label="Florentine Histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="34556" end="34566" title="Copernicus" label="Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="34573" end="34590" title="heliocentrism" label="heliocentric idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q88999" start="34635" end="34655" title="Johann Widmanstetter" label="Johann Widmanstetter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984081" start="34670" end="34687" title="Copernican heliocentrism" label="Copernican system"/>
<link wikidata="Q437543" start="34923" end="34935" title="Paolo Giovio" label="Paolo Giovio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474884" start="35089" end="35105" title="High Renaissance" label="High Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="35198" end="35215" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q698015" start="35271" end="35295" title="Madonna of the Carnation" label="Madonna of the Carnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q296272" start="35335" end="35349" title="Pietro Aretino" label="Pietro Aretino"/>
<link wikidata="Q211133" start="35510" end="35532" title="Baldassare Castiglione" label="Baldassare Castiglione"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="35554" end="35582" title="Holy Roman Emperor Charles V" label="Holy Roman Emperor Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q44601" start="35598" end="35620" title="Francesco Guicciardini" label="Francesco Guicciardini"/>
<link wikidata="Q244482" start="35640" end="35647" title="Romagna" label="Romagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q283088" start="36052" end="36065" title="André Chastel" label="André Chastel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9348" start="36126" end="36138" title="Parmigianino" label="Parmigianino"/>
<link wikidata="Q312617" start="36140" end="36156" title="Rosso Fiorentino" label="Rosso Fiorentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q728375" start="36200" end="36220" title="Marcantonio Raimondi" label="Marcantonio Raimondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q215305" start="36258" end="36271" title="Giulio Romano (painter)" label="Giulio Romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q983350" start="36273" end="36290" title="Giovanni da Udine" label="Giovanni da Udine"/>
<link wikidata="Q918778" start="36292" end="36307" title="Perino del Vaga" label="Perino del Vaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q964822" start="36313" end="36335" title="Polidoro da Caravaggio" label="Polidoro da Caravaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="37312" end="37322" title="Copernicus" label="Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="37330" end="37347" title="heliocentrism" label="heliocentric idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q298877" start="37561" end="37580" title="Giuliano de Medici" label="his murdered father"/>
<link wikidata="Q48544" start="37721" end="37743" title="Cosimo de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Cosimo de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q44601" start="38022" end="38044" title="Francesco Guicciardini" label="Francesco Guicciardini"/>
<link wikidata="Q302556" start="38792" end="38813" title="Catholic Encyclopedia" label="Catholic Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148540" start="39038" end="39058" title="Republic of Florence" label="Republic of Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q273348" start="39060" end="39072" title="Italian Wars" label="Italian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q170022" start="39074" end="39087" title="Medici family" label="Medici family"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634344" start="39089" end="39125" title="List of popes from the Medici family" label="List of popes from the Medici family"/>
<link wikidata="Q304009" start="39127" end="39159" title="Cardinals created by Clement VII" label="Cardinals created by Clement VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q13518448" start="39161" end="39174" title="Tour Grimaldi" label="Tour Grimaldi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24120" wikidata="Q170395" url="?curid=24120" title="Pope Clement VIII">
<text>Pope Clement VIII (; ; 24 February 1536 – 3 March 1605), born Ippolito Aldobrandini, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 30 January 1592 to his death in March 1605.

Born in Fano, Italy to a prominent Florentine family, he initially came to prominence as a canon lawyer before being made a Cardinal-Priest in 1585. In 1592, he was elected Pope and took the name of Clement. During his papacy he effected the reconciliation of Henry IV of France to the Catholic faith and was instrumental in setting up an alliance of Christian nations to oppose the Ottoman Empire in the so-called Long War. He also successfully adjudicated in a bitter dispute between the Dominicans and the Jesuits on the issue of efficacious grace and free will. In 1600, he presided over a jubilee, which brought many pilgrimages to Rome. He presided over the trial and execution of Giordano Bruno and implemented strict measures against Jewish residents of the Papal States. According to some accounts, he may have been the first pope to drink coffee, and his approval thereof may have led to its popularization.

Clement VIII died at the age of 69 in 1605, and his remains now rest in the Roman church of Santa Maria Maggiore.

==Early life==
He was baptized on 4 March at the cathedral of Fano. He was from a Florentine family, son of Silvestro Aldobrandini and Lesa Deti, and followed his father as a canon lawyer, becoming an Auditor (judge) of the Roman Rota, the highest ecclesiastical court constituted by the Holy See. He was only ordained as a priest on 31 December 1580 at the age of 45 and became pope on 2 February 1592 when he was not yet 56. He was an effective, if sometimes rigorous, administrator.

==Cardinal==

He was made Cardinal-Priest of S. Pancrazio in 1585 by Pope Sixtus V, who named him major penitentiary in January 1586 and in 1588 sent him as Papal legate in Poland. He placed himself under the spiritual direction of the reformer Saint Philip Neri, who for thirty years was his confessor. Aldobrandini won the gratitude of the Habsburgs by his successful diplomatic efforts in Poland to obtain the release of the imprisoned Archduke Maximilian, the defeated candidate for the Polish throne.

After the death of Pope Innocent IX (1591), another stormy conclave ensued, in which a determined minority of Italian Cardinals were unwilling to be dictated to by Philip II of Spain. Known to be very intelligent, disciplined, and in tune with the inner workings of the Church, Cardinal Aldobrandini was elected on 30 January 1592, as a portent of more balanced and liberal Papal policy in European affairs. He took the non-politicised name Clement VIII. He proved to be an able Pope, with an unlimited capacity for work, and a lawyer&#x27;s eye for detail. He was a wise statesman, the general object of whose policy was to free the Papacy from its dependence upon Spain.

==Ecclesiastical matters==

=== Clementine Vulgate ===

In November 1592, he published the Clementine Vulgate. It was issued with the Bull &quot;Cum Sacrorum&quot; (9 November 1592) which asserted that every subsequent edition must be assimilated to this one, that no word of the text could be changed, and that not even variant readings could be printed in the margin. This new official version of the Vulgate, known as the Clementine Vulgate&quot; &quot;or Sixto-Clementine Vulgate&quot;,&quot; became and remained the official Bible of the Catholic Church until the &quot;Nova Vulgata&quot; replaced it in 1979.&quot;&quot;

===&quot;De Auxiliis&quot; controversy===
In 1597, he established the Congregatio de Auxiliis which was to settle the theological controversy between the Dominican Order and the Jesuits concerning the respective role of efficacious grace and free will. Although the debate tended toward a condemnation of Molinism&#x27;s insistence on free will to the detriment of efficacious grace, the important influence of the Jesuit Order — among other considerations — which, beside important political and theological power in Europe, had also various missions abroad (Misiones Jesuiticas in South America, missions in China, etc.), led the Pope to abstain from an official condemnation of the Jesuits. In 1611 and again in 1625 a decree prohibited any discussion of the matter, although it was often informally skirted by the publication of commentaries on Thomas Aquinas.

===Jubilee of 1600===
During the jubilee of 1600, three million pilgrims visited the holy places. The Synod of Brest was held 1595 in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, by which a great part of the Ruthenian clergy and people were reunited to Rome.

===Canonisations and beatifications===
Clement VIII canonised Hyacinth (17 April 1594), Julian of Cuenca (18 October 1594), and Raymond of Peñafort (1601). He beatified 205 individuals, 200 of them being group martyrs; notable individuals he named as Blessed included Carlo Borromeo.

===Consistories===

The pope created 53 cardinals in six consistories during his pontificate; he named his two nephews Pietro and Cinzio Passeri as cardinals. Notable cardinals named during his reign included Camillo Borghese (his successor Pope Paul V) as well as the noted theologians Robert Bellarmine and Caesar Baronius.

==Foreign relations==

===Relations with France and Spain===

The most remarkable event of Clement VIII&#x27;s reign was the reconciliation to the Church of Henry IV of France (1589–1610), after long negotiations, carried on with great dexterity through Cardinal Arnaud d&#x27;Ossat, that resolved the complicated situation in France. Henry embraced Catholicism on 25 July 1593. After a pause to assess Henry IV&#x27;s sincerity, Clement VIII braved Spanish displeasure, and in the autumn of 1595 he solemnly absolved Henry IV, thus putting an end to the thirty years&#x27; religious war in France.

Henry IV&#x27;s friendship was of essential importance to the papacy two years later, when Alfonso II d&#x27;Este, Duke of Ferrara, died childless (27 October 1597), and the pope resolved to attach the stronghold of the Este family to the states of the Church. Though Spain and the Emperor Rudolf II encouraged Alfonso II&#x27;s illegitimate cousin, Cesare d&#x27;Este, to withstand the pope, they were deterred from giving him any material aid by Henry IV&#x27;s threats, and a Papal army entered Ferrara almost unopposed.

In 1598 Clement VIII won more credit for the papacy by bringing about a definite treaty of peace between Spain and France in the Peace of Vervins, which put an end to their long contest; he negotiated peace between France and the Duchy of Savoy as well.

===Long War===

In 1594, Clement VIII initiated an alliance of Christian European powers to take part in the war with the Ottoman Empire, fought mainly in Hungary, which would become known as the &quot;Long Turkish War&quot; and continue past Clement&#x27;s own lifetime. Facilitated by the pope, a treaty of alliance was signed in Prague by Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor and Sigismund Báthory of Transylvania. Aron Vodă of Moldavia and Michael the Brave of Wallachia joined the alliance later that year. Clement VIII himself lent the Emperor valuable assistance in men and money.

==Internal policies==

===Law enforcement===
Clement VIII was as vigorous as Pope Sixtus V (1585–90) in crushing banditry in the Papal provinces of Umbria and the Marche and in punishing the lawlessness of the Papal nobility. Upon his ascension to the Papal throne in 1592, he immediately had several noble troublemakers put to death. These included most famously Troio Savelli, scion of a powerful ancient Roman family, and the youthful and noble Beatrice Cenci, who had murdered her father – probably as a consequence of his repeated abuses. The latter case prompted many requests of clemency – rejected by the Pope, who passed the confiscated Cenci property to his own family.

Clement&#x27;s strict ways also concerned philosophical and religious matters. In 1599 he had the Italian miller Menocchio – who had formed the belief that God was not eternal but had Himself once been created out of chaos – tried by the Inquisition and burnt at the stake. A more famous case was the trial for heresy of Giordano Bruno, who was burned at the stake in 1600. Pope Clement VIII participated personally in the final phases of the trial, inviting the Cardinals in charge of the case to proceed with the verdict.

===Anti-Jewish measures===
Clement VIII tightened measures against the Jewish inhabitants of his territories. In 1592, the papal bull &quot;Cum saepe accidere&quot; forbade the Jewish community of the Comtat Venaissin of Avignon, a Papal enclave, to sell new goods, putting them at an economic disadvantage. In 1593, the bull &quot;Caeca et Obdurata&quot; reiterated Pope Pius V&#x27;s decree of 1569, which banned Jews from living in the Papal States outside the cities of Rome, Ancona, and Avignon. The main effect of the bull was to evict Jews who had returned to areas of the Papal States (mainly Umbria) after 1586 (following their expulsion in 1569) and to expel Jewish communities from cities like Bologna (which had been incorporated under papal dominion since 1569). The bull also alleged that Jews in the Papal States had engaged in usury and exploited the hospitality of Clement VIII&#x27;s predecessors &quot;who, in order to lead them from their darkness to knowledge of the true faith, deemed it opportune to use the clemency of Christian piety towards them&quot; (alluding to &quot;Christiana pietas&quot;). With the bull &quot;Cum Hebraeorum malitia&quot; a few days later, Clement VIII also forbade the reading of the Talmud.

==Later life and death==

Clement VIII was afflicted by gout, using a wheelchair by the late 1590s, and was forced to spend much of his later life immobilized in bed. He suddenly became ill on 10 February 1605 and his condition rapidly deteriorated over the next few weeks. He died on 3 March 1605 around midnight, leaving a reputation for prudence, munificence, ruthlessness and capacity for business. Clement was buried in St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica, and later Pope Paul V (1605–21) had a mausoleum built for him in the Borghese Chapel of Santa Maria Maggiore, where his remains were transferred in 1646.

His reign is especially distinguished by the number and beauty of his medals. Clement VIII founded the Collegio Clementino for the education of the sons of the richer classes, and augmented the number of national colleges in Rome by opening the Collegio Scozzese for the training of missionaries to Scotland.
==Coffee==
Coffee aficionados often claim that the spread of its popularity among Catholics is due to Pope Clement VIII&#x27;s influence. According to the legend, there was opposition to coffee as &quot;Satan&#x27;s drink&quot;, leading to the pope&#x27;s advisors asking him to denounce the beverage. However, upon tasting coffee, Pope Clement VIII declared: &quot;Why, this Satan&#x27;s drink is so delicious that it would be a pity to let the infidels have exclusive use of it.&quot; Clement allegedly blessed the bean because it appeared better for the people than alcoholic beverages. The year often cited is 1600. It is not clear whether this is a true story, but it may have been found amusing at the time.

==See also==
* Giovanni Aldobrandini, his older brother, who was a cardinal
* Sixto-Clementine Vulgate
* Cardinals created by Clement VIII

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Mons. Jouin, &quot;The Holy See and the Jews&quot;, from &quot;Révue International des Societés,&quot; 1918</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q170395" start="0" end="17" title="Pope Clement VIII" label="Pope Clement VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q170395" start="62" end="83" title="Pope Clement VIII" label="Ippolito Aldobrandini"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="101" end="116" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="134" end="146" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="232" end="242" title="Florence" label="Florentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="288" end="297" title="canon law" label="canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="321" end="336" title="Cardinal-Priest" label="Cardinal-Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699923" start="362" end="374" title="Papal conclave, 1592" label="elected Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="457" end="475" title="Henry IV of France" label="Henry IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="548" end="557" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="580" end="594" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q690361" start="612" end="620" title="Long Turkish War" label="Long War"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="687" end="697" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="706" end="713" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719777" start="730" end="747" title="efficacious grace" label="efficacious grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="752" end="761" title="free will" label="free will"/>
<link wikidata="Q838794" start="791" end="798" title="jubilee (Christian)" label="jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="834" end="838" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q36330" start="884" end="898" title="Giordano Bruno" label="Giordano Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q186282" start="1208" end="1228" title="Santa Maria Maggiore" label="Santa Maria Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="1313" end="1323" title="Florence" label="Florentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q129090" start="1339" end="1361" title="Silvestro Aldobrandini" label="Silvestro Aldobrandini"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="1406" end="1415" title="canon law" label="canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819974" start="1432" end="1439" title="Auditor (ecclesiastical)" label="Auditor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234169" start="1455" end="1465" title="Roman Rota" label="Roman Rota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640717" start="1479" end="1499" title="ecclesiastical court" label="ecclesiastical court"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="1519" end="1527" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="1744" end="1759" title="Cardinal-Priest" label="Cardinal-Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515307" start="1763" end="1775" title="S. Pancrazio" label="S. Pancrazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q133350" start="1787" end="1800" title="Pope Sixtus V" label="Pope Sixtus V"/>
<link wikidata="Q620144" start="1816" end="1834" title="Apostolic Penitentiary" label="major penitentiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q740369" start="1875" end="1887" title="Papal legate" label="Papal legate"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="1891" end="1897" title="Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q217791" start="1969" end="1980" title="Philip Neri" label="Philip Neri"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="2060" end="2068" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9360741" start="2077" end="2106" title="Treaty of Bytom and Będzin" label="successful diplomatic efforts"/>
<link wikidata="Q283909" start="2157" end="2176" title="Maximilian III, Archduke of Austria" label="Archduke Maximilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q167959" start="2244" end="2260" title="Pope Innocent IX" label="Pope Innocent IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699923" start="2269" end="2292" title="Papal conclave, 1592" label="another stormy conclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="2389" end="2407" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="2891" end="2896" title="Habsburg Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3442" end="3457" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259379" start="3474" end="3486" title="Nova Vulgata" label="Nova Vulgata"/>
<link wikidata="Q392176" start="3597" end="3620" title="Congregatio de Auxiliis" label="Congregatio de Auxiliis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="3681" end="3696" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="3705" end="3712" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719777" start="3747" end="3764" title="efficacious grace" label="efficacious grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="3769" end="3778" title="free will" label="free will"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177169" start="3832" end="3840" title="Molinism" label="Molinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q465960" start="4087" end="4106" title="Jesuit Reductions" label="Misiones Jesuiticas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335343" start="4125" end="4142" title="Jesuit China missions" label="missions in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="4376" end="4390" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q838794" start="4426" end="4433" title="jubilee (Christian)" label="jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q845668" start="4495" end="4509" title="Synod of Brest" label="Synod of Brest"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="4531" end="4561" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147883" start="4592" end="4600" title="Ruthenia" label="Ruthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="4696" end="4705" title="canonised" label="canonised"/>
<link wikidata="Q8689031" start="4706" end="4714" title="Hyacinth of Poland" label="Hyacinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395103" start="4732" end="4748" title="Julian of Cuenca" label="Julian of Cuenca"/>
<link wikidata="Q318980" start="4772" end="4791" title="Raymond of Peñafort" label="Raymond of Peñafort"/>
<link wikidata="Q216946" start="4912" end="4926" title="Carlo Borromeo" label="Carlo Borromeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q691894" start="5048" end="5054" title="Pietro Aldobrandini" label="Pietro"/>
<link wikidata="Q710327" start="5059" end="5073" title="Cinzio Passeri Aldobrandini" label="Cinzio Passeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q132711" start="5170" end="5181" title="Pope Paul V" label="Pope Paul V"/>
<link wikidata="Q298664" start="5216" end="5233" title="Robert Bellarmine" label="Robert Bellarmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q317900" start="5238" end="5253" title="Caesar Baronius" label="Caesar Baronius"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="5413" end="5431" title="Henry IV of France" label="Henry IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2863243" start="5519" end="5538" title="Arnaud d&amp;#x27;Ossat" label="Arnaud d&amp;#x27;Ossat"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="5583" end="5589" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="5706" end="5713" title="Habsburg Spain" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="5830" end="5843" title="French Wars of Religion" label="religious war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856074" start="5947" end="5969" title="Alfonso II d&amp;#x27;Este" label="Alfonso II d&amp;#x27;Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q693570" start="5971" end="5986" title="Duchy of Ferrara" label="Duke of Ferrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q677173" start="6076" end="6080" title="House of Este" label="Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q150586" start="6146" end="6155" title="Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Rudolf II"/>
<link wikidata="Q59657" start="6206" end="6224" title="Cesare d&amp;#x27;Este" label="Cesare d&amp;#x27;Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q13362" start="6354" end="6361" title="Ferrara" label="Ferrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188688" start="6510" end="6526" title="Peace of Vervins" label="Peace of Vervins"/>
<link wikidata="Q426025" start="6611" end="6625" title="Duchy of Savoy" label="Duchy of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="6758" end="6772" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q559336" start="6791" end="6798" title="Ottoman Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="6968" end="6974" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q150586" start="6978" end="7007" title="Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q368154" start="7012" end="7029" title="Sigismund Báthory" label="Sigismund Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q655621" start="7033" end="7045" title="Principality of Transylvania (1570–1711)" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q220660" start="7047" end="7056" title="Aron Vodă" label="Aron Vodă"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="7060" end="7068" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q118755" start="7073" end="7090" title="Michael the Brave" label="Michael the Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q133350" start="7295" end="7308" title="Pope Sixtus V" label="Pope Sixtus V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280" start="7366" end="7372" title="Umbria" label="Umbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279" start="7381" end="7387" title="Marche" label="Marche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342546" start="7428" end="7442" title="Papal nobility" label="Papal nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q237908" start="7666" end="7680" title="Beatrice Cenci" label="Beatrice Cenci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346430" start="8012" end="8021" title="Menocchio" label="Menocchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="8210" end="8216" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36330" start="8220" end="8234" title="Giordano Bruno" label="Giordano Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q468455" start="8244" end="8263" title="burned at the stake" label="burned at the stake"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="8362" end="8371" title="Cardinal (Catholicism)" label="Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="8547" end="8557" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716797" start="8564" end="8582" title="Cum saepe accidere" label="Cum saepe accidere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122980" start="8625" end="8641" title="Comtat Venaissin" label="Comtat Venaissin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="8645" end="8652" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932802" start="8756" end="8773" title="Caeca et Obdurata" label="Caeca et Obdurata"/>
<link wikidata="Q131945" start="8791" end="8802" title="Pope Pius V" label="Pope Pius V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415" start="8904" end="8910" title="Ancona" label="Ancona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280" start="9025" end="9031" title="Umbria" label="Umbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="9129" end="9136" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q157188" start="9267" end="9272" title="usury" label="usury"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="9659" end="9665" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q133087" start="9724" end="9728" title="gout" label="gout"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="10093" end="10118" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q132711" start="10130" end="10141" title="Pope Paul V" label="Pope Paul V"/>
<link wikidata="Q186282" start="10208" end="10228" title="Santa Maria Maggiore" label="Santa Maria Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682949" start="10378" end="10397" title="Collegio Clementino" label="Collegio Clementino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762628" start="10520" end="10537" title="Collegio Scozzese" label="Collegio Scozzese"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="10574" end="10582" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="10595" end="10601" title="Coffee" label="Coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q129064" start="11314" end="11335" title="Giovanni Aldobrandini" label="Giovanni Aldobrandini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533226" start="11377" end="11401" title="Sixto-Clementine Vulgate" label="Sixto-Clementine Vulgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q595945" start="11404" end="11437" title="Cardinals created by Clement VIII" label="Cardinals created by Clement VIII"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24121" wikidata="Q33745" url="?curid=24121" title="Peloponnesian War">
<text>The Second Peloponnesian War (431–404 BC), often called simply the Peloponnesian War (), was an ancient Greek war fought between Athens and Sparta and their respective allies for the hegemony of the Greek world. The war remained undecided until the later intervention of the Persian Empire in support of Sparta. Led by Lysander, the Spartan fleet (built with Persian subsidies) finally defeated Athens which began a period of Spartan hegemony over Greece.

Historians have traditionally divided the war into three phases. The first phase (431–421 BC) was named the Ten Years War, or the Archidamian War, after the Spartan king Archidamus II, who invaded Attica several times with the full hoplite army of the Peloponnesian League, the alliance network dominated by Sparta (then known as Lacedaemon). The Long Walls of Athens rendered this strategy ineffective, while the superior navy of the Delian League (Athens&#x27; alliance) raided the Peloponnesian coast to trigger rebellions within Sparta. The precarious Peace of Nicias was signed in 421 BC and lasted until 413 BC. Several proxy battles took place during this period, notably the battle of Mantinea in 418 BC, won by Sparta against an ad-hoc alliance of Elis, Mantinea (both former Spartan allies), Argos, and Athens. The main event was the Sicilian Expedition, between 415 and 413 BC, during which Athens lost almost all its navy in the attempt to capture Syracuse, an ally of Sparta.

The Sicilian disaster prompted the third phase of the war (413–404 BC), named the Decelean War, or the Ionian War, when the Persian Empire supported Sparta to recover the suzerainty of the Greek cities of Asia Minor, incorporated into the Delian League at the end of the Persian Wars. With Persian money, Sparta built a massive fleet under the leadership of Lysander, who won a streak of decisive victories in the Aegean Sea, notably at Aegospotamos, in 405 BC. Athens capitulated the following year and lost all its empire. Lysander imposed puppet oligarchies on the former members of the Delian League, including Athens, where the regime was known as the Thirty Tyrants. The Peloponnesian War was followed ten years later by the Corinthian War (394–386 BC), which, although it ended inconclusively, helped Athens regain its independence from Sparta.

The Peloponnesian War changed the ancient Greek world. Athens, the strongest city-state in Greece prior to the war, was reduced to a state of near-complete subjection, while Sparta became established as the leading power of Greece. The economic costs of the war were felt all across Greece, poverty became widespread in the Peloponnese, while Athens was devastated and never regained its pre-war prosperity. The war also wrought subtler changes to Greek society. The conflict between democratic Athens and oligarchic Sparta, each of which supported friendly political factions within other states, made war a common occurrence in the Greek world. Ancient Greek warfare, originally a limited and formalized form of conflict, was transformed into an all-out struggle between city-states, complete with mass atrocities. Shattering religious and cultural taboos, devastating vast swathes of countryside, and destroying whole cities, the Peloponnesian War marked the dramatic end to the fifth century BC and the golden age of Greece.

== Historic sources ==
The main historical source for most of the war is the detailed account in &quot;The History of the Peloponnesian War&quot; by Thucydides. He states that he began writing his history as soon as the war broke out and took his information from first-hand accounts, including events he witnessed himself. An Athenian who fought in the early part of the war, Thucydides was exiled in 423 BC and settled in the Peloponnese, where he spent the rest of the war collecting sources and writing his history. Scholars regard Thucydides as reliable and neutral between the two sides. A partial exception are the lengthy speeches he reports, which Thucydides admits are not accurate records of what was said, but his interpretation of the general arguments presented. The narrative begins several years before the war, explaining why it began, then reports events year-by-year. The main limitation of Thucydides&#x27; work is that it is incomplete: the text ends abruptly in 411 BC, seven years before the conclusion of the war.

The account was continued by Xenophon, a younger contemporary, in the first book of his &quot;Hellenica&quot;. This directly follows Thucydides&#x27; final sentence and provides a similar record, on the topics of the war&#x27;s conclusion and aftermath. Born in Athens, Xenophon spent his military career as a mercenary, fighting in the Persian Empire and for Sparta in Asia Minor, Thrace and Greece. Exiled from Athens for these actions, he retired to live in Sparta, where he wrote &quot;Hellenica&quot; around 40 years after the war had ended. His account is generally considered favourable to Sparta.

A briefer account of the whole war is provided by the Sicilian historian Diodorus Siculus in books 12 and 13 of his &quot;Bibliotheca historica&quot;. Written in the first century BC, these books appear to be based heavily (possibly entirely) upon an earlier universal history by Ephorus, written in the century after the war, which is now lost.

The Roman-Greek historian Plutarch wrote biographies of four of the major commanders in the war (Pericles, Nicias, Alcibiades and Lysander) in his &quot;Parallel Lives&quot;. Plutarch&#x27;s focus was on the character and morality of these men, but he does provide some details on the progress of the war that are not recorded elsewhere. Written in the first century AD, Plutarch based his work on earlier accounts which are now lost.

More limited information on the war is derived from epigraphy and archaeology, such as the walls of Amphipolis and grave of Brasidas, excavated in the 20th century. Some buildings and artworks produced during the war have survived, such as the Erechtheion temple and Grave Stele of Hegeso, both in Athens; these provide no information on military activity but do reflect civilian life during the war. Several plays by the Athenian Aristophanes were written and set during the war (particularly &quot;Peace&quot; and &quot;Lysistrata&quot;), but these are works of comedic fiction with little historical value.

== Prelude ==
Thucydides summarised the situation before the war as: &quot;The growth of the power of Athens, and the alarm which this inspired in Lacedaemon, made war inevitable&quot;. The nearly 50 years before the War had been marked by the development of Athens as a major power in the Mediterranean world. Its empire began as a small group of city-states, called the Delian League – from the island of Delos, on which they kept their treasury – that formed to ensure that the Greco-Persian Wars were over. After defeating the Second Persian invasion of Greece in the year 480 BC, Athens led the coalition of Greek city-states that continued the Greco-Persian Wars with attacks on Persian territories in the Aegean and Ionia. What ensued was a period which Thucydides called the Pentecontaetia, in which Athens increasingly became an empire, carrying out an aggressive war against Persia and increasingly dominating other city-states. Athens brought under its control all of Greece except for Sparta and its allies, ushering in a period now called the Athenian Empire. By mid-century, the Persians had been driven out of the Aegean and had ceded control of vast territories to Athens. Athens had greatly increased its own power; a number of its formerly independent allies were reduced, over the course of the century, to the status of tribute-paying subject states of the Delian League. This tribute was used to fund a powerful fleet and, after the middle of the century, massive public works in Athens, causing resentment.

Friction between Athens and the Peloponnesian states, including Sparta, began early in the Pentecontaetia. In the wake of the departure of the Persians from Greece, Sparta sent ambassadors to persuade Athens not to reconstruct their walls, but was rebuffed. Without the walls, Athens would have been defenseless against a land attack and subject to Spartan control. According to Thucydides, although the Spartans took no action then, they &quot;secretly felt aggrieved&quot;. Conflict between the states flared up again in 465 BC, when a helot revolt broke out in Sparta. The Spartans summoned forces from all of their allies, including Athens, to help them suppress the revolt. Athens sent out a sizable contingent (4,000 hoplites), but upon its arrival, this force was dismissed by the Spartans, while those of all the other allies were permitted to remain. According to Thucydides, the Spartans did this out of fear that the Athenians would switch sides and support the helots; the offended Athenians repudiated their alliance with Sparta. When the rebellious helots were finally forced to surrender and permitted to evacuate the state, the Athenians settled them at the strategic city of Naupaktos on the Gulf of Corinth.

In 459 BC, there was a war between Spartan allies Megara and Corinth, which were neighbors of Athens. Athens took advantage of the war to make an alliance with Megara, giving Athens a critical foothold on the Isthmus of Corinth. A 15-year conflict, commonly known as the First Peloponnesian War, ensued, in which Athens fought intermittently against Sparta, Corinth, Aegina, and a number of other states. For a time during this conflict, Athens controlled not only Megara but also Boeotia. But at its end, a massive Spartan invasion of Attica forced Athens to cede the lands it had won on the Greek mainland, and Athens and Sparta recognized each other&#x27;s right to control their respective alliance systems. The war was officially ended by the Thirty Years&#x27; Peace, signed in the winter of 446/5 BC.

=== Breakdown of peace ===
The Thirty Years&#x27; Peace was first tested in 440 BC, when Athens&#x27;s powerful ally Samos rebelled from its alliance with Athens. The rebels quickly secured the support of a Persian satrap, and Athens faced the prospect of revolts throughout its empire. The Spartans, whose intervention would have been the trigger for a massive war to determine the fate of the empire, called a congress of their allies to discuss the possibility of war with Athens. Sparta&#x27;s powerful ally Corinth was notably opposed to intervention, and the congress voted against war with Athens. The Athenians crushed the revolt, and peace was maintained.

The more immediate events that led to war involved Athens and Corinth. After a defeat by their colony of Corcyra, a sea power that was not allied to either Sparta or Athens, Corinth began to build an allied naval force. Alarmed, Corcyra sought alliance with Athens. Athens discussed with both Corcyra and Corinth, and made a defensive alliance with Corcyra. At the Battle of Sybota, a small contingent of Athenian ships played a critical role in preventing a Corinthian fleet from capturing Corcyra. In order to uphold the Thirty Years&#x27; Peace, the Athenians were instructed not to intervene in the battle unless it was clear that Corinth would invade Corcyra. However, the Athenian ships participated in the battle, and the arrival of additional Athenian triremes was enough to dissuade the Corinthians from exploiting their victory, thus sparing much of the routed Corcyrean and Athenian fleet.

Following this, Athens instructed Potidaea in the peninsula of Chalkidiki, a tributary ally of Athens but a colony of Corinth, to tear down its walls, send hostages to Athens, dismiss the Corinthian magistrates from office, and refuse the magistrates that Corinth would send in the future. Outraged, the Corinthians encouraged Potidaea to revolt and assured them that they would ally with them should they revolt from Athens. During the subsequent Battle of Potidaea, the Corinthians unofficially aided Potidaea by sneaking contingents of men into the besieged city to help defend it. This directly violated the Thirty Years&#x27; Peace, which stipulated that the Delian League and the Peloponnesian League would respect each other&#x27;s autonomy and internal affairs.

A further provocation was Athens in 433/2 BC imposing trade sanctions on Megarian citizens (once more a Spartan ally after the First Peloponnesian War). It was alleged that the Megarians had desecrated the &quot;Hiera Orgas&quot;. These sanctions, known as the Megarian decree, were largely ignored by Thucydides, but some modern economic historians have noted that forbidding Megara to trade with the prosperous Athenian empire would have been disastrous for the Megarans, and so have considered the sanctions a contributing causing of the war. Historians who attribute responsibility for the war to Athens cite this event as the main cause.

At the request of Corinth, the Spartans summoned members of the Peloponnesian League to Sparta in 432 BC, especially those who had grievances with Athens, to make their complaints to the Spartan assembly. This debate was also attended by an uninvited delegation from Athens, which also asked to speak, and became the scene of a debate between the Athenians and the Corinthians. Thucydides reports that the Corinthians condemned Sparta&#x27;s inactivity until then, warning Sparta that if it remained passive, it would soon be outflanked and without allies. In response, the Athenians reminded the Spartans of Athens&#x27;s record of military success and opposition to Persia, warned them of confronting such a powerful state, and encouraged Sparta to seek arbitration as provided by the Thirty Years&#x27; Peace. The Spartan king Archidamus II spoke against the war, but the opinion of the hawkish ephor Sthenelaidas prevailed in the Spartan ecclesia. A majority of the Spartan assembly voted to declare that the Athenians had broken the peace, essentially declaring war.

== Archidamian War (431–421 BC) ==
The first years of the war are known as the Archidamian War (431–421 BC), after Sparta&#x27;s king Archidamus II. The first attack was by the Thebans on the Athenian outpost at Plataea, on 4 April 431 BC.

Sparta and its allies, except for Corinth, were almost exclusively land-based, and able to summon large armies which were nearly unbeatable (thanks to the legendary Spartan forces). The Athenian Empire, although based in the peninsula of Attica, spread out across the islands of the Aegean Sea; Athens drew its immense wealth from tribute paid by these islands. Athens maintained its empire through naval power. Thus, the two powers were relatively unable to fight decisive battles.

The Spartan strategy during the Archidamian War was to invade the land around Athens. While this invasion deprived Athenians of the productive land around their city, Athens maintained access to the sea, and did not suffer much. Many of the citizens of Attica abandoned their farms and moved inside the Long Walls, which connected Athens to its port of Piraeus. At the end of the first year of the war, Pericles gave his famous Funeral Oration (431 BC).

The Spartans also occupied Attica for periods of only three weeks at a time; in the tradition of earlier hoplite warfare, the soldiers were expected to go home to participate in the harvest. Moreover, Spartan slaves, known as helots, needed to be kept under control, and could not be left unsupervised for long. The longest Spartan invasion, in 430 BC, lasted just 40 days.

The Athenian strategy was initially guided by the &quot;strategos,&quot; or general, Pericles, who advised the Athenians to avoid open battle with the far more numerous and better trained Spartan hoplites, relying instead on the fleet. The Athenian fleet, the dominant Greek naval force, went on the offensive, winning at Naupactus. In 430 BC, an outbreak of a plague hit Athens. The plague ravaged the densely packed city, and in the long run, was a significant cause of its final defeat. The plague wiped out over 30,000 citizens, sailors and soldiers, including Pericles and his sons. Roughly one-third to two-thirds of the Athenian population died. Athenian manpower was correspondingly drastically reduced and even foreign mercenaries refused to hire themselves out to a city riddled with plague. The fear of plague was so widespread that the Spartan invasion of Attica was abandoned, their troops being unwilling to risk contact with the diseased enemy.

After the death of Pericles, the Athenians turned somewhat against his conservative, defensive strategy and to the more aggressive strategy of bringing the war to Sparta and its allies. Rising to particular importance in Athenian democracy at this time was Cleon, a leader of the hawkish elements of the Athenian democracy. Led militarily by a clever new general Demosthenes (not to be confused with the later Athenian orator Demosthenes), the Athenians managed some successes as they continued their naval raids on the Peloponnese. Athens stretched their military activities into Boeotia and Aetolia, quelled the Mytilenean revolt and began fortifying posts around the Peloponnese. One of these posts was near Pylos on a tiny island called Sphacteria, where the first war turned in Athens&#x27;s favor. The post off Pylos exploited Sparta&#x27;s dependence on the helots, slaves who worked the fields while its citizens trained to be soldiers. The Pylos post began attracting helot runaways. In addition, the fear of a revolt of helots emboldened by the nearby Athenians drove the Spartans to attack the post. Demosthenes outmaneuvered the Spartans in the Battle of Pylos in 425 BC and trapped a group of Spartan soldiers on Sphacteria as he waited for them to surrender. But weeks later he proved unable to finish them off. Instead, the inexperienced Cleon boasted in the Assembly that he could end the affair, and did win a great victory at the Battle of Sphacteria. In a shocking turn of events, 300 Spartan hoplites encircled by Athenian forces surrendered. The Spartan image of invincibility took significant damage. The Athenians jailed Sphacterian hostages in Athens and resolved to execute the captured Spartans if a Peloponnesian army invaded Attica again.

After these battles, the Spartan general Brasidas raised an army of allies and helots and marched the length of Greece to the Athenian colony of Amphipolis in Thrace. Amphipolis controlled several nearby silver mines whose that supplied much of the Athenian war fund. A force led by Thucydides was dispatched but arrived too late to stop Brasidas capturing Amphipolis; Thucydides was exiled for this, and, as a result, had conversations with both sides of the war which inspired him to record its history. Both Brasidas and Cleon were killed in Athenian efforts to retake Amphipolis (see Battle of Amphipolis). The Spartans and Athenians agreed to exchange the hostages for the towns captured by Brasidas, and signed a truce.

== Peace of Nicias (421 BC) ==
With the death of Cleon and Brasidas, both zealous war hawks for their nations, the Peace of Nicias was able to last six years. However, it was a time of constant skirmishes in and around the Peloponnese. While the Spartans refrained from action themselves, some of their allies began to talk of revolt. They were supported in this by Argos, a powerful Peloponnesian state that had remained independent of Lacedaemon. With the support of the Athenians, the Argives forged a coalition of democratic states in the Peloponnese, including the powerful states of Mantinea and Elis. Early Spartan attempts to break up the coalition failed, and the leadership of the Spartan king Agis was called into question. Emboldened, the Argives and their allies, with the support of a small Athenian force under Alcibiades, moved to seize the city of Tegea, near Sparta.

The Battle of Mantinea was the largest land battle within Greece during the Peloponnesian War. The Lacedaemonians, with their neighbors the Tegeans, faced the combined armies of Argos, Athens, Mantinea, and Arcadia. In the battle, the allied coalition scored early successes, but failed to capitalize on them, which allowed the Spartan elite forces to defeat them. The result was a complete victory for the Spartans, which rescued their city from the brink of strategic defeat. The democratic alliance was broken up, and most of its members were reincorporated into the Peloponnesian League. With its victory at Mantinea, Sparta pulled itself back from the brink of utter defeat, and re-established its hegemony throughout the Peloponnese.

In the summer of 416 BC, during a truce with Sparta, Athens invaded the neutral island of Melos, and demanded that Melos ally with them against Sparta, or be destroyed. The Melians rejected this, so the Athenian army laid siege to their city and eventually captured it in the winter. After the city&#x27;s fall, the Athenians executed all the adult men, and sold the women and children into slavery.

== Sicilian Expedition (415–413 BC) ==

In the 17th year of the war, word came to Athens that one of their distant allies in Sicily was under attack from Syracuse, the main city of Sicily. The people of Syracuse were ethnically Dorian (as were the Spartans), while the Athenians, and their ally in Sicilia, were Ionian.

The Athenians felt obliged to help their ally. They also held visions, rallied on by Alcibiades, who ultimately led an expedition, of conquering all of Sicily. Syracuse was not much smaller than Athens, and conquering all of Sicily would bring Athens immense resources. In the final preparations for departure, the hermai (religious statues) of Athens were mutilated by unknown persons, and Alcibiades was charged with religious crimes. Alcibiades demanded that he be put on trial at once, so that he could defend himself before the expedition. However, the Athenians allowed Alcibiades to go on the expedition without being tried (many believed in order to better plot against him). After arriving in Sicily, Alcibiades was recalled to Athens for trial. Fearing that he would be unjustly condemned, Alcibiades defected to Sparta and Nicias was placed in charge of the mission. After his defection, Alcibiades claimed to the Spartans that the Athenians planned to use Sicily as a springboard for the conquest of all of Italy and Carthage, and to use the resources and soldiers from these new conquests to conquer the Peloponnese.

The Athenian force consisted of over 100 ships and some 5,000 infantry and light-armored troops. Cavalry was limited to about 30 horses, which proved to be no match for the large and highly trained Syracusan cavalry. Upon landing in Sicily, several cities immediately joined the Athenian cause. But instead of attacking, Nicias procrastinated and the campaigning season of 415 BC ended with Syracuse scarcely damaged. With winter approaching, the Athenians withdrew into their quarters and spent the winter gathering allies. The delay allowed Syracuse to request help from Sparta, who sent their general Gylippus to Sicily with reinforcements. Upon arriving, he raised a force from several Sicilian cities, and went to the relief of Syracuse. He took command of the Syracusan troops, and in a series of battles defeated the Athenian forces, and prevented them from invading the city.

Nicias then sent word to Athens asking for reinforcements. Demosthenes was chosen and led another fleet to Sicily, joining his forces with those of Nicias. More battles ensued and again, the Syracusans and their allies defeated the Athenians. Demosthenes argued for a retreat to Athens, but Nicias at first refused. After additional setbacks, Nicias seemed to agree to a retreat until a bad omen, in the form of a lunar eclipse, delayed withdrawal. The delay was costly and forced the Athenians into a major sea battle in the Great Harbor of Syracuse. The Athenians were thoroughly defeated. Nicias and Demosthenes marched their remaining forces inland in search of friendly allies. The Syracusan cavalry rode them down mercilessly, eventually killing or enslaving all who were left of the mighty Athenian fleet.

== Second War (413–404 BC) ==
The Lacedaemonians were not content with simply sending aid to Sicily; they also resolved to take the war to the Athenians. On the advice of Alcibiades, they fortified Decelea, near Athens, and prevented the Athenians from making use of their land year round. The fortification of Decelea prevented overland supplies to Athens, and forced all supplies to be brought in by sea at greater expense. More significantly, the nearby silver mines were totally disrupted, with as many as 20,000 Athenian slaves freed by the Spartan hoplites at Decelea. With the treasury and emergency reserve of 1,000 talents dwindling, the Athenians were forced to demand even more tribute from her subject allies, further increasing tensions and the threat of rebellion within the Empire.

Corinth, Sparta, and others in the Peloponnesian League sent more reinforcements to Syracuse, to drive off the Athenians; but instead of withdrawing, the Athenians sent another hundred ships and another 5,000 troops to Sicily. Under Gylippus, the Syracusans and their allies decisively defeated the Athenians on land; and Gylippus encouraged the Syracusans to build a navy, which defeated the Athenian fleet when they tried to withdraw. The Athenian army tried to withdraw overland to friendlier Sicilian cities, but was divided and defeated. The entire Athenian fleet was destroyed, and virtually the entire Athenian army was sold into slavery.

Following the defeat of the Athenians in Sicily, it was widely believed that the end of the Athenian Empire was at hand. Athens&#x27; treasury was nearly empty, its docks were depleted, and many of the Athenian youth were dead or imprisoned in a foreign land.

===Athens recovers===
After the destruction of the Sicilian Expedition, Lacedaemon encouraged the revolt of Athens&#x27;s tributary allies, and indeed, much of Ionia rose in revolt. The Syracusans sent their fleet to the Peloponnesians, and the Persians decided to support the Spartans with money and ships. Revolt and faction threatened in Athens itself.

The Athenians managed to survive for several reasons. First, their foes lacked initiative. Corinth and Syracuse were slow to bring their fleets into the Aegean, and Sparta&#x27;s other allies were also slow to furnish troops or ships. The Ionian states that rebelled expected protection, and many rejoined the Athenian side. The Persians were slow to send promised funds and ships, frustrating battle plans.

At the start of the war, the Athenians had prudently put aside some money and 100 ships that were to be used only as a last resort.

These ships were then released, and served as the core of the Athenians&#x27; fleet throughout the rest of the war. An oligarchical revolution occurred in Athens, in which a group of 400 seized power. Peace with Sparta might have been possible, but the Athenian fleet, now based on the island of Samos, refused the change. In 411 BC, this fleet engaged the Spartans at the Battle of Syme. The fleet appointed Alcibiades their leader, and continued the war in Athens&#x27;s name. Their opposition led to the reinstitution of a democratic government in Athens within two years.

Alcibiades, while condemned as a traitor, still carried weight in Athens. He prevented the Athenian fleet from attacking Athens; instead, he helped restore democracy by more subtle pressure. He also persuaded the Athenian fleet to attack the Spartans at the battle of Cyzicus in 410. In the battle, the Athenians obliterated the Spartan fleet, and succeeded in re-establishing the financial basis of the Athenian Empire.

Between 410 and 406, Athens won a continuous string of victories, and eventually recovered large portions of its empire. All of this was due, in no small part, to Alcibiades.

===Achaemenid&#x27;s support for Sparta (414–404 BC)===
From 414 BC, Darius II, ruler of the Achaemenid Empire had started to resent increasing Athenian power in the Aegean. He had his satrap Tissaphernes make alliance with Sparta against Athens. In 412 BC, this led to the Persian reconquest of most of Ionia. Tissaphernes also helped fund the Peloponnesian fleet.

Facing the resurgence of Athens, from 408 BC, Darius II decided to continue the war against Athens and give stronger support to the Spartans. He sent his son Cyrus the Younger into Asia Minor as satrap of Lydia, Phrygia Major and Cappadocia, and general commander (&quot;Karanos&quot;, κἀρανος) of the Persian troops. There, Cyrus allied with the Spartan general Lysander. In him, Cyrus found a man willing to help him become king, just as Lysander himself hoped to become absolute ruler of Greece by the aid of the Persian prince. Thus, Cyrus put all his means at the disposal of Lysander in the Peloponnesian War. When Cyrus was recalled to Susa by his dying father Darius, he gave Lysander the revenues from all of his cities of Asia Minor.

Cyrus the Younger would later obtain the support of the Spartans in return, after having asked them &quot;to show themselves as good friend to him, as he had been to them during their war against Athens&quot;, when he led his own expedition to Susa in 401 BC in order to topple his brother, Artaxerxes II.

==Athenian defeat==
The faction hostile to Alcibiades triumphed in Athens following a minor Spartan victory by their skillful general Lysander at the naval battle of Notium in 406 BC. Alcibiades was not re-elected general by the Athenians and he exiled himself from the city. He would never again lead Athenians in battle. Athens won the naval battle of Arginusae. The Spartan fleet under Callicratidas lost 70 ships and the Athenians lost 25 ships. But, due to bad weather, the Athenians were unable to rescue their stranded crews or finish off the Spartan fleet. Despite their victory, these failures caused outrage in Athens and led to a controversial trial. The trial resulted in the execution of six of Athens&#x27;s top naval commanders. Athens&#x27;s naval supremacy would now be challenged without several of its most able military leaders and a demoralized navy.

Unlike some of his predecessors, the new Spartan general, Lysander, was not a member of the Spartan royal families and was also formidable in naval strategy; he was an artful diplomat, who had even cultivated good personal relationships with the Achaemenid prince Cyrus the Younger, son of Emperor Darius II. Seizing its opportunity, the Spartan fleet sailed at once to the Dardanelles, the source of Athens&#x27;s grain. Threatened with starvation, the Athenian fleet had no choice but to follow. Through cunning strategy, Lysander totally defeated the Athenian fleet, in 405 BC, at the Battle of Aegospotami, destroying 168 ships. Only 12 Athenian ships escaped, and several of these sailed to Cyprus, carrying the &quot;strategos&quot; (general) Conon, who was anxious not to face the judgment of the Assembly.

Facing starvation and disease from the prolonged siege, Athens surrendered on 25 April 404 BC, and its allies soon surrendered as well. The democrats at Samos, loyal to the bitter last, held on slightly longer, and were allowed to flee with their lives. The surrender stripped Athens of its walls, its fleet, and all of its overseas possessions. Corinth and Thebes demanded that Athens should be destroyed and all its citizens should be enslaved. However, the Spartans announced their refusal to destroy a city that had done a good service at a time of greatest danger to Greece, and took Athens into their own system. Athens was &quot;to have the same friends and enemies&quot; as Sparta.

== Aftermath ==
The overall effect of the war in Greece proper was to replace the Athenian Empire with a Spartan empire. After the battle of Aegospotami, Sparta took over the Athenian empire and kept all its tribute revenues for itself; Sparta&#x27;s allies, who had made greater sacrifices in the war than had Sparta, got nothing.

For a short time, Athens was ruled by the Thirty Tyrants, a reactionary regime set up by Sparta. In 403 BC, the oligarchs were overthrown and a democracy was restored by Thrasybulus.

Although the hegemony of Athens was broken, the Attic city completed the recovery of its autonomy in the Corinthian War and continued to play an active role in Greek politics. Sparta was later defeated by Thebes at the Battle of Leuctra in 371 BC. A few decades later, the rivalry between Athens and Sparta ended when Macedonia became the most powerful entity in Greece and Philip II of Macedon unified all of the Greek world except Sparta, which was later subjugated by Philip&#x27;s son Alexander in 331 BC.

A symbolic peace treaty was signed by the mayors of modern Athens and Sparta on 12 March 1996, more than 2,500 years after the war ended.
== Citations ==
== General and cited references ==
=== Classical authors ===
* Aristophanes, &quot;Lysistrata&quot;.
* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;Bibliotheca historica&quot;.
* Herodotus, &quot;Histories&quot;.
* Plutarch, &quot;Parallel Lives&quot;, &quot;Moralia&quot;.
* Thucydides, &quot;History of the Peloponnesian War&quot;.
* Xenophon, &quot;Hellenica&quot;.
* Plutarch, &quot;Parallel Lives&quot; (Pericles, Alcibiades, Lysander).

=== Modern authors ===
* Bagnall, Nigel. &quot;The Peloponnesian War: Athens, Sparta, And The Struggle For Greece&quot;. New York: Thomas Dunne Books, 2006 (hardcover, ).
* Cawkwell, George. &quot;Thucydides and the Peloponnesian War&quot;. London: Routledge, 1997 (hardcover, ; paperback, ).
* Hanson, Victor Davis. &quot;A War Like No Other: How the Athenians and Spartans Fought the Peloponnesian War&quot;. New York: Random House, 2005 (hardcover, ); New York: Random House, 2006 (paperback, ).
* Heftner, Herbert. &quot;Der oligarchische Umsturz des Jahres 411 v. Chr. und die Herrschaft der Vierhundert in Athen: Quellenkritische und historische Untersuchungen&quot;. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, 2001 ().
* Hutchinson, Godfrey. &quot;Attrition: Aspects of Command in the Peloponnesian War&quot;. Stroud, Gloucestershire, UK: Tempus Publishing, 2006 (hardcover, ).
* Kagan, Donald:
** &quot;The Outbreak of the Peloponnesian War&quot;. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1969 (hardcover, ); 1989 (paperback, ).
** &quot;The Archidamian War&quot;. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1974 (hardcover, ); 1990 (paperback, ).
** &quot;The Peace of Nicias and the Sicilian Expedition&quot;. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1981 (hardcover, ); 1991 (paperback, ).
** &quot;The Fall of the Athenian Empire&quot;. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1987 (hardcover, ); 1991 (paperback, ).
** &quot;The Peloponnesian War&quot;. New York: Viking, 2003 (hardcover, ); New York: Penguin, 2004 (paperback, ); a one-volume version of his earlier tetralogy.
* Kallet, Lisa. &quot;Money and the Corrosion of Power in Thucydides: The Sicilian Expedition and its Aftermath&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001 (hardcover, ).
* Krentz, Peter. &quot;The Thirty at Athens&quot;. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1982 (hardcover, ).
* G. E. M. de Ste. Croix, &quot;The Origins of the Peloponnesian War&quot;, London, Duckworth, 1972. 
* &quot;The Landmark Thucydides: A Comprehensive Guide to the Peloponnesian War&quot;, edited by Robert B. Strassler. New York: The Free Press, 1996 (hardcover, ); 1998 (paperback, ).
* Roberts, Jennifer T. &quot;The Plague of War: Athens, Sparta, and the Struggle for Ancient Greece&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017 (hardcover, 

== External links ==
* LibriVox: The History of the Peloponnesian War ( Audiobooks in the US – 20:57:23 hours, at least 603.7 MB)
* Richard Crawley, &quot;The History of the Peloponnesian War&quot; (translation of Thukydides&#x27;s books – in Project Gutenberg)
* Peloponnesian war
* Peloponnesian war on Lycurgus.org (archived 29 August 2016)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="4" end="28" title="Peloponnesian War" label="Second Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="67" end="84" title="Peloponnesian War" label="Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="96" end="109" title="Ancient Greece" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q844930" start="129" end="135" title="Classical Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="140" end="146" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q182034" start="183" end="191" title="hegemony" label="hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="199" end="210" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek world"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="275" end="289" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q143559" start="319" end="327" title="Lysander" label="Lysander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254630" start="426" end="442" title="Spartan hegemony" label="Spartan hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q313731" start="627" end="640" title="Archidamus II" label="Archidamus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q122443" start="654" end="660" title="Attica" label="Attica"/>
<link wikidata="Q175249" start="689" end="696" title="hoplite" label="hoplite"/>
<link wikidata="Q208742" start="709" end="729" title="Peloponnesian League" label="Peloponnesian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163616" start="804" end="814" title="Long Walls" label="Long Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q193235" start="892" end="905" title="Delian League" label="Delian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q932202" start="1013" end="1028" title="Peace of Nicias" label="Peace of Nicias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362053" start="1140" end="1158" title="Battle of Mantinea (418 BC)" label="battle of Mantinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536845" start="1214" end="1218" title="Ancient Elis" label="Elis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160195" start="1220" end="1228" title="Mantineia" label="Mantinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="1259" end="1264" title="Argos, Peloponnese" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q844289" start="1301" end="1320" title="Sicilian Expedition" label="Sicilian Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="1417" end="1425" title="Syracuse, Sicily" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="1438" end="1444" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="1652" end="1662" title="Anatolia" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q76026" start="1718" end="1730" title="Greco-Persian Wars" label="Persian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q866862" start="1884" end="1896" title="Battle of Aegospotami" label="Aegospotamos"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="1996" end="2007" title="Oligarchy" label="oligarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q643488" start="2104" end="2118" title="Thirty Tyrants" label="Thirty Tyrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q651008" start="2178" end="2192" title="Corinthian War" label="Corinthian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="2784" end="2794" title="democracy" label="democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918232" start="2947" end="2968" title="Ancient Greek warfare" label="Ancient Greek warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="3073" end="3083" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q843745" start="3307" end="3327" title="Classical Greece" label="golden age of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q639493" start="3433" end="3469" title="The History of the Peloponnesian War" label="The History of the Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="3479" end="3489" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q129772" start="4398" end="4406" title="Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q674638" start="4463" end="4472" title="Hellenica" label="Hellenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="4679" end="4688" title="mercenary" label="mercenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="4706" end="4720" title="Persian Empire" label="Persian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="4739" end="4749" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="4751" end="4757" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="5048" end="5064" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q672803" start="5097" end="5118" title="Bibliotheca historica" label="Bibliotheca historica"/>
<link wikidata="Q18882" start="5234" end="5251" title="Universal history (genre)" label="universal history"/>
<link wikidata="Q313791" start="5255" end="5262" title="Ephorus" label="Ephorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585442" start="5315" end="5319" title="Lost literary work" label="lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497438" start="5326" end="5337" title="Roman Greece" label="Roman-Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="5348" end="5356" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q80398" start="5419" end="5427" title="Pericles" label="Pericles"/>
<link wikidata="Q315822" start="5429" end="5435" title="Nicias" label="Nicias"/>
<link wikidata="Q187982" start="5437" end="5447" title="Alcibiades" label="Alcibiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q143559" start="5452" end="5460" title="Lysander" label="Lysander"/>
<link wikidata="Q842337" start="5475" end="5489" title="Parallel Lives" label="Parallel Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q181260" start="5810" end="5819" title="epigraphy" label="epigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="5824" end="5835" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q217414" start="5858" end="5868" title="Amphipolis" label="Amphipolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q311742" start="5882" end="5890" title="Brasidas" label="Brasidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q242741" start="6002" end="6013" title="Erechtheion" label="Erechtheion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12877248" start="6025" end="6046" title="Grave Stele of Hegeso" label="Grave Stele of Hegeso"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="6189" end="6201" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193602" start="6258" end="6263" title="Peace (play)" label="Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q753907" start="6280" end="6290" title="Lysistrata" label="Lysistrata"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="6383" end="6393" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="6516" end="6526" title="Sparta" label="Lacedaemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193235" start="6741" end="6754" title="Delian League" label="Delian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q173148" start="6776" end="6781" title="Delos" label="Delos"/>
<link wikidata="Q76026" start="6850" end="6868" title="Greco-Persian Wars" label="Greco-Persian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122337" start="6900" end="6933" title="Second Persian invasion of Greece" label="Second Persian invasion of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974221" start="7152" end="7166" title="Pentecontaetia" label="Pentecontaetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193235" start="7425" end="7440" title="Athenian Empire" label="Athenian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q462484" start="8437" end="8442" title="helot" label="helot"/>
<link wikidata="Q175249" start="8622" end="8630" title="hoplites" label="hoplites"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9091" end="9100" title="Nafpaktos#Antiquity" label="Naupaktos"/>
<link wikidata="Q209682" start="9108" end="9123" title="Gulf of Corinth" label="Gulf of Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q184864" start="9176" end="9182" title="Megara" label="Megara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363688" start="9187" end="9194" title="ancient Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q215200" start="9335" end="9353" title="Isthmus of Corinth" label="Isthmus of Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q743776" start="9397" end="9420" title="First Peloponnesian War" label="First Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q191082" start="9493" end="9499" title="Aegina" label="Aegina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="9607" end="9614" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q787429" start="9874" end="9898" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; Peace" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q156882" start="10052" end="10057" title="Samos" label="Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q926514" start="10058" end="10096" title="Samian War" label="rebelled from its alliance with Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q170305" start="10150" end="10156" title="satrap" label="satrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693378" start="10706" end="10713" title="Korkyra (polis)" label="Corcyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q951932" start="10966" end="10982" title="Battle of Sybota" label="Battle of Sybota"/>
<link wikidata="Q208420" start="11361" end="11368" title="trireme" label="trireme"/>
<link wikidata="Q999468" start="11537" end="11545" title="Potidaea" label="Potidaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q204728" start="11566" end="11576" title="Chalkidiki" label="Chalkidiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356189" start="11951" end="11969" title="Battle of Potidaea" label="Battle of Potidaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625537" start="12055" end="12063" title="Siegecraft in Ancient Greece" label="besieged"/>
<link wikidata="Q20639198" start="12486" end="12497" title="Hiera Orgas" label="Hiera Orgas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586944" start="12535" end="12550" title="Megarian decree" label="Megarian decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="12576" end="12586" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q313731" start="13748" end="13761" title="Archidamus II" label="Archidamus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973090" start="13822" end="13834" title="Sthenelaidas" label="Sthenelaidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q514435" start="13852" end="13868" title="Ecclesia (Sparta)" label="Spartan ecclesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q313731" start="14125" end="14138" title="Archidamus II" label="Archidamus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q742538" start="14203" end="14210" title="Plataea" label="Plataea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418190" start="14397" end="14411" title="Spartan Army" label="Spartan forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163616" start="15019" end="15029" title="Long Walls" label="Long Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="15069" end="15076" title="Piraeus" label="Piraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497849" start="15144" end="15159" title="Pericles&amp;#x27; Funeral Oration" label="Funeral Oration"/>
<link wikidata="Q175249" start="15276" end="15283" title="hoplite" label="hoplite"/>
<link wikidata="Q335954" start="15602" end="15611" title="strategos" label="strategos"/>
<link wikidata="Q80398" start="15631" end="15639" title="Pericles" label="Pericles"/>
<link wikidata="Q608021" start="15868" end="15877" title="Battle of Naupactus (429 BC)" label="Naupactus"/>
<link wikidata="Q758173" start="15890" end="15913" title="Plague of Athens" label="an outbreak of a plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q298220" start="16764" end="16769" title="Cleon" label="Cleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q504986" start="16870" end="16881" title="Demosthenes (general)" label="Demosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q117253" start="16933" end="16944" title="Demosthenes" label="Demosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="17088" end="17095" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26857" start="17100" end="17107" title="Aetolia" label="Aetolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076124" start="17121" end="17138" title="Mytilenean revolt" label="Mytilenean revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263152" start="17218" end="17223" title="Pylos" label="Pylos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303524" start="17248" end="17258" title="Sphacteria" label="Sphacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q670128" start="17664" end="17679" title="Battle of Pylos" label="Battle of Pylos"/>
<link wikidata="Q176416" start="17955" end="17975" title="Battle of Sphacteria" label="Battle of Sphacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q311742" start="18316" end="18324" title="Brasidas" label="Brasidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q217414" start="18420" end="18430" title="Amphipolis" label="Amphipolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="18479" end="18485" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="18558" end="18568" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q637544" start="18863" end="18883" title="Battle of Amphipolis" label="Battle of Amphipolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q298220" start="19051" end="19056" title="Cleon" label="Cleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q311742" start="19061" end="19069" title="Brasidas" label="Brasidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="19368" end="19373" title="Argos, Peloponnese" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160195" start="19591" end="19599" title="Mantinea" label="Mantinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536845" start="19604" end="19608" title="Ancient Elis" label="Elis"/>
<link wikidata="Q202826" start="19706" end="19710" title="Agis II" label="Agis"/>
<link wikidata="Q187982" start="19828" end="19838" title="Alcibiades" label="Alcibiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q645234" start="19867" end="19872" title="Tegea" label="Tegea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362053" start="19892" end="19910" title="Battle of Mantinea (418 BC)" label="Battle of Mantinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12898802" start="20095" end="20102" title="Arcadia (ancient region)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q203979" start="20719" end="20724" title="Milos" label="Melos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289503" start="21020" end="21027" title="Slavery in ancient Greece" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="21155" end="21161" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q203711" start="21258" end="21264" title="Dorians" label="Dorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q187982" start="21436" end="21446" title="Alcibiades" label="Alcibiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q376693" start="21666" end="21672" title="hermai" label="hermai"/>
<link wikidata="Q315822" start="22185" end="22191" title="Nicias" label="Nicias"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="22370" end="22375" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="22380" end="22388" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q504975" start="23086" end="23094" title="Gylippus" label="Gylippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44235" start="23781" end="23794" title="lunar eclipse" label="lunar eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006561" start="24379" end="24386" title="Decelea" label="Decelea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716388" start="26905" end="26928" title="Athenian coup of 411 BC" label="oligarchical revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q156882" start="27082" end="27087" title="Samos" label="Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766951" start="27159" end="27173" title="Battle of Syme" label="Battle of Syme"/>
<link wikidata="Q524871" start="27621" end="27638" title="battle of Cyzicus" label="battle of Cyzicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q202236" start="28030" end="28039" title="Darius II" label="Darius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="28054" end="28071" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="28127" end="28133" title="Aegean sea" label="Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q355727" start="28153" end="28165" title="Tissaphernes" label="Tissaphernes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="28185" end="28191" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="28200" end="28206" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q620874" start="28265" end="28270" title="Ionia" label="Ionia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="28420" end="28426" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="28460" end="28466" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q297960" start="28486" end="28503" title="Cyrus the Younger" label="Cyrus the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="28509" end="28519" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q170305" start="28523" end="28529" title="satrap" label="satrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="28533" end="28538" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q32579" start="28540" end="28547" title="Phrygia" label="Phrygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217265" start="28558" end="28568" title="Cappadocia" label="Cappadocia"/>
<link wikidata="Q143559" start="28691" end="28699" title="Lysander" label="Lysander"/>
<link wikidata="Q180773" start="28971" end="28975" title="Susa" label="Susa"/>
<link wikidata="Q202236" start="28996" end="29002" title="Darius II" label="Darius"/>
<link wikidata="Q180773" start="29317" end="29321" title="Susa" label="Susa"/>
<link wikidata="Q188472" start="29364" end="29377" title="Artaxerxes II" label="Artaxerxes II"/>
<link wikidata="Q143559" start="29514" end="29522" title="Lysander" label="Lysander"/>
<link wikidata="Q975123" start="29536" end="29552" title="battle of Notium" label="battle of Notium"/>
<link wikidata="Q389257" start="29724" end="29743" title="battle of Arginusae" label="battle of Arginusae"/>
<link wikidata="Q465803" start="29769" end="29782" title="Callicratidas" label="Callicratidas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30021" end="30040" title="Battle of Arginusae#Trial of the generals" label="controversial trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q297960" start="30517" end="30534" title="Cyrus the Younger" label="Cyrus the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q202236" start="30551" end="30560" title="Darius II" label="Darius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="30627" end="30638" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="30668" end="30673" title="cereal" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q866862" start="30841" end="30862" title="Battle of Aegospotami" label="Battle of Aegospotami"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="30949" end="30955" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q335954" start="30976" end="30985" title="strategos" label="strategos"/>
<link wikidata="Q363832" start="31002" end="31007" title="Conon" label="Conon"/>
<link wikidata="Q730392" start="31057" end="31065" title="Ecclesia (ancient Athens)" label="Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625537" start="31117" end="31122" title="Siegecraft in Ancient Greece" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q156882" start="31221" end="31226" title="Samos" label="Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="31426" end="31432" title="Thebes, Greece" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q866862" start="31890" end="31911" title="battle of Aegospotami" label="battle of Aegospotami"/>
<link wikidata="Q643488" start="32134" end="32148" title="Thirty Tyrants" label="Thirty Tyrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="32204" end="32213" title="oligarchy" label="oligarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q354403" start="32262" end="32273" title="Thrasybulus" label="Thrasybulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q651008" start="32381" end="32395" title="Corinthian War" label="Corinthian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q461599" start="32495" end="32512" title="Battle of Leuctra" label="Battle of Leuctra"/>
<link wikidata="Q130650" start="32650" end="32670" title="Philip II of Macedon" label="Philip II of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="32690" end="32701" title="Greek world" label="Greek world"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="32765" end="32774" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="32846" end="32852" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308046" start="32857" end="32863" title="Sparta, Laconia" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="33004" end="33016" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q753907" start="33024" end="33034" title="Lysistrata" label="Lysistrata"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="33044" end="33060" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q672803" start="33068" end="33089" title="Bibliotheca historica" label="Bibliotheca historica"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="33099" end="33108" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q746583" start="33116" end="33125" title="Histories (Herodotus)" label="Histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="33135" end="33143" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q842337" start="33151" end="33165" title="Parallel Lives" label="Parallel Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q651941" start="33179" end="33186" title="Moralia" label="Moralia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="33196" end="33206" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q639493" start="33214" end="33246" title="History of the Peloponnesian War" label="History of the Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q129772" start="33256" end="33264" title="Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q674638" start="33272" end="33281" title="Hellenica" label="Hellenica"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="33291" end="33299" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q842337" start="33307" end="33321" title="Parallel Lives" label="Parallel Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537767" start="33536" end="33552" title="George Cawkwell" label="Cawkwell, George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="33612" end="33621" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q744182" start="33784" end="33796" title="Random House" label="Random House"/>
<link wikidata="Q469761" start="34238" end="34251" title="Donald Kagan" label="Kagan, Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997531" start="34319" end="34343" title="Cornell University Press" label="Cornell University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q324054" start="35221" end="35243" title="G. E. M. de Ste. Croix" label="G. E. M. de Ste. Croix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499961" start="35449" end="35463" title="Free Press (publisher)" label="The Free Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324958" start="35796" end="35811" title="Richard Crawley" label="Richard Crawley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24122" wikidata="Q155961" url="?curid=24122" title="Pope Clement IX">
<text>Pope Clement IX (; ; 28 January 1600 – 9 December 1669), born Giulio Rospigliosi, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 20 June 1667 to his death in December 1669.

Giulio Rospigliosi was born into the noble Rospigliosi family in 1600 and studied at the Seminario Romano and the University of Pisa. He held various positions in the Church, including Titular Archbishop of Tarsus and Apostolic Nuncio to Spain. As a man of letters, he wrote poetry, dramas, and libretti, and was a patron of the artist Nicolas Poussin.

Appointed as a cardinal by Pope Alexander VII, Rospigliosi was elected as Pope Clement IX in 1667. His pontificate was marked by mediation during European wars, and his popularity in Rome stemmed from his charity, humility, and refusal to advance his family&#x27;s wealth. He beatified Rose of Lima and canonized Mary Magdalene de&#x27; Pazzi and Peter of Alcántara, while also creating 12 new cardinals.

Clement IX was a patron of the arts, commissioning works from Gian Lorenzo Bernini and opening the first public opera house in Rome. He attempted to strengthen Venetian defenses against the Turks in Crete, but was unsuccessful in gaining wider support. In 1669, after learning about the Venetian fortress of Candia surrendering to the Turks, Clement IX fell ill and died.

==Biography==

===Early life and education===
Giulio Rospigliosi was born in 1600 to the Rospigliosi family, a noble family of Pistoia in the Grand Duchy of Tuscany to Giacomo and Caterina Rospigliosi. He studied at the Seminario Romano and later at the University of Pisa as a pupil of the Jesuits, receiving doctorates in theology, philosophy and both canon and civil law in 1623. After receiving his doctorates, he taught theology there as a professor from 1623 to 1625.

===Episcopate and cardinalate===
Later Rospigliosi worked closely with Pope Urban VIII (1623–1644) where he worked in the diplomatic corps as the Referendary of the Apostolic Signatura. He was appointed as the Titular Archbishop of Tarsus in 1644 and later received episcopal consecration in the Vatican. Rospigliosi also served as the Apostolic Nuncio to Spain from 1644 until 1653 when he decided to retire from that post. He lived in retirement throughout the pontificate of Pope Innocent X who disliked and distanced himself from those associated with his predecessor. He was also made vicar of Santa Maria Maggiore in Rome.

Rospigliosi was an accomplished man of letters who wrote poetry, dramas and libretti, as well as what may be the first comic opera, namely his 1637 libretto &quot;Chi soffre, speri&quot;. He was also a patron of Nicolas Poussin, commissioning &quot;A Dance to the Music of Time&quot; from him and dictating its iconography.

Pope Alexander VII appointed him to the cardinalate in 1657 as the Cardinal-Priest of San Sisto Vecchio and was also appointed as the Cardinal Secretary of State in 1655 which he held until 1667.

==Pontificate==

===Papal election===

Pope Alexander VII died in 1667 and a conclave to choose his successor was called. King Louis XIV of France instructed the French faction to turn their support to Rospigliosi and believed also that he would appease the Spanish faction of Charles II due to the fact that he had once been the Apostolic Nuncio to Spain. On 20 June 1667, he was elected as pontiff and took the pontifical name of &quot;Clement IX&quot;.

The new pope was crowned on 26 June 1667 by the protodeacon, Cardinal Rinaldo d&#x27;Este. He later took possession of the Basilica of Saint John Lateran on 3 July 1667.

When asked about Rospigliosi becoming pope, Cardinal Francesco Albizzi said: &quot;Urban turned the Holy See into a bank; Innocent into a brothel; Alexander into a tavern; this one will make a playhouse of it&quot;. Albizzi also alluded to Rospigliosi&#x27;s passion for music and said, &quot;He will emasculate the Sacred College by giving the hat to all the castrated singers in Europe!&quot; When elected, Rospigliosi received all but two votes since he voted for another while Cardinal Neri Corsini voted for Cardinal Flavio Chigi.

===Actions===
Nothing remarkable occurred under Clement IX&#x27;s short administration beyond the temporary adjustment of the disputes between the Holy See and those prelates of the Gallican Church who had refused to join in condemning the writings of Jansen. He was mediator during the 1668 peace of Aachen, in the wars between France, Spain, England and the Netherlands.

He was popular with the people of Rome, not so much for his erudition and application to business, as for his extreme charity and his affability towards great and small. He increased the goodwill of his subjects by buying off the monopolist who had secured the &quot;macinato&quot;, or privilege of selling grain, and as his predecessor had collected the money for the purpose, Clement IX had the decree published in the name of Alexander VII. Two days each week he occupied a confessional in St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica and heard any one who wished to confess to him. He frequently visited the hospitals, and was lavish in his alms to the poor. In an age of nepotism, he did little or nothing to advance or enrich his family. In his aversion to notoriety, he refused to permit his name to be placed on the buildings erected during his reign.

===Other actions===

Clement IX confirmed the cultus of Margaret of Savoy on 9 October 1669. He also beatified Rose of Lima on 15 April 1668. On 28 April 1668, he canonized Magdalena de Pazzi and Peter of Alcántara.

He elevated 12 new cardinals in three consistories; this included Emilio Bonaventura Altieri who would succeed him as Pope Clement X.

===Art reforms===
As pope, Clement IX continued his interest in the arts. He embellished the city of Rome with famous works commissioned from Gian Lorenzo Bernini, including the angels of Ponte Sant&#x27;Angelo and the colonnade of Saint Peter&#x27;s Basilica. Somewhat unusually for Popes of the era, Clement IX did not have his name displayed on monuments he built. For the Carnival celebrations of 1668, commissioned Antonio Maria Abbatini of the Sistine Chapel Choir to set to music his free Italian translation of a Spanish religious drama &quot;La Baltasara&quot;, the production had sets designed by Bernini.

===Defence against the Turks===
Clement IX worked to strengthen Venetian defences against the Turks on the island of Crete. However, he was unable to get wider support for this cause. At the end of October 1669, Clement IX fell ill after receiving news that the Venetian fortress of Candia in Crete had surrendered to the Turks.

==Death and burial==
Clement IX died in Rome, allegedly of a broken heart, on 9 December 1669. His successor, Pope Clement X (r. 1670–1676), built him an ornate tomb in the basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore.

Clement IX was seriously ill throughout the autumn in 1669 with a hernia and kidney stones. Despite his illness and his anxiety over the Turkish advances in Crete, he travelled on a pilgrimage to the seven Roman basilicas, however, that night, he had a severe apoplexy. On 29 November, just ten days before he died, he named seven new cardinals and announced one whom he had reserved &quot;in pectore&quot;. However, the dying pope intended to create a &quot;faction&quot; for his nephew with which to use in the next conclave to defend his policies. Clement IX died of a stroke on 9 December, and it is believed this was perhaps brought on by learning of the defeat and expulsion of the Venetians from Crete.

Following his death, the Florentine agent in Rome, writing to Grand Duke Ferdinando II de&#x27; Medici a few days later, accuses the late Clement IX of having hidden the fact that he was epileptic, which would have, according to the canon law in place at the time, disqualified him from exercising any ecclesiastical functions, however, this has never been proven.

==Artistic works==

===Libretti===
*for Giovanni Girolamo Kapsperger: &quot;I Pastori di Betlemme&quot; (1630)
*for Stefano Landi: &quot;Il Sant&#x27;Alessio&quot; (1631–2, 1634)
*for Michele Angelo Rossi: &quot;Erminia sul Giordano&quot; (1633)
*for (composer unknown): &quot;I Santi Didimo e Teodora&quot; (1635, 1636)
*for Marco Marazzoli and Virgilio Mazzocchi: &quot;Chi Soffre, Speri&quot; (1637, 1639)
*for Aurelio Aureli: &quot;La Sincerità Trionfante&quot; (1638, 1639)
*for Virgilio Mazzocchi: &quot;Il San Bonifazio&quot; (1638, 1639)
*for Virgilio Mazzocchi: &quot;La Genoinda&quot; (1641)
*for Luigi Rossi: &quot;Il Palazzo Incantato&quot; (1642)
*for Virgilio Mazzocchi: &quot;Il Sant&#x27;Eustachio&quot; (1643)
*for Antonio Maria Abbatini and Marco Marazzoli: &quot;Dal Male Il Bene&quot; (1654, 1656)
*for Marco Marazzoli: &quot;Le Armi e Gli Amori&quot; (1656)
*for Antonio Maria Abbatini: &quot;La Comica del Cielo&quot; (1668)

==See also==
*Cardinals created by Clement IX

==Notes==
==References==
*
==External links==
*
*Notes on 20th-century productions of Rospigliosi&#x27;s operatic works
*Banca dati Giulio Rospigliosi, maintained by Danilo Romei</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q155961" start="0" end="15" title="Pope Clement IX" label="Pope Clement IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q155961" start="62" end="80" title="Pope Clement IX" label="Giulio Rospigliosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="98" end="113" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="131" end="143" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3941572" start="237" end="255" title="Rospigliosi family" label="Rospigliosi family"/>
<link wikidata="Q916458" start="283" end="299" title="Pontifical Roman Major Seminary" label="Seminario Romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q645663" start="308" end="326" title="University of Pisa" label="University of Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q157037" start="422" end="428" title="Nuncio" label="Nuncio"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="432" end="437" title="Habsburg Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q41554" start="530" end="545" title="Nicolas Poussin" label="Nicolas Poussin"/>
<link wikidata="Q127254" start="575" end="593" title="Pope Alexander VII" label="Pope Alexander VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q244383" start="834" end="846" title="Rose of Lima" label="Rose of Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q242040" start="861" end="890" title="Mary Magdalene de&amp;#x27; Pazzi" label="Mary Magdalene de&amp;#x27; Pazzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q470608" start="895" end="913" title="Peter of Alcántara" label="Peter of Alcántara"/>
<link wikidata="Q160538" start="1016" end="1036" title="Gian Lorenzo Bernini" label="Gian Lorenzo Bernini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288441" start="1153" end="1158" title="Kingdom of Candia" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q701094" start="1262" end="1294" title="Siege of Candia" label="Candia surrendering to the Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3941572" start="1416" end="1434" title="Rospigliosi family" label="Rospigliosi family"/>
<link wikidata="Q13376" start="1454" end="1461" title="Pistoia" label="Pistoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154849" start="1469" end="1491" title="Grand Duchy of Tuscany" label="Grand Duchy of Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q916458" start="1547" end="1563" title="Pontifical Roman Major Seminary" label="Seminario Romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q645663" start="1581" end="1599" title="University of Pisa" label="University of Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="1618" end="1625" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q131579" start="1873" end="1888" title="Pope Urban VIII" label="Pope Urban VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="1924" end="1940" title="Holy See" label="diplomatic corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q620145" start="1967" end="1986" title="Apostolic Signatura" label="Apostolic Signatura"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="2068" end="2090" title="episcopal consecration" label="episcopal consecration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993290" start="2138" end="2163" title="Apostolic Nuncio to Spain" label="Apostolic Nuncio to Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q101266" start="2280" end="2295" title="Pope Innocent X" label="Pope Innocent X"/>
<link wikidata="Q186282" start="2401" end="2421" title="Santa Maria Maggiore" label="Santa Maria Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="2425" end="2429" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="2508" end="2516" title="libretti" label="libretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220650" start="2551" end="2562" title="comic opera" label="comic opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095120" start="2595" end="2612" title="Chi soffre, speri" label="Chi soffre, speri"/>
<link wikidata="Q41554" start="2644" end="2659" title="Nicolas Poussin" label="Nicolas Poussin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513438" start="2681" end="2709" title="A Dance to the Music of Time (painting)" label="A Dance to the Music of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q127254" start="2757" end="2775" title="Pope Alexander VII" label="Pope Alexander VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736770" start="2843" end="2860" title="San Sisto Vecchio" label="San Sisto Vecchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054345" start="2891" end="2918" title="Cardinal Secretary of State" label="Cardinal Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q127254" start="2993" end="3011" title="Pope Alexander VII" label="Pope Alexander VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="3081" end="3090" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q36174" start="3231" end="3241" title="Charles II of Spain" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993290" start="3284" end="3309" title="Apostolic Nuncio to Spain" label="Apostolic Nuncio to Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050944" start="3428" end="3435" title="Papal coronation" label="crowned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505768" start="3459" end="3470" title="protodeacon" label="protodeacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="3472" end="3480" title="Cardinal (Catholic Church)" label="Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633696" start="3481" end="3500" title="Rinaldo d&amp;#x27;Este (1618-1672)" label="Rinaldo d&amp;#x27;Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q84090" start="3534" end="3564" title="Basilica of Saint John Lateran" label="Basilica of Saint John Lateran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440887" start="3635" end="3652" title="Francesco Albizzi" label="Francesco Albizzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769160" start="4072" end="4084" title="Neri Corsini (1614–1678)" label="Neri Corsini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397340" start="4104" end="4116" title="Flavio Chigi (1631–1693)" label="Flavio Chigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="4266" end="4274" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q795240" start="4301" end="4316" title="Catholic Church in France" label="Gallican Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287" start="4371" end="4377" title="Jansenism" label="Jansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q223871" start="4386" end="4394" title="Mediation" label="mediator"/>
<link wikidata="Q327270" start="4411" end="4426" title="Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle (1668)" label="peace of Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="4448" end="4454" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="4456" end="4461" title="Habsburg Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="4463" end="4470" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="4479" end="4490" title="Dutch Republic" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="4986" end="5011" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="5150" end="5158" title="nepotism" label="nepotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q289905" start="5391" end="5408" title="Blessed Margaret of Savoy" label="Margaret of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q244383" start="5446" end="5458" title="Rose of Lima" label="Rose of Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q242040" start="5508" end="5526" title="Magdalena de Pazzi" label="Magdalena de Pazzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q470608" start="5531" end="5549" title="Peter of Alcántara" label="Peter of Alcántara"/>
<link wikidata="Q155956" start="5670" end="5684" title="Pope Clement X" label="Pope Clement X"/>
<link wikidata="Q160538" start="5829" end="5849" title="Gian Lorenzo Bernini" label="Gian Lorenzo Bernini"/>
<link wikidata="Q870476" start="5875" end="5897" title="Ponte Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Ponte Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q657100" start="5906" end="5915" title="colonnade" label="colonnade"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="5919" end="5946" title="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618" start="6063" end="6071" title="Carnival" label="Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q550788" start="6107" end="6129" title="Antonio Maria Abbatini" label="Antonio Maria Abbatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236085" start="6137" end="6157" title="Sistine Chapel Choir" label="Sistine Chapel Choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="6183" end="6190" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="6208" end="6215" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="6368" end="6376" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359535" start="6398" end="6403" title="Ottoman Turks" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="6421" end="6426" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q160544" start="6587" end="6593" title="Heraklion" label="Candia"/>
<link wikidata="Q701094" start="6607" end="6618" title="Siege of Candia" label="surrendered"/>
<link wikidata="Q155956" start="6744" end="6758" title="Pope Clement X" label="Pope Clement X"/>
<link wikidata="Q186282" start="6819" end="6839" title="Santa Maria Maggiore" label="Santa Maria Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314" start="6886" end="6892" title="autumn" label="autumn"/>
<link wikidata="Q133076" start="6908" end="6914" title="hernia" label="hernia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178623" start="6919" end="6932" title="kidney stones" label="kidney stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319909" start="7232" end="7242" title="in pectore" label="in pectore"/>
<link wikidata="Q314558" start="7626" end="7655" title="Ferdinando II de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Ferdinando II de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="7740" end="7749" title="epileptic" label="epileptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q707863" start="7959" end="7987" title="Giovanni Girolamo Kapsperger" label="Giovanni Girolamo Kapsperger"/>
<link wikidata="Q381943" start="8035" end="8048" title="Stefano Landi" label="Stefano Landi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089530" start="8056" end="8076" title="Il Sant&amp;#x27;Alessio" label="Il Sant&amp;#x27;Alessio"/>
<link wikidata="Q966250" start="8103" end="8123" title="Michelangelo Rossi" label="Michele Angelo Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635475" start="8245" end="8260" title="Marco Marazzoli" label="Marco Marazzoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q375733" start="8265" end="8283" title="Virgilio Mazzocchi" label="Virgilio Mazzocchi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8291" end="8308" title="Chi Soffre, Speri" label="Chi Soffre, Speri"/>
<link wikidata="Q775525" start="8333" end="8347" title="Aurelio Aureli" label="Aurelio Aureli"/>
<link wikidata="Q472714" start="8526" end="8537" title="Luigi Rossi" label="Luigi Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8545" end="8565" title="Il Palazzo Incantato" label="Il Palazzo Incantato"/>
<link wikidata="Q550788" start="8651" end="8673" title="Antonio Maria Abbatini" label="Antonio Maria Abbatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q781763" start="8881" end="8912" title="Cardinals created by Clement IX" label="Cardinals created by Clement IX"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24123" wikidata="Q155956" url="?curid=24123" title="Pope Clement X">
<text>Pope Clement X (; ; 13 July 1590 – 22 July 1676), born Emilio Bonaventura Altieri, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 29 April 1670 to his death on 22 July 1676. Elected pope at age 79, he has since been ranked as the oldest pope at the time of his election.

Emilio Bonaventura Altieri, born in Rome in 1590, belonged to the Papal nobility. He received a doctorate in law and held various positions within the Catholic Church, including Bishop of Camerino and Superintendent of the Papal Exchequer. At the age of almost 80, he was elected Pope Clement X in 1670 after a four-month-long conclave. As Pope, he canonized and beatified various saints, promoted good relations between Christian countries, and made efforts to preserve the Altieri family name by adopting the Paoluzzi family. He also established a new tax in Rome, which led to conflicts with ambassadors and cardinals. Clement X celebrated the fourteenth jubilee of the holy year in 1675 despite his old age. During his pontificate, he created 20 cardinals, including Pietro Francesco Orsini, who later became Pope Benedict XIII.

==Early life==
Emilio Bonaventura Altieri was born in Rome in 1590, the son of Lorenzo Altieri and Vittoria Delfin, a noble Venetian lady, sister of Flaminio Delfin, commander general of the Papal Army, and of Gentile Delfin, Bishop of Camerino. His brother was Cardinal Giambattista Altieri. The Altieri family belonged to the ancient Roman Papal nobility and had enjoyed the highest consideration at Rome for several centuries; they had occasionally contracted alliances with the Colonnas and the Orsinis. During earlier pontificates, the Altieri held many important offices and had been entrusted with several delicate missions.

==Early work==
Altieri received a doctorate in law from the Roman College in 1611. After finishing his studies, he was named &quot;auditor&quot; of Giovanni Battista Lancellotti in 1623, in the nuncio of Poland. He was ordained on 6 April 1624. On his return to Rome, he was named Bishop of Camerino, then governor of Loreto and of all Umbria. Pope Urban VIII (1623–44) gave him charge of the works designed to protect the territory of Ravenna from the unruly Po River.

Pope Innocent X (1644–55) sent him as nuncio to Naples, where he remained for eight years. He is credited with the re-establishment of peace after the stormy days of Masaniello. Pope Alexander VII (1655–67) confided to him a mission to Poland.

Pope Clement IX (1667–69) named him Superintendent of the Papal Exchequer (in charge of the Church&#x27;s finances), and in 1667 his &quot;maestro di camera&quot;, and he was made Secretary of the Congregation of Bishops and Regulars. Just before his death, Clement IX made him a cardinal. He was then about seventy-nine years of age; and Clement IX, when making him a member of the Sacred College, said to him: &quot;You will be our successor.&quot;

After the funeral of Pope Clement IX, sixty-two electors entered into conclave on 20 December 1669. Forty-two votes were necessary, and due to the rivalry between the French and Spanish factions, heated discussion prevailed for four months. Cardinal Giannicolò Conti was supported by twenty-two votes; Cardinal Giacomo Rospigliosi, nephew of the late pope, had thirty, or, as some say, thirty-three, with two at the &quot;accesso&quot;, so that he needed only seven more votes to gain the tiara. Cardinal Carlo Cerri obtained twenty-three votes.

At length the cardinals agreed to resort to the old expedient of electing a cardinal of advanced years, and proposed Cardinal Altieri, almost an octogenarian, whose long life had been spent in the service of the Catholic Church, and whom Clement IX, on the eve of his death, had raised to the dignity of the purple. The reason a prelate of such transcendent merits received the cardinalate so late in life seems to have been that he had waived his claims to the elevation in favour of an older brother.

==Pontificate==

On 29 April 1670, the papacy was offered to him by fifty-nine cardinals present at the election; only two being against him. He, however, objected because of his age, for he was almost eighty, and exclaimed, &quot;I am too old to bear such a burden.&quot; Pointing to Cardinal Francesco Maria Brancaccio, Altieri said he was the cardinal whom they ought to elect. He persisted in refusing, protesting that he no longer had strength or memory; eventually, with tears he accepted, and out of gratitude to his benefactor, by ten years his junior, he assumed the name of Clement X. He was crowned on 11 May.
On 8 June Clement X took possession of the Basilica of Saint John Lateran. On 11 June, he confirmed the Minor Observantines in the Holy Land in the privileges and indulgences granted to those who visit the holy places, according to the decrees of Alexander VII and Clement IX. In the same month, he granted to the prelate-clerks of the chamber the use of the violet-coloured band around their hats. Occasionally forgetful, he sometimes promised the same favors to different people and came to rely on his cardinal-nephew, Cardinal Paluzzo Paluzzi Altieri degli Albertoni.

All but one of the male scions of the Altieri family had chosen the ecclesiastical career. On his accession to the papacy, Clement X, in order to save the Altieri name from extinction, adopted the Paoluzzi family, and proposed that one of the Paluzzi should marry Laura Caterina Altieri, the sole heiress of the family. In exchange for adopting the Altieri surname, he would make one of the Paoluzzi a cardinal. Following the wedding, which he officiated, he appointed his niece&#x27;s uncle-in-law Cardinal Paluzzi Altieri to the office of cardinal nephew to take on the duties which he was prevented from doing by age. The main activity was to invest the Church&#x27;s money, and with advancing years gradually entrusted to him the management of affairs, to such an extent that the Romans said he had reserved to himself only the episcopal functions of &quot;benedicere et sanctificare&quot;, resigning in favour of the cardinal the administrative duties of &quot;regere et gubernare&quot;.

Clement X advised the Christian princes to love each other and to prove it by generous measures, and by a prudent and scrupulous conduct. It was especially between Spain and France that the pope desired to witness a renewal of feelings of good understanding.

In 1671, the Pope published an edict by which he declared that &quot;a noble might be a merchant without loss of his nobility, provided always that he did not sell by retail&quot;. In 1676, Gian Lorenzo Bernini sculpted one of his final statues, a bust of Clement X.

===Canonizations and beatifications===
On 12 April 1671, Clement X canonised five new saints:
* Saint Gaetan of Thiene, founder of the Clerks of Divine Providence, better known by their other title of Theatines.
* Saint Francis Borgia, fourth Duke of Gandia, Marquis of Lombay, and viceroy of Catalonia, born in 1510. He took the habit of the Jesuits in 1547, and became general and one of the most illustrious ornaments of that religious order.
* Saint Philip Benizi, a noble Florentine, a religious of the order of the Servants of Mary, of which he was the reviver, and not, as has been stated by some, the founder. Pope Leo X (1513–21) had beatified him in 1516.
* Saint Louis Beltran, or Bertrand, a Spaniard, of the family of Saint Vincent Ferrer, and like him a Dominican.
* Saint Rose of Lima, of the third order of Saint Dominic, born at Lima, Peru in 1586. Saint Rose, beatified by Clement IX, was the first American saint of the Americas.
* Fernando III called El Santo (the Saint), (1198/1199 – 30 May 1252) was a king of Castile (1217–1252) and Leon (1230–1252). He was the son of Alfonso IX and Berengaria of Castile, daughter of Alfonso VIII. In 1231 he united Castile and León permanently. Fernando was canonized by Pope Clement X in 1671. Several places named &quot;San Fernando&quot; were founded across the Spanish Empire.

In 1673, he had Pope Leo III&#x27;s name entered in the Roman Martyrology.

He beatified Pope Pius V (1566–72), Francis Solano, and John of the Cross, all subsequently canonized by Clement XI and Pope Benedict XIII (1724–30). Clement X also declared Venerable one of the famous Spanish mystics, Sister María de Jesús de Ágreda.

Clement X, on 24 November 1673, beatified nineteen Martyrs of Gorkum, who had been taken prisoner at Gorcum, the Netherlands, and put to death in Brielle on 9 July 1572, in hatred of the Catholic faith, of the primacy of the Pope, and of the Roman Church. Of the nineteen Gorcum martyrs, Peter Ascanius (&quot;Peter of Assche&quot;) and Cornelius Vican (&quot;Cornelius van Wijk&quot;) were laymen; eleven were Franciscan priests; one a Dominican, two Premonstratensians, one a regular canon of Saint Augustine, and four were secular priests.

On 13 January 1672, Clement X regulated the formalities to be observed in removing the relics of saints from sacred cemeteries. No one was to remove such relics without the permission of the cardinal-vicar. They were not to be exposed for the veneration of the faithful unless previously examined by the same cardinal. The principal relics of the martyr – that is to say, the head, the legs, the arms, and the part in which they suffered – were to be exposed only in the churches, and they were not to be given to private persons, but only to princes and high prelates; and even to them but rarely, lest the too great profusion should deprive relics of the respect which they ought to inspire. The Pope decreed severe penalties against all who gave a relic any name but that given by the cardinal-vicar. The pain of excommunication was pronounced against all who should demand any sum whatever for sealed and authentic relics. These decrees, and others made by preceding Popes were confirmed by Pope Clement XI (1700–21) in 1704.

Clement X confirmed the exemptions granted by Pope Gregory XIII (1572–85) to the German College at Rome in 1671; and then, on 16 October 1672, he ordered the pupils to swear that at the close of their studies they would set out for Germany without a day&#x27;s delay.

===Foreign affairs===
Clement X, seeing the results of the apostolic labours of the early French missionaries in Canada, the number of the faithful, and the wide field of labour, resolved to give the Church an independent organisation, and erected a &quot;see&quot; at Quebec, the bishop to depend directly on the Holy See; this provision would later secure its permanence after Quebec passed into the hands of Great Britain. The first bishop was Francois de Montmorency-Laval.

In 1673, there arrived at Rome ambassadors from the Tsar of Russia, Alexei. He solicited from the Pope the title of Tsar, which, however, had already been adopted by his predecessors. At the same time it could not be forgotten that he gave strong financial aid to King John III Sobieski of Poland in their fight against the Turkish invaders. But Paul Menesius, a Scotsman, who was the ambassador, could not obtain the grant or sanction of that title, though he was received with great magnificence and had many precious gifts to carry back to his master. The Russian Tsar did not profess the Catholic faith in such a manner as to give any assurance of his intentions, and the King of Poland had looked upon the embassy with displeasure.

===Local administration===
Meanwhile, Rome had reason to fear trouble. Cardinal Paluzzi Altieri, who was at the head of the government, determined to increase the revenues, and he established a new tax of three percent upon all merchandise entering the city, including even goods for cardinals and ambassadors. Although the government complained that ambassadors had abused their privilege, the diplomatic corps showed discontent that they were not expressly exempted in the new tax law.

Another edict confirmed the first and ordered the confiscation without distinction of all goods that did not pay the new tax. The cardinals at first complained, though with moderation. But the ambassadors didn&#x27;t speak Clement X&#x27;s language.

The Cardinal nephew maintained that Clement X, within his own State, might make what rules he pleased. Then the ambassadors of the Empire, of France, Spain, and Venice, sent their secretaries to demand an audience of the Pope. The chief chamberlain replied that the Pope was busy that day. And for four days in succession, the chamberlain gave the same answer to the same applicants. Clement X, learning at length what had occurred, declared that he had given no such order. The ambassadors then sent their secretaries to ask an audience of Cardinal Paluzzi Altieri. Not only did he refuse to admit them, but closed his doors and increased the guard at the pontifical palace, so that the offence could go no further. Subsequently, the Cardinal nephew wrote to the nuncios who resided in the courts of Europe, stating that the excesses committed by the ambassadors had induced the pope to publish the edict. The ambassadors, on the contrary, assured their sovereigns that the accusation was a pretext.

The conflict lasted for more than a year; and Clement X, who loved peace, at length referred the matter to a congregation. Sometime after, Cardinal Paluzzi Altieri declared that he had not intended to comprise the ambassadors among those for whom the edict was intended, and that the pope had never contemplated subjecting them to it.

Queen Christina of Sweden, who had become a Catholic and moved to Rome in December 1655, made Clement X prohibit the custom of chasing Jews through the streets during the carnival. In 1686 she issued a declaration that Roman Jews stood under her protection, signed &quot;la Regina&quot; – the queen.

===Jubilee===
In 1675 Clement X celebrated the fourteenth jubilee of the holy year. Notwithstanding his age, he visited the churches, regretting that the gout prevented him from making that holy visit more than five times. He went twelve times to Trinity hospital to wash the feet of the pilgrims, and after the ceremony gave them liberal alms. A commemorated silver piastra was issued on the occasion of the Holy Year.

===Cardinals===

Clement X created 20 cardinals in six consistories including Pietro Francesco Orsini, who would become Pope Benedict XIII several decades later.

==Death==

On 22 July 1676, the agonies of the gout became so violent that Clement X died under them that afternoon. He was eighty-six years old and had governed the Church six years, two months, and twenty-four days. His tomb is in St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica.

==Other accomplishments==
He laboured to preserve the peace of Europe even though he was menaced by the ambition of Louis XIV of France (1643–1715), an imperious monarch over ecclesiastical matters (the struggle concerned the &quot;régale&quot;, or revenues of vacant dioceses and abbeys, which resulted in continued tension with France). He decorated the Ponte Sant&#x27;Angelo with the ten statues of angels in Carrara marble still to be seen there.

Pope Clement X had the two fountains located in St. Peter&#x27;s Square built near the tribune, where a monument has been erected to his memory. During his papacy, the Palazzo Altieri in central Rome was refurbished.

Clement X appointed Francesco Lorenzo Brancati di Lauria head of the Vatican Library.

==See also==

* Cardinals created by Clement X

==References==

* (source of the interment information)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q155956" start="0" end="14" title="Pope Clement X" label="Pope Clement X"/>
<link wikidata="Q155956" start="55" end="81" title="Pope Clement X" label="Emilio Bonaventura Altieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="99" end="114" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="132" end="144" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342546" start="358" end="372" title="Papal nobility" label="Papal nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q166109" start="470" end="488" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Camerino-San Severino Marche" label="Bishop of Camerino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3613194" start="767" end="781" title="Altieri family" label="Altieri family"/>
<link wikidata="Q838794" start="950" end="957" title="Jubilee in the Catholic Church" label="jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q155971" start="1105" end="1123" title="Pope Benedict XIII" label="Pope Benedict XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1180" end="1184" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3613194" start="1213" end="1220" title="Altieri family" label="Altieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021557" start="1234" end="1240" title="Delfin (family)" label="Delfin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="1250" end="1258" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1275" end="1290" title="Flaminio Delfin" label="Flaminio Delfin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29937213" start="1336" end="1350" title="Gentile Dolfino" label="Gentile Delfin"/>
<link wikidata="Q166109" start="1352" end="1370" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Camerino-San Severino Marche" label="Bishop of Camerino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105116" start="1397" end="1417" title="Giambattista Altieri" label="Giambattista Altieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342546" start="1468" end="1482" title="Papal nobility" label="Papal nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q327202" start="1608" end="1615" title="Colonna family" label="Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q855303" start="1625" end="1631" title="Orsini family" label="Orsini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157592" start="1819" end="1832" title="Roman College" label="Roman College"/>
<link wikidata="Q157037" start="1953" end="1959" title="nuncio" label="nuncio"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="1963" end="1969" title="Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q166109" start="2040" end="2058" title="Bishop of Camerino" label="Bishop of Camerino"/>
<link wikidata="Q124110" start="2077" end="2083" title="Loreto (AN)" label="Loreto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280" start="2095" end="2101" title="Umbria" label="Umbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131579" start="2103" end="2118" title="Pope Urban VIII" label="Pope Urban VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q13364" start="2195" end="2202" title="Ravenna" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q643" start="2219" end="2227" title="Po River" label="Po River"/>
<link wikidata="Q101266" start="2230" end="2245" title="Pope Innocent X" label="Pope Innocent X"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="2278" end="2284" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q735619" start="2396" end="2406" title="Masaniello" label="Masaniello"/>
<link wikidata="Q127254" start="2408" end="2426" title="Pope Alexander VII" label="Pope Alexander VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q155961" start="2475" end="2490" title="Pope Clement IX" label="Pope Clement IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q105200032" start="2672" end="2708" title="Congregation of Bishops and Regulars" label="Congregation of Bishops and Regulars"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="2755" end="2763" title="Cardinal (Catholicism)" label="cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q852242" start="2858" end="2872" title="College of Cardinals" label="Sacred College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132440" start="2997" end="3005" title="Papal conclave, 1669–1670" label="conclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105283" start="3177" end="3193" title="Giannicolò Conti" label="Giannicolò Conti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105088" start="3238" end="3257" title="Giacomo Rospigliosi" label="Giacomo Rospigliosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063103" start="3416" end="3421" title="papal tiara" label="tiara"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3686" end="3701" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q725440" start="3803" end="3810" title="prelate" label="prelate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254112" start="4272" end="4298" title="Francesco Maria Brancaccio" label="Francesco Maria Brancaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050944" start="4580" end="4587" title="papal coronation" label="crowned"/>
<link wikidata="Q84090" start="4642" end="4672" title="Basilica of Saint John Lateran" label="Basilica of Saint John Lateran"/>
<link wikidata="Q131340607" start="4709" end="4721" title="Observantine" label="Observantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="4730" end="4739" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q127254" start="4846" end="4859" title="Alexander VII" label="Alexander VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q155961" start="4864" end="4874" title="Clement IX" label="Clement IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q890269" start="5104" end="5119" title="cardinal-nephew" label="cardinal-nephew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348288" start="5130" end="5169" title="Paluzzo Paluzzi Altieri degli Albertoni" label="Paluzzo Paluzzi Altieri degli Albertoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q21513359" start="5369" end="5377" title="Paoluzzi" label="Paoluzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="6330" end="6335" title="Habsburg Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="6340" end="6346" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q160538" start="6616" end="6636" title="Gian Lorenzo Bernini" label="Gian Lorenzo Bernini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604478" start="6674" end="6691" title="Statue of Clement X (Bernini)" label="bust of Clement X"/>
<link wikidata="Q379914" start="6790" end="6812" title="Saint Gaetan of Thiene" label="Saint Gaetan of Thiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414924" start="6895" end="6904" title="Theatines" label="Theatines"/>
<link wikidata="Q380092" start="6908" end="6928" title="Saint Francis Borgia" label="Saint Francis Borgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q112061791" start="6937" end="6951" title="Duke of Gandia" label="Duke of Gandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5409852" start="6953" end="6970" title="Marquisate of Lombay" label="Marquis of Lombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="6987" end="6996" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="7037" end="7044" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515704" start="7065" end="7072" title="Superior General of the Society of Jesus" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q141900" start="7142" end="7161" title="Saint Philip Benizi" label="Saint Philip Benizi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="7171" end="7181" title="Florence" label="Florentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q615923" start="7215" end="7231" title="Servants of Mary" label="Servants of Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q49237" start="7312" end="7322" title="Pope Leo X" label="Pope Leo X"/>
<link wikidata="Q941886" start="7362" end="7381" title="Saint Louis Beltran" label="Saint Louis Beltran"/>
<link wikidata="Q317131" start="7425" end="7445" title="Saint Vincent Ferrer" label="Saint Vincent Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="7462" end="7471" title="Dominican order" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q244383" start="7475" end="7493" title="Saint Rose of Lima" label="Saint Rose of Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q44091" start="7517" end="7530" title="Saint Dominic" label="Saint Dominic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="7540" end="7544" title="Lima" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="7546" end="7550" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q155961" start="7585" end="7595" title="Clement IX" label="Clement IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q243122" start="7645" end="7657" title="Ferdinand III of Castile" label="Fernando III"/>
<link wikidata="Q316115" start="7787" end="7797" title="Alfonso IX" label="Alfonso IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q232323" start="7802" end="7823" title="Berengaria of Castile" label="Berengaria of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q295268" start="7837" end="7849" title="Alfonso VIII" label="Alfonso VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="7869" end="7876" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q175276" start="7881" end="7885" title="Kingdom of León" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q225390" start="7976" end="7988" title="San Fernando (disambiguation)" label="San Fernando"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="8019" end="8033" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q132086" start="8052" end="8064" title="Pope Leo III" label="Pope Leo III"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705108" start="8092" end="8109" title="Roman Martyrology" label="Roman Martyrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q51620" start="8115" end="8124" title="beatification" label="beatified"/>
<link wikidata="Q131945" start="8125" end="8136" title="Pope Pius V" label="Pope Pius V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352076" start="8148" end="8162" title="Francis Solano" label="Francis Solano"/>
<link wikidata="Q190388" start="8168" end="8185" title="John of the Cross" label="John of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="8204" end="8213" title="canonized" label="canonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q155971" start="8232" end="8250" title="Pope Benedict XIII" label="Pope Benedict XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q51619" start="8286" end="8295" title="Venerable" label="Venerable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813828" start="8314" end="8329" title="Spanish mystics" label="Spanish mystics"/>
<link wikidata="Q275907" start="8338" end="8362" title="María de Ágreda" label="María de Jesús de Ágreda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909286" start="8416" end="8433" title="Martyrs of Gorkum" label="Martyrs of Gorkum"/>
<link wikidata="Q244327" start="8466" end="8472" title="Gorinchem" label="Gorcum"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="8478" end="8489" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q33426218" start="8511" end="8518" title="Brielle" label="Brielle"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="8776" end="8786" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q339332" start="8817" end="8834" title="Premonstratensian" label="Premonstratensian"/>
<link wikidata="Q89566537" start="8843" end="8856" title="regular canon" label="regular canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="8860" end="8875" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Saint Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q187616" start="8996" end="9001" title="relic" label="relic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729117" start="9100" end="9114" title="cardinal-vicar" label="cardinal-vicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="9725" end="9740" title="excommunication" label="excommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q129967" start="9904" end="9919" title="Pope Clement XI" label="Pope Clement XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q83029" start="9986" end="10003" title="Pope Gregory XIII" label="Pope Gregory XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q868294" start="10021" end="10043" title="German College at Rome" label="German College at Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="10172" end="10179" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569593" start="10322" end="10328" title="Canada (New France)" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q866196" start="10459" end="10474" title="episcopal see" label="&amp;quot;see&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="10478" end="10484" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="10523" end="10531" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="10620" end="10633" title="British Empire" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q607145" start="10656" end="10685" title="Francois de Montmorency-Laval" label="Francois de Montmorency-Laval"/>
<link wikidata="Q186096" start="10748" end="10754" title="Tsardom of Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731" start="10756" end="10762" title="Alexis of Russia" label="Alexei"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="10804" end="10808" title="Tsar" label="Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q53454" start="10957" end="10974" title="John III Sobieski" label="John III Sobieski"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="10978" end="10984" title="Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="11012" end="11019" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3741049" start="11034" end="11047" title="Paul Menesius" label="Paul Menesius"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="12297" end="12303" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="12308" end="12314" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="12316" end="12321" title="Habsburg Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="12327" end="12333" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q157037" start="12930" end="12936" title="nuncio" label="nuncio"/>
<link wikidata="Q52937" start="13510" end="13529" title="Christina of Sweden" label="Christina of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="13639" end="13643" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618" start="13675" end="13683" title="carnival" label="carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q838794" start="13863" end="13870" title="Jubilee (Christianity)" label="jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q133087" start="13959" end="13963" title="gout" label="gout"/>
<link wikidata="Q155971" start="14304" end="14327" title="Pope Benedict XIII" label="Pietro Francesco Orsini"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="14622" end="14647" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="14766" end="14785" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="14918" end="14925" title="diocese" label="diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q160742" start="14931" end="14936" title="abbey" label="abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q870476" start="15006" end="15028" title="Ponte Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Ponte Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q40088" start="15063" end="15077" title="Carrara marble" label="Carrara marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q83425" start="15151" end="15174" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Square" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q908759" start="15271" end="15286" title="Palazzo Altieri" label="Palazzo Altieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224480" start="15341" end="15377" title="Francesco Lorenzo Brancati di Lauria" label="Francesco Lorenzo Brancati di Lauria"/>
<link wikidata="Q213678" start="15390" end="15405" title="Vatican Library" label="Vatican Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q834215" start="15424" end="15454" title="Cardinals created by Clement X" label="Cardinals created by Clement X"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24124" wikidata="Q129967" url="?curid=24124" title="Pope Clement XI">
<text>Pope Clement XI (; ; ; 23 July 1649 – 19 March 1721), born Giovanni Francesco Albani, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 23 November 1700 to his death in March 1721.

Clement XI was a patron of the arts and of science. He was also a great benefactor of the Vatican Library; his interest in archaeology is credited with saving much of Rome&#x27;s antiquity. He authorized expeditions which succeeded in rediscovering various ancient Christian writings and authorized excavations of the Roman catacombs.

==Biography==
===Early life===
Giovanni Francesco Albani was born in 1649 in Urbino to the Albani family, a distinguished family of Albanian origin in central Italy. His mother Elena Mosca (1630–1698) was a high-standing Italian of bergamasque origin, descended from the noble Mosca family of Pesaro. His father Carlo Albani (1623–1684) was a patrician. His mother descended in part from the Staccoli family, who were patricians of Urbino, in part from the Giordani, who were nobles of Pesaro. The original name of the Albani was Lazzi (Laçi) which they changed to &quot;Albani&quot; in memory of their origin. Francesco Albani funded an expedition in Albania to locate the exact settlement of his family&#x27;s origins. In the final report, the two most probable locations which were presented to him were Laç near Lezhë and Laç near Kukës, both in northern Albania.

Albani was educated at the Collegio Romano in Rome from 1660 onwards. He became a very proficient Latinist and gained a doctorate in both canon and civil law. He was one of those who frequented the academy of Queen Christina of Sweden. He would serve as a papal prelate under Pope Alexander VIII and was appointed by Pope Innocent XII as the Referendary of the Apostolic Signatura. Throughout this time, he also served as the governor of Rieti, Sabina and Orvieto.

===Cardinalate===

Pope Alexander VIII elevated him to the cardinalate in 1690 despite his protests and made him the Cardinal-Deacon of Santa Maria in Aquiro but he later opted for the &quot;Diaconia&quot; of Sant&#x27;Adriano al Foro and later, as the Cardinal-Priest, for the &quot;titulus&quot; of San Silvestro in Capite. He was then ordained to the priesthood in September 1700 and celebrated his first Mass in Rome on 6 October 1700.

==Pontificate==
===Election to the papacy===
After the death of Pope Innocent XII in 1700, a conclave was convoked to elect a successor. Albani was regarded as a fine diplomat known for his skills as a peacemaker and so was unanimously elected pope on 23 November 1700. He agreed to the election after three days of consultation.

Unusually, from the viewpoint of current practice, his election came within three months after his ordination as a priest and within two months after he celebrated his first Mass, though he had been a cardinal for ten years previously. Having accepted election after some hesitation, he was ordained a bishop on 30 November 1700 and assumed the pontifical name of &quot;Clement XI&quot;. Cardinal protodeacon Benedetto Pamphili crowned him on 8 December 1700 and he took possession of the Basilica of Saint John Lateran on 10 April 1701.

===Actions===

Soon after his accession to the pontificate, the War of the Spanish Succession broke out.

In 1703 Pope Clement XI ordered a synod of Catholic bishops in northern Albania that discussed promotion of the Council of Trent decrees within Albanian dioceses, stemming conversions among locals to Islam and securing agreement to deny communion to crypto-Catholics who outwardly professed the Muslim faith.

Despite initially holding an ambiguous neutrality in world affairs, Clement XI was later forced to name Charles, Archduke of Austria, as the King of Spain, since the imperial army had conquered much of northern Italy and was threatening Rome itself in January 1709.

By the Treaty of Utrecht that put an end to the war, the Papal States lost its suzerainty over the Farnese Duchy of Parma and Piacenza in favour of Austria, and lost Comacchio as well, a blow to the prestige of the Papal States.

In 1713 Clement XI issued the bull &quot;Unigenitus&quot; in response to the spread of the Jansenist heresy. There followed great upheaval in France, where apart from theological issues, a strong Gallican tendency persisted. The bull, which was produced with the contribution of Gregorio Selleri, a lector at the College of Saint Thomas, the future Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas &quot;Angelicum&quot;, condemned Jansenism by extracting and anathematizing as heretical 101 propositions from the works of Pasquier Quesnel, declaring them to be identical in substance with propositions already condemned in the writings of Jansenius.

The resistance of many French ecclesiastics and the refusal of the French &quot;parlements&quot; to register the bull led to controversies extending through the greater part of the 18th century. Because the local governments did not officially receive the bull, it was not, technically, in force in those areas – an example of the interference of states in religious affairs common before the 20th century.

Clement XI supported James Francis Edward Stuart, the exiled Stuart Prince of Wales, recognizing him as James III and VIII, and paid for the residence of him and his wife, Princess Maria Clementina Sobieska, Granddaughter of John III Sobieski, King of Poland-Lithuania, in Rome, the Palazzo Muti, as well as donating a summerhouse near the shores of Lake Albano. He also performed the baptism of James&#x27; son, the Jacobite Prince of Wales, Charles Edward Stuart.

During his reign as a pope the famous &quot;Illyricum Sacrum&quot; was commissioned, and today it is one of the main sources of the field of Balkan region during Middle Ages, with over 5,000 pages divided in several volumes written by the Jesuit Daniele Farlati and Dom Jacopo Coleti.

Clement XI made a concerted effort to acquire Christian manuscripts in Syriac from Egypt and other places in the Middle East, greatly expanding the Vatican Library&#x27;s collection of Syriac works.

===Other activities===
Clement XI extended the feast of Our Lady of the Rosary to the Universal Church of the Roman Rite in 1716.

====Beatifications and canonizations====

Clement XI confirmed the cultus of Ceslas Odrowaz (27 August 1712), Jakov Varingez (29 December 1700), Peregrine Laziosi (11 September 1702), John of Perugia (11 September 1704), Peter of Sassoferrato (11 September 1704), Buonfiglio Monaldi (1 December 1717), Pope Gregory X (8 July 1713) and Humbeline of Jully (1703). He formally beatified a number of individuals: Alexis Falconieri, Bartholomew degli Amidei and Benedict Dellantella, (1 December 1717) and John Francis Régis (24 May 1716). He also beatified the sisters Theresa (20 May 1705) and Sancha (10 May 1705).

He canonized Andrew Avellino, Catherine of Bologna, Felix of Cantalice and Pope Pius V on 22 May 1712, Humility on 27 January 1720, Stephen of Obazine in 1701 and Boniface of Lausanne in 1702.

Clement XI, on 8 February 1720, named Saint Anselm of Canterbury as a Doctor of the Church, providing him the supplementary titles of &quot;Doctor magnificus&quot; (&quot;Magnificent Doctor&quot;) and &quot;Doctor Marianus&quot; (&quot;Marian Doctor&quot;).

====Consistories====

Clement XI created a total of 70 cardinals in 15 consistories. Notably, two cardinals of his own creation were Michelangelo dei Conti, who became his immediate successor, Pope Innocent XIII, and Lorenzo Corsini, who later became Pope Clement XII. The pope also nominated eight cardinals &quot;in pectore&quot;, later publishing their names which validated their appointments as cardinals.

During his pontificate, Gabriele Filippucci resigned his cardinalate which the pope accepted on 7 June 1706. Clement XI also accepted the resignation of Francesco Maria de&#x27; Medici from the cardinalate on 19 June 1709.

===Chinese Rites controversies===

Another important decision of Clement XI was in regard to the Chinese Rites controversy: the Jesuit missionaries were forbidden to take part in honors paid to Confucius or the ancestors of the Emperors of China, which Clement XI identified as &quot;idolatrous and barbaric&quot;, and to accommodate Christian language to pagan ideas under plea of conciliating the heathen.

==Death and burial==

Clement XI died in Rome on 19 March 1721 at 12:45pm and was buried in the pavement of Saint Peter&#x27;s Basilica rather than in an ornate tomb like those of his predecessors.

On March 10, Clement XI had a meeting at about 11:00am with the Bishop of Sisteron Pierre François Lafitau. When the pope met with the bishop, he said that his time was drawing to a close and that he would soon die, despite protests to the contrary by Lafitau. On 14 March, Clement XI took ill while Lafitau was trying to get the pope&#x27;s nephew to persuade the pope to name the French Chief minister Guillaume Dubois to the cardinalate. However, Clement XI was in a state of delirium and was not responsive to his pleas. On 16 March, Quadragesima Sunday, the pope did not participate in the services, however, celebrated Mass in his private chapel at the Quirinal Palace. He took medication that day but experienced pains in his thorax and had trouble breathing from the cold air in his rooms.

The following day, Clement XI celebrated Mass in his private chapel before meeting various prelates which included the Archbishop of Ravenna Geronimo Crispi. However, at around noon, he was suddenly struck with an extraordinary chill which was accompanied by a very strong fever that immediately forced him to his bed, with the pope declining a meal that evening. His pulse was exceptionally slow and he even coughed up a thick liquid that was streaked with blood. Unable to sleep that night, his fever abated somewhat. But the following day saw his fever return much more violently, and he had an irregular pulse. The sputum was foamy, once more with blood, indicating that there was something wrong with his lungs, causing his doctors to realize that his condition would more than likely prove fatal. Clement XI made his confession and the profession of faith before receiving Holy Communion at 8:00pm. James Francis Edward Stuart, the &quot;Pretender&quot;, tried to see the dying pope, however he was denied on the grounds of the dangerous state of the pope&#x27;s condition. That night, the papal sacristan Niccolo Agostino degli Abbati Olivieri, Bishop of Porfirio, administered the Extreme Unction.

On 19 March, the fever returned violently, and Clement XI slowly lost his ability to speak as his eyes clouded over and his respiration slowly diminished as the pope died just after midday.

===Contemporary influence===
In his book &quot;Journal of a Soul&quot;, while he was preparing for the Second Vatican Council, Pope John XXIII resolved to pray the and highly recommended it to others.

==Construction activity and patronage==

Pope Clement XI had a famous sundial added in the church of Santa Maria degli Angeli e dei Martiri and had an obelisk erected in the Piazza della Rotonda in front of the Pantheon, and a port built on the Tiber River, the beautiful Porto di Ripetta, demolished at the end of the 19th century.

He established a committee, overseen by his favourite artists, Carlo Maratta and Carlo Fontana, to commission statuary of the apostles to complete the decoration of Basilica of Saint John Lateran. He also founded an academy of painting and sculpture on the Campidoglio.

He also enriched the Vatican Library with numerous Oriental codices and lent his patronage to the first archaeological excavations in the Roman catacombs. In his native Urbino he restored numerous edifices and founded a public library.

==See also==
*Cardinals created by Clement XI
*List of popes

==Notes==
==Sources==
* 
* 
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q129967" start="0" end="15" title="Pope Clement XI" label="Pope Clement XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q129967" start="59" end="84" title="Pope Clement XI" label="Giovanni Francesco Albani"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="102" end="117" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="135" end="147" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q213678" start="289" end="304" title="Vatican Library" label="Vatican Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q741051" start="517" end="532" title="Catacombs of Rome" label="Roman catacombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759" start="612" end="618" title="Urbino" label="Urbino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605448" start="626" end="639" title="Albani family" label="Albani family"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="667" end="675" title="Albanians" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q628" start="767" end="778" title="Bergamo" label="bergamasque"/>
<link wikidata="Q13134" start="828" end="834" title="Pesaro" label="Pesaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759" start="967" end="973" title="Urbino" label="Urbino"/>
<link wikidata="Q18768" start="1342" end="1345" title="Laç" label="Laç"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157592" start="1431" end="1446" title="Collegio Romano" label="Collegio Romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1450" end="1454" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q52937" start="1613" end="1638" title="Queen Christina of Sweden" label="Queen Christina of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095504" start="1660" end="1673" title="Prelate of Honour of His Holiness" label="papal prelate"/>
<link wikidata="Q101294" start="1680" end="1699" title="Pope Alexander VIII" label="Pope Alexander VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q132708" start="1721" end="1738" title="Pope Innocent XII" label="Pope Innocent XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q465288" start="1746" end="1757" title="Referendary" label="Referendary"/>
<link wikidata="Q620145" start="1765" end="1784" title="Apostolic Signatura" label="Apostolic Signatura"/>
<link wikidata="Q13396" start="1842" end="1847" title="Rieti" label="Rieti"/>
<link wikidata="Q779478" start="1849" end="1855" title="Sabina (region)" label="Sabina"/>
<link wikidata="Q541" start="1860" end="1867" title="Orvieto" label="Orvieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q101294" start="1889" end="1908" title="Pope Alexander VIII" label="Pope Alexander VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552500" start="2006" end="2027" title="Santa Maria in Aquiro" label="Santa Maria in Aquiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3672239" start="2079" end="2104" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Adriano al Foro" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Adriano al Foro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625428" start="2171" end="2194" title="San Silvestro in Capite" label="San Silvestro in Capite"/>
<link wikidata="Q777310" start="3051" end="3069" title="Benedetto Pamphili" label="Benedetto Pamphili"/>
<link wikidata="Q84090" start="3131" end="3161" title="Basilica of Saint John Lateran" label="Basilica of Saint John Lateran"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="3245" end="3274" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851991" start="3311" end="3326" title="Arbëni Council" label="ordered a synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="3399" end="3415" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3450" end="3492" title="Islamization of Albania#Northern Albania" label="stemming conversions among locals to Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q150665" start="3701" end="3729" title="Charles VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles, Archduke of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="3738" end="3751" title="King of Spain" label="King of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721681" start="3763" end="3776" title="Imperial Army of the Holy Roman Emperor" label="imperial army"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="3871" end="3888" title="Treaty of Utrecht" label="Treaty of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="3921" end="3933" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q463573" start="3943" end="3953" title="suzerainty" label="suzerainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q859466" start="3963" end="3970" title="House of Farnese" label="Farnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q165040" start="3971" end="3998" title="Duchy of Parma and Piacenza" label="Duchy of Parma and Piacenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="4012" end="4019" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q95097" start="4030" end="4039" title="Comacchio" label="Comacchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="4124" end="4128" title="papal bull" label="bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670578" start="4135" end="4145" title="Unigenitus" label="Unigenitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287" start="4185" end="4194" title="Jansenism" label="Jansenist"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="4236" end="4242" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q740931" start="4290" end="4298" title="Gallicanism" label="Gallican"/>
<link wikidata="Q246887" start="4443" end="4488" title="Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas" label="Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="4568" end="4577" title="heresy" label="heretical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390575" start="4613" end="4629" title="Pasquier Quesnel" label="Pasquier Quesnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q318943" start="4730" end="4739" title="Cornelius Jansen" label="Jansenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936090" start="4822" end="4831" title="parlement" label="parlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q211681" start="5171" end="5198" title="James Francis Edward Stuart" label="James Francis Edward Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q265880" start="5331" end="5356" title="Maria Clementina Sobieska" label="Maria Clementina Sobieska"/>
<link wikidata="Q53454" start="5375" end="5392" title="John III Sobieski" label="John III Sobieski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360903" start="5433" end="5445" title="Palazzo Muti" label="Palazzo Muti"/>
<link wikidata="Q849448" start="5500" end="5511" title="Lake Albano" label="Lake Albano"/>
<link wikidata="Q312581" start="5593" end="5614" title="Charles Edward Stuart" label="Charles Edward Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796489" start="5661" end="5677" title="Illyricum sacrum" label="Illyricum Sacrum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5758" end="5790" title="Balkans#Early modern period" label="Balkan region during Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="5856" end="5862" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q797181" start="5863" end="5878" title="Daniele Farlati" label="Daniele Farlati"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5887" end="5900" title="Jacopo Coleti" label="Jacopo Coleti"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="5974" end="5980" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q213678" start="6051" end="6066" title="Vatican Library" label="Vatican Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q54875" start="6159" end="6181" title="Our Lady of the Rosary" label="Our Lady of the Rosary"/>
<link wikidata="Q332882" start="6311" end="6325" title="Ceslas Odrowaz" label="Ceslas Odrowaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q348558" start="6344" end="6358" title="Jakov Varingez" label="Jakov Varingez"/>
<link wikidata="Q141838" start="6379" end="6396" title="Peregrine Laziosi" label="Peregrine Laziosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265819" start="6418" end="6476" title="John of Perugia and Peter of Sassoferrato" label="John of Perugia (11 September 1704), Peter of Sassoferrato"/>
<link wikidata="Q161740" start="6536" end="6550" title="Pope Gregory X" label="Pope Gregory X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636776" start="6569" end="6587" title="Humbeline of Jully" label="Humbeline of Jully"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057218" start="6643" end="6660" title="Alexis Falconieri" label="Alexis Falconieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q918364" start="6735" end="6753" title="John Francis Regis" label="John Francis Régis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594188" start="6799" end="6806" title="Theresa of Portugal, Queen of León" label="Theresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460880" start="6825" end="6831" title="Sancha of Portugal" label="Sancha"/>
<link wikidata="Q495892" start="6861" end="6876" title="Andrew Avellino" label="Andrew Avellino"/>
<link wikidata="Q455252" start="6878" end="6898" title="Catherine of Bologna" label="Catherine of Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q982691" start="6900" end="6918" title="Felix of Cantalice" label="Felix of Cantalice"/>
<link wikidata="Q131945" start="6923" end="6934" title="Pope Pius V" label="Pope Pius V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171057" start="6951" end="6959" title="Saint Humility" label="Humility"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065847" start="6980" end="6998" title="Stephen of Obazine" label="Stephen of Obazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q892522" start="7011" end="7031" title="Boniface of Lausanne" label="Boniface of Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q43939" start="7080" end="7106" title="Anselm of Canterbury" label="Saint Anselm of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q192499" start="7112" end="7132" title="Doctor of the Church" label="Doctor of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q133100" start="7494" end="7512" title="Pope Innocent XIII" label="Pope Innocent XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q133108" start="7552" end="7568" title="Pope Clement XII" label="Pope Clement XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319909" start="7616" end="7626" title="in pectore" label="in pectore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347454" start="7866" end="7897" title="Francesco Maria de&amp;#x27; Medici, Duke of Rovere and Montefeltro" label="Francesco Maria de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q525545" start="8034" end="8059" title="Chinese Rites controversy" label="Chinese Rites controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="8065" end="8071" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604" start="8131" end="8140" title="Confucius" label="Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="8177" end="8182" title="Manchu China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="8454" end="8481" title="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q876593" start="8609" end="8627" title="Ancient Diocese of Sisteron" label="Bishop of Sisteron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403515" start="8927" end="8948" title="Chief minister of France" label="French Chief minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q542800" start="8949" end="8965" title="Guillaume Dubois" label="Guillaume Dubois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609861" start="9083" end="9102" title="Quadragesima Sunday" label="Quadragesima Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q223079" start="9204" end="9219" title="Quirinal Palace" label="Quirinal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q440842" start="9463" end="9484" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Ravenna-Cervia" label="Archbishop of Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="9617" end="9622" title="fever" label="fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q259346" start="9963" end="9969" title="sputum" label="sputum"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="10223" end="10237" title="Eucharist" label="Holy Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q211681" start="10249" end="10276" title="James Francis Edward Stuart" label="James Francis Edward Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365552" start="10446" end="10455" title="sacristan" label="sacristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230328" start="10506" end="10514" title="Porphyreon" label="Porfirio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146443" start="10533" end="10548" title="Extreme Unction" label="Extreme Unction"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="10845" end="10867" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q23873" start="10869" end="10884" title="Pope John XXIII" label="Pope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q80793" start="11014" end="11021" title="sundial" label="sundial"/>
<link wikidata="Q569253" start="11045" end="11083" title="Santa Maria degli Angeli e dei Martiri" label="Santa Maria degli Angeli e dei Martiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457157" start="11118" end="11138" title="Piazza della Rotonda" label="Piazza della Rotonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q99309" start="11155" end="11163" title="Pantheon, Rome" label="Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="11189" end="11200" title="Tiber River" label="Tiber River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232177" start="11216" end="11232" title="Porto di Ripetta" label="Porto di Ripetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q538998" start="11341" end="11354" title="Carlo Maratta" label="Carlo Maratta"/>
<link wikidata="Q704356" start="11359" end="11372" title="Carlo Fontana" label="Carlo Fontana"/>
<link wikidata="Q84090" start="11443" end="11473" title="Basilica of Saint John Lateran" label="Basilica of Saint John Lateran"/>
<link wikidata="Q34925" start="11535" end="11546" title="Campidoglio" label="Campidoglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q213678" start="11570" end="11585" title="Vatican Library" label="Vatican Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q172896" start="11693" end="11701" title="catacomb" label="catacomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681288" start="11800" end="11831" title="Cardinals created by Clement XI" label="Cardinals created by Clement XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q40483" start="11833" end="11846" title="List of popes" label="List of popes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24126" wikidata="Q218802" url="?curid=24126" title="Pan flute">
<text>A pan flute (also known as panpipes or syrinx) is a musical instrument based on the principle of the closed tube, consisting of multiple pipes of gradually increasing length (and occasionally girth). Multiple varieties of pan flutes have been popular as folk instruments. The pipes are typically made from bamboo, giant cane, or local reeds. Other materials include wood, plastic, metal, and clay.

== Name ==

The pan flute is named after Pan, the Greek god of nature and shepherds, often depicted with such an instrument.
 The pan flute has become widely associated with the character Peter Pan created by Sir James Matthew Barrie, whose name was inspired by the god Pan.

In Greek mythology, Syrinx (Σύριγξ) was a forest nymph. In her attempt to escape the affection of god Pan (a creature half goat and half man), she was transformed into a water-reed or calamos (cane-reed). Then, Pan cut several reeds, placed them in parallel one next to the other, and bound them together to make a melodic musical instrument. Ancient Greeks called this instrument Syrinx, in honour of the Muse, and Pandean, or Pan-pipes and Pan-flute, after Pan. (Syrinx was a different musical instrument from Aulos. Aulos is often translated as &quot;flute&quot; or &quot;double flute&quot; in English).

The Syrinx, a predominantly pastoral instrument for the Greeks, was adopted by the Etruscans who played it at their festivals and banquets; the Etruscans called it fistula. The Romans adopted the Syrinx from the Greeks and the Etruscans, and they too played it at their banquets, festivals, as well as in religious and funeral processions.

== Structure ==

The pan flute&#x27;s tubes are stopped at one end, at which the standing wave is reflected giving a note an octave lower than that produced by an open pipe of equal length. In the traditional South American style, pipes are fine-tuned to correct pitch by placing small pebbles or dry corn kernels into the bottom of the pipes. Contemporary makers of curved Romanian-style panpipes use wax (commonly beeswax) to tune new instruments. Special tools are used to place or remove the wax. Corks and rubber stoppers are also used, and are easier to quickly tune pipes.

=== Acoustics ===
The pan flute is an end-blown flute. Sound is produced by the vibration of an air-stream blowing across an open hole at the end of a resonating tube. The length of the tube determines the fundamental frequency. An overblown harmonic register is near a 12th above the fundamental in cylindrical tubes, but can approach an octave jump (8th) if a decreasing taper is used.

According to the Fundamental Principle for pan flutes, the frequency and the length of the tube are inversely proportional. Every time the pitch goes up one octave, the frequency doubles. Because there are 12 notes in a chromatic scale or a full octave, every half-step in a chromatic scale is multiplied by the 12th root of 2 to get the note next to it. By this, it is possible to calculate the length of any pipe, given that one knows the length of any one pipe. The formula for calculating the length of a pan flute pipe is L = (c / f) / 4 (the &quot;theoretical length&quot; L equals the speed of sound c = 343 m/s, divided by the desired frequency in hertz f, that quantity divided by 4; this simplifies and rearranges to: Length of pipe (in centimeters) × Frequency (in hertz) = 8575). Because of a property of compression within the tube, the length must be a little shorter to correct flat pitch. The extra length is helpful for a maker, who can use a cork or plug at the bottom to adjust the pitch. Some instruments use wax or pellets to tune the fundamental pitch of each tube. A tube that has a diameter 1/10 of its length yields a typical tone colour (see Timbre). An inner diameter range between 1/7 and 1/14 of the length L is acceptable. A narrow tube will sound &quot;reedy&quot;, while a wide one will sound &quot;flutey&quot;. A more exact method is to multiply the bore diameter by 0.82 and subtract this value from the tube length. This compensates for internal compression slowing frequency and the lips partially covering the voicing. Only tiny adjustments will be needed then to adjust fundamental pitch for air density and temperature.

== Playing ==

The pan flute is played by blowing horizontally across an open end against the sharp inner edge of the pipes. Each pipe is tuned to a keynote, called the fundamental frequency. By overblowing, that is, increasing the pressure of breath and tension of lips, odd harmonics (notes whose frequencies are odd-number multiples of the fundamental), near a 12th in cylindrical tubes, may also be produced. The Romanian pan flute has the pipes arranged in a curved array, solidly glued together, unlike Andean versions, which are usually tied together. Thus, the player can easily reach all the notes by simply swiveling the head, or by moving the instrument with the hands. These instruments can also play all the sharps and flats, with a special technique of both tilting the pipes and jaw movement, thus reducing the size of the pipe&#x27;s opening and producing a change in pitch. A very advanced player can play any scale and in any key. There are two styles of vibrato possible, hand vibrato and breath vibrato. In hand vibrato, the pitch is shifted up and down, like a vocal vibrato. The player gently moves one end of the pan flute (usually the high end) somewhat similar to violin vibrato. Breath, or throat vibrato, which is more accurately described as a tremolo or volume swell, is the same technique used by players of the flute and other woodwinds by use of the player&#x27;s diaphragm, or throat muscles.

== Variations ==
The curved-style pan flute was popularized by the Romanian musician Gheorghe Zamfir, who toured extensively and recorded many albums of pan flute music in the 1970s, and by several other artists who began recording at the same time. Today there are thousands of devoted players across Europe, Asia and the Americas. Both the curved and traditional South American variations are also very popular in Peruvian traditional groups and other Andean music.

In Laos and Thailand, there is a cylindrical version called the wot, used in folk music from the Isaan region of the country. The player alters notes by rotating the instrument with the hands, rather than by head movements.

Some new designs are beginning to appear, as designers and makers take advantage of computer-aided design and 3D additive manufacturing, to move past the limitations of traditional tool and materials. These new pan flutes address some long-standing issues to make it an easier instrument to learn and to play accurately.

=== Types ===
* Paixiao 
* Wot
* Nai (Romania, Moldova).
* Siku
* Kuvytsi, Svyryli, Rebro, Nai (Ukraine)
* A small panflute called &quot;chiflo&quot; or &quot;xipro&quot; was used by Galician mobile knife sharpeners in Portugal, Spain, Argentina and Mexico, who blew quick, loud scales to announce their arrival in the neighborhood. They were traditionally bored from a block of wood, but more recently have been cast in plastic.
* The firlinfeu is a popular folk instrument in Brianza, the province of Monza and the southern sides of provinces of Lecco and Como (Italy).
* Quills, an African-American instrument known primarily through the recordings of Henry Thomas in the 1920s, and the Delta blues musician Sid Hemphill. More recently, Dom Flemons has revived the playing of the quills.
* Soinari
* Larchemi

== Notable pan flute musicians ==
* Ulrich Herkenhoff (German)
* Matthijs Koene (Dutch)
* Gheorghe Zamfir (Romanian)
*Leo Rojas (Ecuadorian)
*Henry &quot;Ragtime Texas&quot; Thomas (American, played a variant known as &quot;quills&quot;)
*Dana Dragomir (Romanian/Swedish)
*Ian Anderson from Jethro Tull (British)
==See also==
* List of flautists
* Fife and drum blues
* Siku (instrument)

==References==

* panpipe. (n.d.). The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition. Retrieved July 17, 2008, from Dictionary.com website: Definition of panpipe | Dictionary.com

== External links ==
* A Worldwide History of the Pan Flute
* Spirit Flute
* Information on quills
* info from Henan China</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q218802" start="2" end="11" title="Pan flute" label="pan flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q218802" start="27" end="35" title="Pan flute" label="panpipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q218802" start="39" end="45" title="Pan flute" label="syrinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q34379" start="52" end="70" title="musical instrument" label="musical instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558427" start="101" end="112" title="closed tube" label="closed tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q13135638" start="254" end="270" title="folk instruments" label="folk instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="306" end="312" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q161114" start="314" end="324" title="Arundo donax" label="giant cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q132582" start="440" end="443" title="Pan (god)" label="Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q516588" start="449" end="458" title="List of Greek deities" label="Greek god"/>
<link wikidata="Q107190" start="587" end="596" title="Peter Pan" label="Peter Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q81796" start="608" end="632" title="Sir James Matthew Barrie" label="Sir James Matthew Barrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="678" end="693" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q846129" start="695" end="701" title="Syrinx" label="Syrinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q373916" start="724" end="729" title="nymph" label="nymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q324299" start="1187" end="1192" title="Aulos" label="Aulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="1366" end="1375" title="Etruscans" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651392" start="1460" end="1466" title="Roman people" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q143739" start="2040" end="2047" title="beeswax" label="beeswax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879241" start="2243" end="2258" title="end-blown flute" label="end-blown flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="2751" end="2757" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q202021" start="2814" end="2829" title="chromatic scale" label="chromatic scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q124003" start="3186" end="3200" title="speed of sound" label="speed of sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="3250" end="3255" title="hertz" label="hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q174728" start="3341" end="3352" title="centimeters" label="centimeters"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="3356" end="3365" title="Frequency" label="Frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="3370" end="3375" title="hertz" label="hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q176501" start="3762" end="3768" title="Timbre" label="Timbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q331383" start="4450" end="4461" title="overblowing" label="overblowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q263961" start="4527" end="4540" title="Harmonic series (music)" label="odd harmonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064632" start="5527" end="5534" title="tremolo" label="tremolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="6098" end="6102" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q492096" start="6136" end="6148" title="Andean music" label="Andean music"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="6154" end="6158" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="6163" end="6171" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q83489" start="6215" end="6218" title="wot (musical instrument)" label="wot"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="6248" end="6253" title="Isaan" label="Isaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134958" start="6714" end="6721" title="Paixiao" label="Paixiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q83489" start="6725" end="6728" title="wot (musical instrument)" label="Wot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414230" start="6731" end="6734" title="Nai (pan flute)" label="Nai"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="6736" end="6743" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="6745" end="6752" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q905244" start="6757" end="6761" title="Siku (instrument)" label="Siku"/>
<link wikidata="Q4244288" start="6764" end="6771" title="Kuvytsi" label="Kuvytsi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6773" end="6780" title="Svyryli" label="Svyryli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6782" end="6787" title="Rebro" label="Rebro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414230" start="6789" end="6792" title="Nai (pan flute)" label="Nai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6835" end="6841" title="chiflo" label="chiflo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6857" end="6862" title="xipro" label="xipro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908" start="6881" end="6888" title="Galicia (Spain)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7134" end="7143" title="firlinfeu" label="firlinfeu"/>
<link wikidata="Q652729" start="7176" end="7183" title="Brianza" label="Brianza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252" start="7201" end="7206" title="Monza" label="Monza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6237" start="7246" end="7251" title="Lecco" label="Lecco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308" start="7256" end="7260" title="Como" label="Como"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="7262" end="7267" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607308" start="7353" end="7365" title="Henry Thomas (blues musician)" label="Henry Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127539" start="7388" end="7399" title="Delta blues" label="Delta blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q23063230" start="7409" end="7421" title="Sid Hemphill" label="Sid Hemphill"/>
<link wikidata="Q61875353" start="7438" end="7449" title="Dom Flemons" label="Dom Flemons"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161788" start="7491" end="7498" title="Soinari" label="Soinari"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161788" start="7501" end="7509" title="Larchemi" label="Larchemi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7547" end="7564" title="Ulrich Herkenhoff" label="Ulrich Herkenhoff"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7576" end="7590" title=":nl:Matthijs_Koene" label="Matthijs Koene"/>
<link wikidata="Q328800" start="7601" end="7616" title="Gheorghe Zamfir" label="Gheorghe Zamfir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628336" start="7629" end="7638" title="Leo Rojas" label="Leo Rojas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607308" start="7653" end="7691" title="Henry Thomas (blues musician)" label="Henry &amp;quot;Ragtime Texas&amp;quot; Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4945183" start="7750" end="7763" title="Dana Dragomir" label="Dana Dragomir"/>
<link wikidata="Q216100" start="7784" end="7796" title="Ian Anderson" label="Ian Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140183" start="7839" end="7856" title="List of flautists" label="List of flautists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447390" start="7859" end="7878" title="Fife and drum blues" label="Fife and drum blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q905244" start="7881" end="7898" title="Siku (instrument)" label="Siku (instrument)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24130" wikidata="Q837718" url="?curid=24130" title="Energy storage">
<text>Energy storage is the capture of energy produced at one time for use at a later time to reduce imbalances between energy demand and energy production. A device that stores energy is generally called an accumulator or battery. Energy comes in multiple forms including radiation, chemical, gravitational potential, electrical potential, electricity, elevated temperature, latent heat and kinetic. Energy storage involves converting energy from forms that are difficult to store to more conveniently or economically storable forms.

Some technologies provide short-term energy storage, while others can endure for much longer. Bulk energy storage is currently dominated by hydroelectric dams, both conventional as well as pumped. Grid energy storage is a collection of methods used for energy storage on a large scale within an electrical power grid.

Common examples of energy storage are the rechargeable battery, which stores chemical energy readily convertible to electricity to operate a mobile phone; the hydroelectric dam, which stores energy in a reservoir as gravitational potential energy; and ice storage tanks, which store ice frozen by cheaper energy at night to meet peak daytime demand for cooling. Fossil fuels such as coal and gasoline store ancient energy derived from sunlight by organisms that later died, became buried and over time were then converted into these fuels. Food (which is made by the same process as fossil fuels) is a form of energy stored in chemical form.
== History ==
In the 20th century grid, electrical power was largely generated by burning fossil fuel. When less power was required, less fuel was burned. Hydropower, a mechanical energy storage method, is the most widely adopted mechanical energy storage, and has been in use for centuries. Large hydropower dams have been energy storage sites for more than one hundred years. Concerns with air pollution, energy imports, and global warming have spawned the growth of renewable energy such as solar and wind power. Wind power is uncontrolled and may be generating at a time when no additional power is needed. Solar power varies with cloud cover and at best is only available during daylight hours, while demand often peaks after sunset (&quot;see&quot; duck curve). Interest in storing power from these intermittent sources grows as the renewable energy industry begins to generate a larger fraction of overall energy consumption. In 2023 BloombergNEF forecast total energy storage deployments to grow at a compound annual growth rate of 27 percent through 2030.

Off grid electrical use was a niche market in the 20th century, but in the 21st century, it has expanded. Portable devices are in use all over the world. Solar panels are now common in the rural settings worldwide. Access to electricity is now a question of economics and financial viability, and not solely on technical aspects. Electric vehicles are gradually replacing combustion-engine vehicles. However, powering long-distance transportation without burning fuel remains in development.

== Methods ==
=== Outline ===
The following list includes a variety of types of energy storage:
* Fossil fuel storage
* Mechanical
** Spring
** Compressed-air energy storage (CAES)
** Fireless locomotive
** Flywheel energy storage
** Solid mass gravitational

** Hydraulic accumulator
** Pumped-storage hydroelectricity (a.k.a. pumped hydroelectric storage, PHS, or pumped storage hydropower, PSH)
** Thermal expansion
* Electrical, electromagnetic
** Capacitor
** Supercapacitor
** Superconducting magnetic energy storage (SMES, also superconducting storage coil)
* Biological
** Glycogen
** Starch
* Electrochemical (battery energy storage system, BESS)
** Flow battery
** Rechargeable battery
** UltraBattery
* Thermal
** Brick storage heater
** Cryogenic energy storage, liquid-air energy storage (LAES)
** Liquid nitrogen engine
** Eutectic system
** Ice storage air conditioning
** Molten salt storage
** Phase-change material
** Seasonal thermal energy storage
** Solar pond
** Steam accumulator
** Thermal energy storage (general)
* Chemical
** Biofuels
** Hydrated salts
** Hydrogen peroxide
** Power-to-gas (methane, hydrogen storage, oxyhydrogen)
=== Mechanical ===

Energy can be stored in water pumped to a higher elevation using pumped storage methods or by moving solid matter to higher locations (gravity batteries). 
Other commercial mechanical methods include compressing air and flywheels that convert electric energy into internal energy or kinetic energy and then back again when electrical demand peaks.

==== Hydroelectricity ====

Hydroelectric dams with reservoirs can be operated to provide electricity at times of peak demand. 
Water is stored in the reservoir during periods of low demand and released when demand is high. 
The net effect is similar to pumped storage, but without the pumping loss.

While a hydroelectric dam does not directly store energy from other generating units, it behaves equivalently by lowering output in periods of excess electricity from other sources. 
In this mode, dams are one of the most efficient forms of energy storage, because only the timing of its generation changes. 
Hydroelectric turbines have a start-up time on the order of a few minutes.

==== Pumped hydro ====

Worldwide, pumped-storage hydroelectricity (PSH) is the largest-capacity form of active grid energy storage available, and, as of March 2012, the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) reports that PSH accounts for more than 99% of bulk storage capacity worldwide, representing around 127,000 MW. PSH energy efficiency varies in practice between 70% and 80%, with claims of up to 87%.

At times of low electrical demand, excess generation capacity is used to pump water from a lower source into a higher reservoir. When demand grows, water is released back into a lower reservoir (or waterway or body of water) through a turbine, generating electricity. Reversible turbine-generator assemblies act as both a pump and turbine (usually a Francis turbine design). Nearly all facilities use the height difference between two water bodies. Pure pumped-storage plants shift the water between reservoirs, while the &quot;pump-back&quot; approach is a combination of pumped storage and conventional hydroelectric plants that use natural stream-flow.

==== Compressed air ====

Compressed-air energy storage (CAES) uses surplus energy to compress air for subsequent electricity generation. Small-scale systems have long been used in such applications as propulsion of mine locomotives. The compressed air is stored in an underground reservoir, such as a salt dome.

Compressed-air energy storage (CAES) plants can bridge the gap between production volatility and load. CAES storage addresses the energy needs of consumers by effectively providing readily available energy to meet demand. Renewable energy sources like wind and solar energy vary. So at times when they provide little power, they need to be supplemented with other forms of energy to meet energy demand. Compressed-air energy storage plants can take in the surplus energy output of renewable energy sources during times of energy over-production. This stored energy can be used at a later time when demand for electricity increases or energy resource availability decreases.

Compression of air creates heat; the air is warmer after compression. Expansion requires heat. If no extra heat is added, the air will be much colder after expansion. If the heat generated during compression can be stored and used during expansion, efficiency improves considerably. A CAES system can deal with the heat in three ways. Air storage can be adiabatic, diabatic, or isothermal. Another approach uses compressed air to power vehicles.

==== Flywheel ====


Flywheel energy storage (FES) works by accelerating a rotor (a flywheel) to a very high speed, holding energy as rotational energy. When energy is added the rotational speed of the flywheel increases, and when energy is extracted, the speed declines, due to conservation of energy.

Most FES systems use electricity to accelerate and decelerate the flywheel, but devices that directly use mechanical energy are under consideration.

FES systems have rotors made of high strength carbon-fiber composites, suspended by magnetic bearings and spinning at speeds from 20,000 to over 50,000 revolutions per minute (rpm) in a vacuum enclosure. Such flywheels can reach maximum speed (&quot;charge&quot;) in a matter of minutes. The flywheel system is connected to a combination electric motor/generator.

FES systems have relatively long lifetimes (lasting decades with little or no maintenance; full-cycle lifetimes quoted for flywheels range from in excess of 105, up to 107, cycles of use), high specific energy (100–130 W·h/kg, or 360–500 kJ/kg) and power density.

==== Solid mass gravitational ====

Changing the altitude of solid masses can store or release energy via an elevating system driven by an electric motor/generator. Studies suggest energy can begin to be released with as little as 1 second warning, making the method a useful supplemental feed into an electricity grid to balance load surges.

Efficiencies can be as high as 85% recovery of stored energy.

This can be achieved by siting the masses inside old vertical mine shafts or in specially constructed towers where the heavy weights are winched up to store energy and allowed a controlled descent to release it. At 2020 a prototype vertical store is being built in Edinburgh, Scotland

Potential energy storage or gravity energy storage was under active development in 2013 in association with the California Independent System Operator. It examined the movement of earth-filled hopper rail cars driven by electric locomotives from lower to higher elevations.

Other proposed methods include:-

* using rails, cranes, or elevators to move weights up and down;
* using high-altitude solar-powered balloon platforms supporting winches to raise and lower solid masses slung underneath them, 
* using winches supported by an ocean barge to take advantage of a 4 km (13,000 ft) elevation difference between the sea surface and the seabed,

=== Thermal ===
Thermal energy storage (TES) is the temporary storage or removal of heat.

==== Sensible heat thermal ====
Sensible heat storage take advantage of sensible heat in a material to store energy.

Seasonal thermal energy storage (STES) allows heat or cold to be used months after it was collected from waste energy or natural sources. The material can be stored in contained aquifers, clusters of boreholes in geological substrates such as sand or crystalline bedrock, in lined pits filled with gravel and water, or water-filled mines. Seasonal thermal energy storage (STES) projects often have paybacks in four to six years. An example is Drake Landing Solar Community in Canada, for which 97% of the year-round heat is provided by solar-thermal collectors on garage roofs, enabled by a borehole thermal energy store (BTES). In Braedstrup, Denmark, the community&#x27;s solar district heating system also uses STES, at a temperature of . A heat pump, which runs only while surplus wind power is available. It is used to raise the temperature to for distribution. When wind energy is not available, a gas-fired boiler is used. Twenty percent of Braedstrup&#x27;s heat is solar.

==== Latent heat thermal (LHTES) ====
Latent heat thermal energy storage systems work by transferring heat to or from a material to change its phase. A phase-change is the melting, solidifying, vaporizing or liquifying. Such a material is called a phase change material (PCM). Materials used in LHTESs often have a high latent heat so that at their specific temperature, the phase change absorbs a large amount of energy, much more than sensible heat.

A steam accumulator is a type of LHTES where the phase change is between liquid and gas and uses the latent heat of vaporization of water. Ice storage air conditioning systems use off-peak electricity to store cold by freezing water into ice. The stored cold in ice releases during melting process and can be used for cooling at peak hours.

==== Cryogenic thermal energy storage ====
Air can be liquefied by cooling using electricity and stored as a cryogen with existing technologies. The liquid air can then be expanded through a turbine and the energy recovered as electricity. The system was demonstrated at a pilot plant in the UK in 2012.
In 2019, Highview announced plans to build a 50 MW in the North of England and northern Vermont, with the proposed facility able to store five to eight hours of energy, for a 250–400 MWh storage capacity.

==== Carnot battery ====
Electrical energy can be stored thermally by resistive heating or heat pumps, and the stored heat can be converted back to electricity via Rankine cycle or Brayton cycle. This technology has been studied to retrofit coal-fired power plants into fossil-fuel free generation systems. Coal-fired boilers are replaced by high-temperature heat storage charged by excess electricity from renewable energy sources. In 2020, German Aerospace Center started to construct the world&#x27;s first large-scale Carnot battery system, which has 1,000  MWh storage capacity.

=== Electrochemical ===

==== Rechargeable battery ====

A rechargeable battery comprises one or more electrochemical cells. It is known as a &#x27;secondary cell&#x27; because its electrochemical reactions are electrically reversible. Rechargeable batteries come in many shapes and sizes, ranging from button cells to megawatt grid systems.

Rechargeable batteries have lower total cost of use and environmental impact than non-rechargeable (disposable) batteries. Some rechargeable battery types are available in the same form factors as disposables. Rechargeable batteries have higher initial cost but can be recharged very cheaply and used many times.

Common rechargeable battery chemistries include:
* Lead–acid battery: Lead acid batteries hold the largest market share of electric storage products. A single cell produces about 2V when charged. In the charged state the metallic lead negative electrode and the lead sulfate positive electrode are immersed in a dilute sulfuric acid (H2SO4) electrolyte. In the discharge process electrons are pushed out of the cell as lead sulfate is formed at the negative electrode while the electrolyte is reduced to water.
** Lead–acid battery technology has been developed extensively. Upkeep requires minimal labor and its cost is low. The battery&#x27;s available energy capacity is subject to a quick discharge resulting in a low life span and low energy density.
* Nickel–cadmium battery (NiCd): Uses nickel oxide hydroxide and metallic cadmium as electrodes. Cadmium is a toxic element, and was banned for most uses by the European Union in 2004. Nickel–cadmium batteries have been almost completely replaced by nickel–metal hydride (NiMH) batteries.
* Nickel–metal hydride battery (NiMH): First commercial types were available in 1989. These are now a common consumer and industrial type. The battery has a hydrogen-absorbing alloy for the negative electrode instead of cadmium.
* Lithium-ion battery: The choice in many consumer electronics and have one of the best energy-to-mass ratios and a very slow self-discharge when not in use.
* Lithium-ion polymer battery: These batteries are light in weight and can be made in any shape desired.
* Aluminium-sulfur battery with rock salt crystals as electrolyte: aluminium and sulfur are Earth-abundant materials and are much more cheaper than traditional Lithium.

===== Flow battery =====
A flow battery works by passing a solution over a membrane where ions are exchanged to charge or discharge the cell. Cell voltage is chemically determined by the Nernst equation and ranges, in practical applications, from 1.0 V to 2.2 V. Storage capacity depends on the volume of solution. A flow battery is technically akin both to a fuel cell and an electrochemical accumulator cell. Commercial applications are for long half-cycle storage such as backup grid power.

==== Supercapacitor ====

Supercapacitors, also called electric double-layer capacitors (EDLC) or ultracapacitors, are a family of electrochemical capacitors that do not have conventional solid dielectrics. Capacitance is determined by two storage principles, double-layer capacitance and pseudocapacitance.

Supercapacitors bridge the gap between conventional capacitors and rechargeable batteries. They store the most energy per unit volume or mass (energy density) among capacitors. They support up to 10,000 farads/1.2 Volt, up to 10,000 times that of electrolytic capacitors, but deliver or accept less than half as much power per unit time (power density).

While supercapacitors have specific energy and energy densities that are approximately 10% of batteries, their power density is generally 10 to 100 times greater. This results in much shorter charge/discharge cycles. Also, they tolerate many more charge-discharge cycles than batteries.

Supercapacitors have many applications, including:
* Low supply current for memory backup in static random-access memory (SRAM)
* Power for cars, buses, trains, cranes and elevators, including energy recovery from braking, short-term energy storage and burst-mode power delivery

=== Chemical ===

==== Power-to-gas ====

Power-to-gas is the conversion of electricity to a gaseous fuel such as hydrogen or methane. The three commercial methods use electricity to reduce water into hydrogen and oxygen by means of electrolysis.

In the first method, hydrogen is injected into the natural gas grid or is used for transportation. The second method is to combine the hydrogen with carbon dioxide to produce methane using a methanation reaction such as the Sabatier reaction, or biological methanation, resulting in an extra energy conversion loss of 8%. The methane may then be fed into the natural gas grid. The third method uses the output gas of a wood gas generator or a biogas plant, after the biogas upgrader is mixed with the hydrogen from the electrolyzer, to upgrade the quality of the biogas.

===== Hydrogen =====
The element hydrogen can be a form of stored energy. Hydrogen can produce electricity via a hydrogen fuel cell.

At penetrations below 20% of the grid demand, renewables do not severely change the economics; but beyond about 20% of the total demand, external storage becomes important. If these sources are used to make ionic hydrogen, they can be freely expanded. A 5-year community-based pilot program using wind turbines and hydrogen generators began in 2007 in the remote community of Ramea, Newfoundland and Labrador. A similar project began in 2004 on Utsira, a small Norwegian island.

Energy losses involved in the hydrogen storage cycle come from the electrolysis of water, liquification or compression of the hydrogen and conversion to electricity.

Hydrogen can also be produced from aluminum and water by stripping aluminum&#x27;s naturally-occurring aluminum oxide barrier and introducing it to water. This method is beneficial because recycled aluminum cans can be used to generate hydrogen, however systems to harness this option have not been commercially developed and are much more complex than electrolysis systems. Common methods to strip the oxide layer include caustic catalysts such as sodium hydroxide and alloys with gallium, mercury and other metals.

Underground hydrogen storage is the practice of hydrogen storage in caverns, salt domes and depleted oil and gas fields. Large quantities of gaseous hydrogen have been stored in caverns by Imperial Chemical Industries for many years without any difficulties. The European Hyunder project indicated in 2013 that storage of wind and solar energy using underground hydrogen would require 85 caverns.

Powerpaste is a magnesium and hydrogen -based fluid gel that releases hydrogen when reacting with water. It was invented, patented and is being developed by the &quot;Fraunhofer Institute for Manufacturing Technology and Advanced Materials&quot; (&quot;IFAM&quot;) of the Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft. Powerpaste is made by combining magnesium powder with hydrogen to form magnesium hydride in a process conducted at 350 °C and five to six times atmospheric pressure. An ester and a metal salt are then added to make the finished product. Fraunhofer states that they are building a production plant slated to start production in 2021, which will produce 4 tons of Powerpaste annually. Fraunhofer has patented their invention in the United States and EU. Fraunhofer claims that Powerpaste is able to store hydrogen energy at 10 times the energy density of a lithium battery of a similar dimension and is safe and convenient for automotive situations.

===== Methane =====
Methane is the simplest hydrocarbon with the molecular formula CH4. Methane is more easily stored and transported than hydrogen. Storage and combustion infrastructure (pipelines, gasometers, power plants) are mature.

Synthetic natural gas (syngas or SNG) can be created in a multi-step process, starting with hydrogen and oxygen. Hydrogen is then reacted with carbon dioxide in a Sabatier process, producing methane and water. Methane can be stored and later used to produce electricity. The resulting water is recycled, reducing the need for water. In the electrolysis stage, oxygen is stored for methane combustion in a pure oxygen environment at an adjacent power plant, eliminating nitrogen oxides.

Methane combustion produces carbon dioxide (CO2) and water. The carbon dioxide can be recycled to boost the Sabatier process and water can be recycled for further electrolysis. Methane production, storage and combustion recycles the reaction products.

The CO2 has economic value as a component of an energy storage vector, not a cost as in carbon capture and storage.

==== Power-to-liquid ====
Power-to-liquid is similar to power to gas except that the hydrogen is converted into liquids such as methanol or ammonia. These are easier to handle than gases, and require fewer safety precautions than hydrogen. They can be used for transportation, including aircraft, but also for industrial purposes or in the power sector.

==== Biofuels ====
Various biofuels such as biodiesel, vegetable oil, alcohol fuels, or biomass can replace fossil fuels. Various chemical processes can convert the carbon and hydrogen in coal, natural gas, plant and animal biomass and organic wastes into short hydrocarbons suitable as replacements for existing hydrocarbon fuels. Examples are Fischer–Tropsch diesel, methanol, dimethyl ether and syngas. This diesel source was used extensively in World War II in Germany, which faced limited access to crude oil supplies. South Africa produces most of the country&#x27;s diesel from coal for similar reasons. A long term oil price above US$35/bbl may make such large scale synthetic liquid fuels economical.

===== Aluminum =====
Aluminum has been proposed as an energy store by a number of researchers. Its electrochemical equivalent (8.04 Ah/cm3) is nearly four times greater than that of lithium (2.06 Ah/cm3). Energy can be extracted from aluminum by reacting it with water to generate hydrogen. However, it must first be stripped of its natural oxide layer, a process which requires pulverization, chemical reactions with caustic substances, or alloys. The byproduct of the reaction to create hydrogen is aluminum oxide, which can be recycled into aluminum with the Hall–Héroult process, making the reaction theoretically renewable. If the Hall-Heroult Process is run using solar or wind power, aluminum could be used to store the energy produced at higher efficiency than direct solar electrolysis.

==== Boron, silicon, and zinc ====
Boron, silicon, and zinc have been proposed as energy storage solutions.

==== Other chemical ====
The organic compound &quot;norbornadiene&quot; converts to &quot;quadricyclane&quot; upon exposure to light, storing solar energy as the energy of chemical bonds. A working system has been developed in Sweden as a molecular solar thermal system.

=== Electrical methods ===

==== Capacitor ====

A capacitor (originally known as a &#x27;condenser&#x27;) is a passive two-terminal electrical component used to store energy electrostatically. Practical capacitors vary widely, but all contain at least two electrical conductors (plates) separated by a dielectric (i.e., insulator). A capacitor can store electric energy when disconnected from its charging circuit, so it can be used like a temporary battery, or like other types of rechargeable energy storage system. Capacitors are commonly used in electronic devices to maintain power supply while batteries change. (This prevents loss of information in volatile memory.) Conventional capacitors provide less than 360 joules per kilogram, while a conventional alkaline battery has a density of 590 kJ/kg.

Capacitors store energy in an electrostatic field between their plates. Given a potential difference across the conductors (e.g., when a capacitor is attached across a battery), an electric field develops across the dielectric, causing positive charge (+Q) to collect on one plate and negative charge (-Q) to collect on the other plate. If a battery is attached to a capacitor for a sufficient amount of time, no current can flow through the capacitor. However, if an accelerating or alternating voltage is applied across the leads of the capacitor, a displacement current can flow. Besides capacitor plates, charge can also be stored in a dielectric layer.

Capacitance is greater given a narrower separation between conductors and when the conductors have a larger surface area. In practice, the dielectric between the plates emits a small amount of leakage current and has an electric field strength limit, known as the breakdown voltage. However, the effect of recovery of a dielectric after a high-voltage breakdown holds promise for a new generation of self-healing capacitors. The conductors and leads introduce undesired inductance and resistance.

Research is assessing the quantum effects of nanoscale capacitors for digital quantum batteries.

==== Superconducting magnetics ====
Superconducting magnetic energy storage (SMES) systems store energy in a magnetic field created by the flow of direct current in a superconducting coil that has been cooled to a temperature below its superconducting critical temperature. A typical SMES system includes a superconducting coil, power conditioning system and refrigerator. Once the superconducting coil is charged, the current does not decay and the magnetic energy can be stored indefinitely.

The stored energy can be released to the network by discharging the coil. The associated inverter/rectifier accounts for about 2–3% energy loss in each direction. SMES loses the least amount of electricity in the energy storage process compared to other methods of storing energy. SMES systems offer round-trip efficiency greater than 95%.

Due to the energy requirements of refrigeration and the cost of superconducting wire, SMES is used for short duration storage such as improving power quality. It also has applications in grid balancing.

== Applications ==

=== Mills ===
The classic application before the Industrial Revolution was the control of waterways to drive water mills for processing grain or powering machinery. Complex systems of reservoirs and dams were constructed to store and release water (and the potential energy it contained) when required.

=== Homes ===
Home energy storage is expected to become increasingly common given the growing importance of distributed generation of renewable energies (especially photovoltaics) and the important share of energy consumption in buildings. To exceed a self-sufficiency of 40% in a household equipped with photovoltaics, energy storage is needed. Multiple manufacturers produce rechargeable battery systems for storing energy, generally to hold surplus energy from home solar or wind generation. Today, for home energy storage, Li-ion batteries are preferable to lead-acid ones given their similar cost but much better performance.

Tesla Motors produces two models of the Tesla Powerwall. One is a 10 kWh weekly cycle version for backup applications and the other is a 7 kWh version for daily cycle applications. In 2016, a limited version of the Tesla Powerpack 2 cost $398(US)/kWh to store electricity worth 12.5 cents/kWh (US average grid price) making a positive return on investment doubtful unless electricity prices are higher than 30 cents/kWh.

RoseWater Energy produces two models of the &quot;Energy &amp; Storage System&quot;, the HUB 120 and SB20. Both versions provide 28.8 kWh of output, enabling it to run larger houses or light commercial premises, and protecting custom installations. The system provides five key elements into one system, including providing a clean 60 Hz Sine wave, zero transfer time, industrial-grade surge protection, renewable energy grid sell-back (optional), and battery backup.

Enphase Energy announced an integrated system that allows home users to store, monitor and manage electricity. The system stores 1.2 kWh of energy and 275W/500W power output.

Storing wind or solar energy using thermal energy storage though less flexible, is considerably cheaper than batteries. A simple 52-gallon electric water heater can store roughly 12 kWh of energy for supplementing hot water or space heating.

For purely financial purposes in areas where net metering is available, home generated electricity may be sold to the grid through a grid-tie inverter without the use of batteries for storage.

=== Grid electricity and power stations ===
==== Renewable energy ====


The largest source and the greatest store of renewable energy is provided by hydroelectric dams. A large reservoir behind a dam can store enough water to average the annual flow of a river between dry and wet seasons, and a very large reservoir can store enough water to average the flow of a river between dry and wet years. While a hydroelectric dam does not directly store energy from intermittent sources, it does balance the grid by lowering its output and retaining its water when power is generated by solar or wind. If wind or solar generation exceeds the region&#x27;s hydroelectric capacity, then some additional source of energy is needed.

Many renewable energy sources (notably solar and wind) produce variable power. Storage systems can level out the imbalances between supply and demand that this causes. Electricity must be used as it is generated or converted immediately into storable forms.

The main method of electrical grid storage is pumped-storage hydroelectricity. Areas of the world such as Norway, Wales, Japan and the US have used elevated geographic features for reservoirs, using electrically powered pumps to fill them. When needed, the water passes through generators and converts the gravitational potential of the falling water into electricity. Pumped storage in Norway, which gets almost all its electricity from hydro, has currently a capacity of 1.4 GW but since the total installed capacity is nearly 32 GW and 75% of that is regulable, it can be expanded significantly.

Some forms of storage that produce electricity include pumped-storage hydroelectric dams, rechargeable batteries, thermal storage including molten salts which can efficiently store and release very large quantities of heat energy, and compressed air energy storage, flywheels, cryogenic systems and superconducting magnetic coils.

Surplus power can also be converted into methane (Sabatier process) with stockage in the natural gas network.

In 2011, the Bonneville Power Administration in the northwestern United States created an experimental program to absorb excess wind and hydro power generated at night or during stormy periods that are accompanied by high winds. Under central control, home appliances absorb surplus energy by heating ceramic bricks in special space heaters to hundreds of degrees and by boosting the temperature of modified hot water heater tanks. After charging, the appliances provide home heating and hot water as needed. The experimental system was created as a result of a severe 2010 storm that overproduced renewable energy to the extent that all conventional power sources were shut down, or in the case of a nuclear power plant, reduced to its lowest possible operating level, leaving a large area running almost completely on renewable energy.

Another advanced method used at the former Solar Two project in the United States and the Solar Tres Power Tower in Spain uses molten salt to store thermal energy captured from the sun and then convert it and dispatch it as electrical power. The system pumps molten salt through a tower or other special conduits to be heated by the sun. Insulated tanks store the solution. Electricity is produced by turning water to steam that is fed to turbines.

Since the early 21st century batteries have been applied to utility scale load-leveling and frequency regulation capabilities.

In vehicle-to-grid storage, electric vehicles that are plugged into the energy grid can deliver stored electrical energy from their batteries into the grid when needed.

=== Air conditioning ===
Thermal energy storage (TES) can be used for air conditioning. It is most widely used for cooling single large buildings and/or groups of smaller buildings. Commercial air conditioning systems are the biggest contributors to peak electrical loads. In 2009, thermal storage was used in over 3,300 buildings in over 35 countries. It works by chilling material at night and using the chilled material for cooling during the hotter daytime periods.

The most popular technique is ice storage, which requires less space than water and is cheaper than fuel cells or flywheels. In this application, a standard chiller runs at night to produce an ice pile. Water circulates through the pile during the day to chill water that would normally be the chiller&#x27;s daytime output.

A partial storage system minimizes capital investment by running the chillers nearly 24 hours a day. At night, they produce ice for storage and during the day they chill water. Water circulating through the melting ice augments the production of chilled water. Such a system makes ice for 16 to 18 hours a day and melts ice for six hours a day. Capital expenditures are reduced because the chillers can be just 40% – 50% of the size needed for a conventional, no-storage design. Storage sufficient to store half a day&#x27;s available heat is usually adequate.

A full storage system shuts off the chillers during peak load hours. Capital costs are higher, as such a system requires larger chillers and a larger ice storage system.

This ice is produced when electrical utility rates are lower. Off-peak cooling systems can lower energy costs. The U.S. Green Building Council has developed the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) program to encourage the design of reduced-environmental impact buildings. Off-peak cooling may help toward LEED Certification.

Thermal storage for heating is less common than for cooling. An example of thermal storage is storing solar heat to be used for heating at night.

Latent heat can also be stored in technical phase change materials (PCMs). These can be encapsulated in wall and ceiling panels, to moderate room temperatures.

=== Transport ===
Liquid hydrocarbon fuels are the most commonly used forms of energy storage for use in transportation, followed by a growing use of Battery Electric Vehicles and Hybrid Electric Vehicles. Other energy carriers such as hydrogen can be used to avoid producing greenhouse gases.

Public transport systems like trams and trolleybuses require electricity, but due to their variability in movement, a steady supply of electricity via renewable energy is challenging. Photovoltaic systems installed on the roofs of buildings can be used to power public transportation systems during periods in which there is increased demand for electricity and access to other forms of energy are not readily available. Upcoming transitions in the transportation system also include e.g. ferries and airplanes, where electric power supply is investigated as an interesting alternative.

=== Electronics ===
Capacitors are widely used in electronic circuits for blocking direct current while allowing alternating current to pass. In analog filter networks, they smooth the output of power supplies. In resonant circuits they tune radios to particular frequencies. In electric power transmission systems they stabilize voltage and power flow.

== Use cases ==
The United States Department of Energy International Energy Storage Database (IESDB), is a free-access database of energy storage projects and policies funded by the United States Department of Energy Office of Electricity and Sandia National Labs.

== Capacity ==
Storage capacity is the amount of energy extracted from an energy storage device or system; usually measured in joules or kilowatt-hours and their multiples, it may be given in number of hours of electricity production at power plant nameplate capacity; when storage is of primary type (i.e., thermal or pumped-water), output is sourced only with the power plant embedded storage system.

== Economics ==
The economics of energy storage strictly depends on the reserve service requested, and several uncertainty factors affect the profitability of energy storage. Therefore, not every storage method is technically and economically suitable for the storage of several MWh, and the optimal size of the energy storage is market and location dependent.

Moreover, ESS are affected by several risks, e.g.:

* Techno-economic risks, which are related to the specific technology;
* Market risks, which are the factors that affect the electricity supply system;
* Regulation and policy risks.

Therefore, traditional techniques based on deterministic Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) for the investment appraisal are not fully adequate to evaluate these risks and uncertainties and the investor&#x27;s flexibility to deal with them. Hence, the literature recommends to assess the value of risks and uncertainties through the Real Option Analysis (ROA), which is a valuable method in uncertain contexts.

The economic valuation of large-scale applications (including pumped hydro storage and compressed air) considers benefits including: curtailment avoidance, grid congestion avoidance, price arbitrage and carbon-free energy delivery. In one technical assessment by the Carnegie Mellon Electricity Industry Centre, economic goals could be met using batteries if their capital cost was $30 to $50 per kilowatt-hour.

A metric of energy efficiency of storage is energy storage on energy invested (ESOI), which is the amount of energy that can be stored by a technology, divided by the amount of energy required to build that technology. The higher the ESOI, the better the storage technology is energetically. For lithium-ion batteries this is around 10, and for lead acid batteries it is about 2. Other forms of storage such as pumped hydroelectric storage generally have higher ESOI, such as 210.

Pumped-storage hydroelectricity is by far the largest storage technology used globally. However, the usage of conventional pumped-hydro storage is limited because it requires terrain with elevation differences and also has a very high land use for relatively small power. In locations without suitable natural geography, underground pumped-hydro storage could also be used. High costs and limited life still make batteries a &quot;weak substitute&quot; for dispatchable power sources, and are unable to cover for variable renewable power gaps lasting for days, weeks or months. In grid models with high VRE share, the excessive cost of storage tends to dominate the costs of the whole grid — for example, in California alone 80% share of VRE would require 9.6 TWh of storage but 100% would require 36.3 TWh. As of 2018 the state only had 150 GWh of storage, primarily in pumped storage and a small fraction in batteries. According to another study, supplying 80% of US demand from VRE would require a smart grid covering the whole country or battery storage capable to supply the whole system for 12 hours, both at cost estimated at $2.5 trillion. Similarly, several studies have found that relying only on VRE and energy storage would cost about 30–50% more than a comparable system that combines VRE with nuclear plants or plants with carbon capture and storage instead of energy storage.

== Research ==

=== Germany ===
In 2013, the German government allocated €200M (approximately US$270M) for research, and another €50M to subsidize battery storage in residential rooftop solar panels, according to a representative of the German Energy Storage Association.

Siemens AG commissioned a production-research plant to open in 2015 at the &quot;Zentrum für Sonnenenergie und Wasserstoff (ZSW,&quot; the German Center for Solar Energy and Hydrogen Research in the State of Baden-Württemberg), a university/industry collaboration in Stuttgart, Ulm and Widderstall, staffed by approximately 350 scientists, researchers, engineers, and technicians. The plant develops new near-production manufacturing materials and processes (NPMM&amp;P) using a computerized Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system. It aims to enable the expansion of rechargeable battery production with increased quality and lower cost.

From 2023 onwards, a new project by the German Research Foundation focuses on molecular photoswitches to store solar thermal energy. The spokesperson of these so-called molecular solar thermal (MOST) systems is Prof. Dr. Hermann A. Wegner.

=== United States ===
In 2014, research and test centers opened to evaluate energy storage technologies. Among them was the Advanced Systems Test Laboratory at the University of Wisconsin at Madison in Wisconsin State, which partnered with battery manufacturer Johnson Controls. The laboratory was created as part of the university&#x27;s newly opened Wisconsin Energy Institute. Their goals include the evaluation of state-of-the-art and next generation electric vehicle batteries, including their use as grid supplements.

The State of New York unveiled its New York Battery and Energy Storage Technology (NY-BEST) Test and Commercialization Center at Eastman Business Park in Rochester, New York, at a cost of $23 million for its almost 1,700 m2 laboratory. The center includes the Center for Future Energy Systems, a collaboration between Cornell University of Ithaca, New York and the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, New York. NY-BEST tests, validates and independently certifies diverse forms of energy storage intended for commercial use.

On September 27, 2017, Senators Al Franken of Minnesota and Martin Heinrich of New Mexico introduced Advancing Grid Storage Act (AGSA), which would devote more than $1 billion in research, technical assistance and grants to encourage energy storage in the United States.

In grid models with high VRE share, the excessive cost of storage tends to dominate the costs of the whole grid – for example, in California alone 80% share of VRE would require 9.6 TWh of storage but 100% would require 36.3 TWh. According to another study, supplying 80% of US demand from VRE would require a smart grid covering the whole country or battery storage capable to supply the whole system for 12 hours, both at cost estimated at $2.5 trillion.

=== United Kingdom ===
In the United Kingdom, some 14 industry and government agencies allied with seven British universities in May 2014 to create the SUPERGEN Energy Storage Hub in order to assist in the coordination of energy storage technology research and development.

== See also ==
* Efficient energy use
* Energy storage as a service (ESaaS)
* Grid energy storage
* Hybrid power
* List of energy storage power plants
* Outline of energy
* Power-to-X
* Power transmission
* Renewable energy
* Thermal battery
* Variable renewable energy
== References ==

== Further reading ==

 Journals and papers 

* Chen, Haisheng; Thang Ngoc Cong; Wei Yang; Chunqing Tan; Yongliang Li; Yulong Ding. Progress in electrical energy storage system: A critical review, &quot;Progress in Natural Science&quot;, accepted July 2, 2008, published in Vol. 19, 2009, pp. 291–312, doi: 10.1016/j.pnsc.2008.07.014. Sourced from the National Natural Science Foundation of China and the Chinese Academy of Sciences. Published by Elsevier and Science in China Press. Synopsis: a review of electrical energy storage technologies for stationary applications. Retrieved from ac.els-cdn.com on May 13, 2014. 
* Corum, Lyn. The New Core Technology: Energy storage is part of the smart grid evolution, &quot;The Journal of Energy Efficiency and Reliability&quot;, December 31, 2009. Discusses: Anaheim Public Utilities Department, lithium ion energy storage, iCel Systems, Beacon Power, Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), ICEL, Self Generation Incentive Program, ICE Energy, vanadium redox flow, lithium Ion, regenerative fuel cell, ZBB, VRB, lead acid, CAES, and Thermal Energy Storage. 
* 
* Whittingham, M. Stanley. History, Evolution, and Future Status of Energy Storage, &quot;Proceedings of the IEEE&quot;, manuscript accepted February 20, 2012, date of publication April 16, 2012; date of current version May 10, 2012, published in &quot;Proceedings of the IEEE&quot;, Vol. 100, May 13, 2012, 0018–9219, pp. 1518–1534, doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2012.219017. Retrieved from ieeexplore.ieee.org May 13, 2014. Synopsis: A discussion of the important aspects of energy storage including emerging battery technologies and the importance of storage systems in key application areas, including electronic devices, transportation, and the utility grid. 

 Books 

* GA Mansoori, N Enayati, LB Agyarko (2016), Energy: Sources, Utilization, Legislation, Sustainability, Illinois as Model State, World Sci. Pub. Co., 

== External links ==
* U.S. Dept of Energy – Energy Storage Systems Government research center on energy storage technology.
* U.S. Dept of Energy – International Energy Storage Database The DOE International Energy Storage Database provides free, up-to-date information on grid-connected energy storage projects and relevant state and federal policies.
* IEEE Special Issue on Massive Energy Storage
* IEA-ECES – International Energy Agency – Energy Conservation through Energy Conservation programme.
* Energy Information Administration Glossary
* Energy Storage Project Regeneration.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q837718" start="0" end="14" title="Energy storage" label="Energy storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="33" end="39" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288996" start="202" end="213" title="Accumulator (energy)" label="accumulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q267298" start="217" end="224" title="Battery (electricity)" label="battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q582668" start="278" end="286" title="chemical energy" label="chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297853" start="288" end="311" title="gravitational potential energy" label="gravitational potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q841798" start="313" end="333" title="Electric potential energy" label="electrical potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q207721" start="370" end="381" title="latent heat" label="latent heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="386" end="393" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1832610" start="727" end="746" title="Grid energy storage" label="Grid energy storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q187510" start="891" end="911" title="rechargeable battery" label="rechargeable battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="1008" end="1021" title="Hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q131681" start="1052" end="1061" title="reservoir" label="reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q155640" start="1079" end="1095" title="potential energy" label="potential energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5985524" start="1101" end="1112" title="Ice storage air conditioning" label="ice storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="1211" end="1222" title="Fossil fuel" label="Fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095" start="1389" end="1393" title="Food" label="Food"/>
<link wikidata="Q79529" start="1476" end="1484" title="chemical" label="chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="1646" end="1656" title="Hydropower" label="Hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q12323" start="1800" end="1803" title="dam" label="dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="1918" end="1932" title="Climate change" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483757" start="2102" end="2113" title="Solar power" label="Solar power"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404346" start="2246" end="2256" title="duck curve" label="duck curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767813" start="2330" end="2355" title="renewable energy industry" label="renewable energy industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q267162" start="2557" end="2576" title="Off-the-grid" label="Off grid electrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629441" start="2887" end="2904" title="Electric vehicles" label="Electric vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q102836" start="3184" end="3190" title="Spring (device)" label="Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260916" start="3194" end="3223" title="Compressed-air energy storage" label="Compressed-air energy storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158874" start="3234" end="3253" title="Fireless locomotive" label="Fireless locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538992" start="3257" end="3280" title="Flywheel energy storage" label="Flywheel energy storage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3284" end="3308" title="#Solid_mass_gravitational" label="Solid mass gravitational"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668679" start="3313" end="3334" title="Hydraulic accumulator" label="Hydraulic accumulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q339353" start="3338" end="3369" title="Pumped-storage hydroelectricity" label="Pumped-storage hydroelectricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583695" start="3451" end="3468" title="Thermal expansion" label="Thermal expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322" start="3502" end="3511" title="Capacitor" label="Capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q754523" start="3515" end="3529" title="Supercapacitor" label="Supercapacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q915682" start="3533" end="3572" title="Superconducting magnetic energy storage" label="Superconducting magnetic energy storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q174936" start="3631" end="3639" title="Glycogen" label="Glycogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41534" start="3643" end="3649" title="Starch" label="Starch"/>
<link wikidata="Q907511" start="3709" end="3721" title="Flow battery" label="Flow battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q187510" start="3725" end="3745" title="Rechargeable battery" label="Rechargeable battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q17154415" start="3749" end="3761" title="UltraBattery" label="UltraBattery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424011" start="3775" end="3795" title="Storage heater" label="Brick storage heater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190518" start="3799" end="3823" title="Cryogenic energy storage" label="Cryogenic energy storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718671" start="3861" end="3883" title="Liquid nitrogen engine" label="Liquid nitrogen engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q628595" start="3887" end="3902" title="Eutectic system" label="Eutectic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5985524" start="3906" end="3934" title="Ice storage air conditioning" label="Ice storage air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142963" start="3938" end="3957" title="Molten salt heat storage" label="Molten salt storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806889" start="3961" end="3982" title="Phase-change material" label="Phase-change material"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441920" start="3986" end="4017" title="Seasonal thermal energy storage" label="Seasonal thermal energy storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q514067" start="4021" end="4031" title="Solar pond" label="Solar pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q825064" start="4035" end="4052" title="Steam accumulator" label="Steam accumulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142963" start="4056" end="4078" title="Thermal energy storage" label="Thermal energy storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q128991" start="4103" end="4110" title="Biofuel" label="Biofuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q462174" start="4115" end="4129" title="Hydrate" label="Hydrated salts"/>
<link wikidata="Q171877" start="4133" end="4150" title="Hydrogen peroxide" label="Hydrogen peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q12646543" start="4154" end="4166" title="Power-to-gas" label="Power-to-gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="4168" end="4175" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203442" start="4177" end="4193" title="hydrogen storage" label="hydrogen storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q506266" start="4195" end="4206" title="oxyhydrogen" label="oxyhydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q339353" start="4293" end="4307" title="pumped storage" label="pumped storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633694" start="4363" end="4380" title="gravity battery" label="gravity batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260916" start="4428" end="4443" title="Compressed-air energy storage" label="compressing air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538992" start="4448" end="4457" title="Flywheel energy storage" label="flywheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="4605" end="4622" title="Hydroelectric dam" label="Hydroelectric dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q339353" start="5298" end="5329" title="pumped-storage hydroelectricity" label="pumped-storage hydroelectricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1832610" start="5375" end="5394" title="grid energy storage" label="grid energy storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q490303" start="5433" end="5466" title="Electric Power Research Institute" label="Electric Power Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="5582" end="5584" title="Megawatt" label="MW"/>
<link wikidata="Q192704" start="5590" end="5607" title="Energy conversion efficiency" label="energy efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q130760" start="5910" end="5917" title="turbine" label="turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q217817" start="6025" end="6040" title="Francis turbine" label="Francis turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="6280" end="6299" title="hydroelectric plant" label="hydroelectric plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q477449" start="6601" end="6622" title="underground reservoir" label="underground reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q477449" start="6634" end="6643" title="salt dome" label="salt dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q178898" start="7321" end="7332" title="Gas compressor" label="Compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="7336" end="7339" title="air" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583695" start="7391" end="7400" title="Thermal expansion" label="Expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q182453" start="7675" end="7684" title="adiabatic" label="adiabatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182453" start="7686" end="7694" title="Adiabatic" label="diabatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q486921" start="7699" end="7709" title="isothermal" label="isothermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q183576" start="7852" end="7860" title="flywheel" label="flywheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140940" start="7902" end="7919" title="rotational energy" label="rotational energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11382" start="8047" end="8069" title="conservation of energy" label="conservation of energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="8268" end="8280" title="carbon-fiber" label="carbon-fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587136" start="8306" end="8322" title="magnetic bearing" label="magnetic bearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q72313" start="8560" end="8574" title="electric motor" label="electric motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131502" start="8575" end="8584" title="electric generator" label="generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023293" start="8781" end="8796" title="specific energy" label="specific energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503313" start="8836" end="8849" title="power density" label="power density"/>
<link wikidata="Q258534" start="9396" end="9401" title="winch" label="winch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850559" start="9657" end="9695" title="California Independent System Operator" label="California Independent System Operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387165" start="9738" end="9754" title="Hopper car" label="hopper rail cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q625151" start="9765" end="9784" title="electric locomotive" label="electric locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480581" start="10357" end="10370" title="sensible heat" label="sensible heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441920" start="10403" end="10434" title="Seasonal thermal energy storage" label="Seasonal thermal energy storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305610" start="10846" end="10875" title="Drake Landing Solar Community" label="Drake Landing Solar Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556756" start="11056" end="11106" title="Solar power in Denmark" label="the community&amp;#x27;s solar district heating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q131313" start="11147" end="11156" title="heat pump" label="heat pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806889" start="11633" end="11654" title="Phase-change material" label="phase change material"/>
<link wikidata="Q207721" start="11705" end="11716" title="latent heat" label="latent heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q825064" start="11840" end="11857" title="steam accumulator" label="steam accumulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q483538" start="11939" end="11966" title="latent heat of vaporization" label="latent heat of vaporization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5985524" start="11977" end="12005" title="Ice storage air conditioning" label="Ice storage air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q215612" start="12854" end="12867" title="Rankine cycle" label="Rankine cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q746338" start="12871" end="12884" title="Brayton cycle" label="Brayton cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q157332" start="13132" end="13155" title="German Aerospace Center" label="German Aerospace Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q80097" start="13377" end="13397" title="electrochemical cell" label="electrochemical cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7877" start="13456" end="13471" title="electrochemistry" label="electrochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="13472" end="13481" title="chemical reaction" label="reactions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13578" end="13589" title="Button cell#Rechargeable variants" label="button cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q337724" start="13983" end="14000" title="Lead–acid battery" label="Lead–acid battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q407821" start="14194" end="14206" title="lead sulfate" label="lead sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="14251" end="14264" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q162908" start="14273" end="14284" title="electrolyte" label="electrolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q898377" start="14690" end="14712" title="Nickel–cadmium battery" label="Nickel–cadmium battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q23927502" start="14726" end="14748" title="nickel oxide hydroxide" label="nickel oxide hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091" start="14762" end="14769" title="cadmium" label="cadmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q176140" start="14773" end="14782" title="electrode" label="electrode"/>
<link wikidata="Q308567" start="14979" end="15007" title="Nickel–metal hydride battery" label="Nickel–metal hydride battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="15153" end="15158" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q176140" start="15176" end="15185" title="electrode" label="electrode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091" start="15197" end="15204" title="cadmium" label="cadmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822895" start="15208" end="15227" title="Lithium-ion battery" label="Lithium-ion battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023293" start="15294" end="15315" title="specific energy" label="energy-to-mass ratios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418367" start="15332" end="15346" title="self-discharge" label="self-discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q898512" start="15366" end="15393" title="Lithium-ion polymer battery" label="Lithium-ion polymer battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="15471" end="15480" title="Aluminium" label="Aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="15481" end="15487" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15501" end="15518" title="rock salt crystal" label="rock salt crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q907511" start="15666" end="15678" title="flow battery" label="flow battery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15781" end="15793" title="Electrode potential#Potential difference of a cell assembled of two electrodes" label="Cell voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q751124" start="15826" end="15841" title="Nernst equation" label="Nernst equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180253" start="15999" end="16008" title="fuel cell" label="fuel cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q80097" start="16016" end="16048" title="electrochemical cell" label="electrochemical accumulator cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q754523" start="16160" end="16174" title="Supercapacitor" label="Supercapacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q754523" start="16265" end="16290" title="electrochemical capacitor" label="electrochemical capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q184996" start="16328" end="16338" title="dielectric" label="dielectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q164399" start="16341" end="16352" title="Capacitance" label="Capacitance"/>
<link wikidata="Q15700830" start="16423" end="16440" title="pseudocapacitance" label="pseudocapacitance"/>
<link wikidata="Q187510" start="16510" end="16532" title="Rechargeable battery" label="rechargeable batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q828402" start="16586" end="16600" title="energy density" label="energy density"/>
<link wikidata="Q131255" start="16646" end="16652" title="farads" label="farads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326992" start="16690" end="16712" title="electrolytic capacitor" label="electrolytic capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503313" start="16781" end="16794" title="power density" label="power density"/>
<link wikidata="Q267416" start="17179" end="17206" title="static random-access memory" label="static random-access memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12646543" start="17408" end="17420" title="Power-to-gas" label="Power-to-gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="17442" end="17453" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q42501" start="17467" end="17471" title="fuel" label="fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="17480" end="17488" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="17492" end="17499" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697332" start="17556" end="17561" title="water splitting" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="17567" end="17575" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="17580" end="17586" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q64403" start="17599" end="17611" title="electrolysis" label="electrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="17763" end="17777" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="17789" end="17796" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q905071" start="17805" end="17816" title="methanation" label="methanation"/>
<link wikidata="Q899612" start="17838" end="17855" title="Sabatier reaction" label="Sabatier reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q649134" start="18033" end="18051" title="wood gas generator" label="wood gas generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q171076" start="18057" end="18063" title="biogas" label="biogas"/>
<link wikidata="Q864324" start="18081" end="18096" title="biogas upgrader" label="biogas upgrader"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="18219" end="18227" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q180253" start="18299" end="18317" title="hydrogen fuel cell" label="hydrogen fuel cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q49833" start="18617" end="18629" title="wind turbine" label="wind turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418437" start="18696" end="18728" title="Ramea, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Ramea, Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q499485" start="18765" end="18771" title="Utsira" label="Utsira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203442" start="18830" end="18846" title="hydrogen storage" label="hydrogen storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="19002" end="19010" title="aluminum" label="aluminum"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="19015" end="19020" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q177342" start="19070" end="19084" title="aluminum oxide" label="aluminum oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q102769" start="19416" end="19432" title="sodium hydroxide" label="sodium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q861" start="19449" end="19456" title="gallium" label="gallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="19458" end="19465" title="Mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203442" start="19485" end="19513" title="Underground hydrogen storage" label="Underground hydrogen storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203442" start="19533" end="19549" title="hydrogen storage" label="hydrogen storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q35509" start="19553" end="19557" title="cave" label="cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q477449" start="19562" end="19571" title="salt dome" label="salt dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q899151" start="19674" end="19702" title="Imperial Chemical Industries" label="Imperial Chemical Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="19899" end="19908" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="19913" end="19921" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="19981" end="19986" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q14208553" start="19995" end="20003" title="invention" label="invented"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="20005" end="20011" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q161057" start="20155" end="20178" title="Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft" label="Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q424091" start="20251" end="20268" title="magnesium hydride" label="magnesium hydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q81809" start="20324" end="20344" title="atmospheric pressure" label="atmospheric pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="20349" end="20354" title="ester" label="ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="20361" end="20371" title="Salt (chemistry)" label="metal salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="20628" end="20630" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q828402" start="20715" end="20729" title="energy density" label="energy density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822895" start="20735" end="20750" title="Lithium-ion battery" label="lithium battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="20849" end="20856" title="Methane" label="Methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q962715" start="21028" end="21038" title="gas holder" label="gasometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273339" start="21090" end="21096" title="syngas" label="syngas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="21210" end="21224" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q899612" start="21230" end="21246" title="Sabatier reaction" label="Sabatier process"/>
<link wikidata="Q424418" start="21536" end="21550" title="nitrogen oxide" label="nitrogen oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q41491" start="21895" end="21921" title="carbon capture and storage" label="carbon capture and storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="22052" end="22060" title="methanol" label="methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="22064" end="22071" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="22185" end="22199" title="transportation" label="transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="22211" end="22219" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q128991" start="22306" end="22314" title="biofuels" label="biofuels"/>
<link wikidata="Q167947" start="22323" end="22332" title="biodiesel" label="biodiesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277761" start="22334" end="22347" title="straight vegetable oil" label="vegetable oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389193" start="22349" end="22361" title="alcohol fuel" label="alcohol fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18537" start="22367" end="22374" title="biomass" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="22387" end="22399" title="fossil fuels" label="fossil fuels"/>
<link wikidata="Q18537" start="22503" end="22510" title="biomass" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q654400" start="22624" end="22639" title="Fischer–Tropsch process" label="Fischer–Tropsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="22648" end="22656" title="methanol" label="methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q408050" start="22658" end="22672" title="dimethyl ether" label="dimethyl ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273339" start="22677" end="22683" title="syngas" label="syngas"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="22728" end="22740" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="23011" end="23019" title="Aluminum" label="Aluminum"/>
<link wikidata="Q906040" start="23089" end="23115" title="electrochemical equivalent" label="electrochemical equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="23271" end="23279" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q50690" start="23331" end="23336" title="oxide" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q177342" start="23491" end="23505" title="aluminum oxide" label="aluminum oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q898555" start="23552" end="23572" title="Hall–Héroult process" label="Hall–Héroult process"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="23822" end="23827" title="Boron" label="Boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="23829" end="23836" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="23842" end="23846" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q726795" start="23948" end="23961" title="norbornadiene" label="norbornadiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913270" start="23986" end="23999" title="quadricyclane" label="quadricyclane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322" start="24219" end="24228" title="capacitor" label="capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045736" start="24280" end="24287" title="passivity (engineering)" label="passive"/>
<link wikidata="Q182610" start="24288" end="24300" title="terminal (electronics)" label="two-terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11653" start="24301" end="24321" title="electronic component" label="electrical component"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="24336" end="24342" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q26336" start="24343" end="24356" title="electrostatic" label="electrostatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q124291" start="24425" end="24445" title="electrical conductor" label="electrical conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q184996" start="24471" end="24481" title="dielectric" label="dielectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q178150" start="24489" end="24498" title="insulator (electricity)" label="insulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q267298" start="24619" end="24626" title="Battery (electricity)" label="battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q187510" start="24651" end="24685" title="rechargeable energy storage system" label="rechargeable energy storage system"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="24889" end="24894" title="joule" label="joule"/>
<link wikidata="Q861345" start="24931" end="24947" title="alkaline battery" label="alkaline battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="24994" end="25000" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="25007" end="25026" title="electric field" label="electrostatic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428" start="25057" end="25077" title="potential difference" label="potential difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="25158" end="25172" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q853178" start="25529" end="25549" title="displacement current" label="displacement current"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811428" start="25829" end="25844" title="leakage (electronics)" label="leakage current"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267190" start="25900" end="25917" title="breakdown voltage" label="breakdown voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q947546" start="26080" end="26084" title="Lead (electronics)" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384728" start="26106" end="26116" title="Equivalent series inductance" label="inductance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384730" start="26121" end="26131" title="Equivalent series resistance" label="resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="26179" end="26188" title="Nanoscopic scale" label="nanoscale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="26341" end="26355" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="26379" end="26393" title="direct current" label="direct current"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="26399" end="26414" title="Superconductivity" label="superconducting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26468" end="26504" title="Superconductivity#Superconducting phase transition" label="superconducting critical temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325" start="26555" end="26559" title="inductor" label="coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="26921" end="26932" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643181" start="27132" end="27152" title="superconducting wire" label="superconducting wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780079" start="27212" end="27225" title="power quality" label="power quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="27341" end="27362" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q131681" start="27476" end="27485" title="reservoir" label="reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12323" start="27491" end="27494" title="dam" label="dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q155640" start="27549" end="27565" title="potential energy" label="potential energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q478214" start="28228" end="28240" title="Tesla Motors" label="Tesla Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q19845823" start="28268" end="28283" title="Tesla Powerwall" label="Tesla Powerwall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28563" end="28583" title="Tesla Powerwall#Return on investment calculations" label="return on investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012234" start="29119" end="29133" title="Enphase Energy" label="Enphase Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142963" start="29330" end="29352" title="thermal energy storage" label="thermal energy storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685471" start="29583" end="29595" title="net metering" label="net metering"/>
<link wikidata="Q9291636" start="29671" end="29688" title="grid-tie inverter" label="grid-tie inverter"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="30462" end="30478" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915732" start="30520" end="30534" title="variable renewable energy" label="variable power"/>
<link wikidata="Q339353" start="30762" end="30793" title="pumped-storage hydroelectricity" label="pumped-storage hydroelectricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q131681" start="30897" end="30906" title="reservoir" label="reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="31386" end="31404" title="hydroelectric dams" label="hydroelectric dams"/>
<link wikidata="Q187510" start="31406" end="31428" title="Rechargeable battery" label="rechargeable batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142963" start="31430" end="31445" title="thermal energy storage" label="thermal storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142963" start="31456" end="31468" title="Molten salt heat storage" label="molten salts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260916" start="31551" end="31580" title="compressed air energy storage" label="compressed air energy storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538992" start="31582" end="31591" title="Flywheel energy storage" label="flywheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190518" start="31593" end="31610" title="cryogenic energy storage" label="cryogenic systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q915682" start="31615" end="31645" title="superconducting magnetic energy storage" label="superconducting magnetic coils"/>
<link wikidata="Q12646543" start="31689" end="31696" title="power to gas" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q899612" start="31698" end="31714" title="Sabatier process" label="Sabatier process"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910288" start="31772" end="31803" title="Bonneville Power Administration" label="Bonneville Power Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q944857" start="31811" end="31837" title="northwestern United States" label="northwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424011" start="32078" end="32099" title="Storage heater" label="special space heaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q14931" start="32167" end="32189" title="Storage water heater" label="hot water heater tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3964193" start="32641" end="32658" title="the Solar Project" label="Solar Two project"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067560" start="32688" end="32710" title="Gemasolar Thermosolar Plant" label="Solar Tres Power Tower"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32725" end="32736" title="Thermal energy storage#Molten salt technology" label="molten salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q130760" start="33037" end="33044" title="turbine" label="turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361387" start="33140" end="33160" title="Utility frequency" label="frequency regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783938" start="33179" end="33194" title="vehicle-to-grid" label="vehicle-to-grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142963" start="33371" end="33393" title="Thermal energy storage" label="Thermal energy storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="33416" end="33432" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33847" end="33858" title="Thermal energy storage#Air conditioning" label="ice storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602385" start="34996" end="35018" title="Green Building Council" label="Green Building Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521623" start="35037" end="35082" title="Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design" label="Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806889" start="35410" end="35432" title="Phase-change material" label="phase change materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q111765628" start="35552" end="35568" title="hydrocarbon fuel" label="hydrocarbon fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="35632" end="35646" title="transportation" label="transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076882" start="35677" end="35702" title="Battery Electric Vehicles" label="Battery Electric Vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083590" start="35707" end="35730" title="Hybrid Electric Vehicle" label="Hybrid Electric Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="35763" end="35771" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="36006" end="36018" title="Photovoltaic" label="Photovoltaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815901" start="36460" end="36478" title="electronic circuit" label="electronic circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="36493" end="36507" title="direct current" label="direct current"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="36523" end="36542" title="alternating current" label="alternating current"/>
<link wikidata="Q359205" start="36555" end="36568" title="analog filter" label="analog filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q204157" start="36605" end="36619" title="power supply" label="power supplies"/>
<link wikidata="Q732473" start="36624" end="36640" title="LC circuit" label="resonant circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="36652" end="36657" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="36673" end="36684" title="frequency" label="frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q200928" start="36689" end="36716" title="electric power transmission" label="electric power transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105389" start="36785" end="36857" title="United States Department of Energy International Energy Storage Database" label="United States Department of Energy International Energy Storage Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="36947" end="36981" title="United States Department of Energy" label="United States Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736748" start="37008" end="37028" title="Sandia National Labs" label="Sandia National Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="37158" end="37163" title="joule" label="joule"/>
<link wikidata="Q182098" start="37168" end="37182" title="Kilowatt hour" label="kilowatt-hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q200974" start="37280" end="37298" title="nameplate capacity" label="nameplate capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q455422" start="38090" end="38110" title="Discounted cash flow" label="Discounted Cash Flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q64358112" start="38570" end="38581" title="Curtailment (electricity)" label="curtailment"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="38704" end="38747" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon Electricity Industry Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q339353" start="39332" end="39363" title="Pumped-storage hydroelectricity" label="Pumped-storage hydroelectricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815910" start="39562" end="39602" title="Surface power density" label="high land use for relatively small power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282546" start="39789" end="39815" title="Dispatchable generation" label="dispatchable power sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915732" start="39845" end="39869" title="Variable renewable energy" label="variable renewable power"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="40040" end="40050" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q134447" start="40639" end="40653" title="Nuclear power plant" label="nuclear plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q41491" start="40669" end="40695" title="carbon capture and storage" label="carbon capture and storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="40997" end="41007" title="Siemens" label="Siemens AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="41196" end="41222" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="State of Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q17498" start="41489" end="41529" title="SCADA" label="Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q187510" start="41581" end="41601" title="rechargeable battery" label="rechargeable battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q707283" start="41693" end="41719" title="German Research Foundation" label="German Research Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479379" start="41731" end="41754" title="Photoswitch" label="molecular photoswitches"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="42058" end="42092" title="University of Wisconsin–Madison" label="University of Wisconsin at Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="42096" end="42111" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin State"/>
<link wikidata="Q667865" start="42155" end="42171" title="Johnson Controls" label="Johnson Controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711073" start="42246" end="42272" title="Wisconsin Energy Institute" label="Wisconsin Energy Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q900762" start="42349" end="42375" title="Electric vehicle battery" label="electric vehicle batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="42423" end="42440" title="New York (state)" label="State of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330778" start="42548" end="42569" title="Eastman Business Park" label="Eastman Business Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="42573" end="42592" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="42737" end="42755" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q217346" start="42759" end="42775" title="Ithaca, New York" label="Ithaca, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q49211" start="42784" end="42816" title="Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute" label="Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q600301" start="42820" end="42834" title="Troy, New York" label="Troy, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q319084" start="42983" end="42993" title="Al Franken" label="Al Franken"/>
<link wikidata="Q565374" start="43011" end="43026" title="Martin Heinrich" label="Martin Heinrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915732" start="43248" end="43251" title="Variable renewable energy" label="VRE"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="43353" end="43363" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q924713" start="43973" end="43993" title="Efficient energy use" label="Efficient energy use"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457578" start="43996" end="44023" title="Energy storage as a service" label="Energy storage as a service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1832610" start="44034" end="44053" title="Grid energy storage" label="Grid energy storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q13636979" start="44056" end="44068" title="Hybrid power" label="Hybrid power"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097866" start="44071" end="44106" title="List of energy storage power plants" label="List of energy storage power plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112616" start="44109" end="44126" title="Outline of energy" label="Outline of energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19298719" start="44129" end="44139" title="Power-to-X" label="Power-to-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242194" start="44142" end="44160" title="Power transmission" label="Power transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="44163" end="44179" title="Renewable energy" label="Renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142963" start="44182" end="44197" title="Thermal battery" label="Thermal battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915732" start="44200" end="44225" title="Variable renewable energy" label="Variable renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501917" start="44596" end="44640" title="National Natural Science Foundation of China" label="National Natural Science Foundation of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q530471" start="44649" end="44676" title="Chinese Academy of Sciences" label="Chinese Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021749" start="45444" end="45467" title="Proceedings of the IEEE" label="Proceedings of the IEEE"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24131" wikidata="Q59" url="?curid=24131" title="PHP">
<text>PHP is a general-purpose scripting language geared towards web development. It was originally created by Danish-Canadian programmer Rasmus Lerdorf in 1993 and released in 1995. The PHP reference implementation is now produced by the PHP Group. PHP was originally an abbreviation of Personal Home Page, but it now stands for the recursive acronym PHP: Hypertext Preprocessor.

PHP code is usually processed on a web server by a PHP interpreter implemented as a module, a daemon or a Common Gateway Interface (CGI) executable. On a web server, the result of the interpreted and executed PHP codewhich may be any type of data, such as generated HTML or binary image datawould form the whole or part of an HTTP response. Various web template systems, web content management systems, and web frameworks exist that can be employed to orchestrate or facilitate the generation of that response. Additionally, PHP can be used for many programming tasks outside the web context, such as standalone graphical applications and drone control. PHP code can also be directly executed from the command line.

The standard PHP interpreter, powered by the Zend Engine, is free software released under the PHP License. PHP has been widely ported and can be deployed on most web servers on a variety of operating systems and platforms.

The PHP language has evolved without a written formal specification or standard, with the original implementation acting as the &quot;de facto&quot; standard that other implementations aimed to follow. 

W3Techs reports that (about two years since PHP 7 was discontinued and 11 months after the PHP 8.3 release), PHP 7 is still used by 50.0% of PHP websites, which is outdated and known to be insecure. In addition, the even more outdated (discontinued for 5+ years) and insecure PHP 5 is used by 13.2% and the no longer supported PHP 8.0 is also very popular, so the majority of PHP websites do not use supported versions.

== History ==
=== Early history ===
PHP development began in 1993 when Rasmus Lerdorf wrote several Common Gateway Interface (CGI) programs in C, which he used to maintain his personal homepage. He extended them to work with web forms and to communicate with databases, and called this implementation &quot;Personal Home Page/Forms Interpreter&quot; or PHP/FI.

An example of the early PHP syntax:
&lt;!--include /text/header.html--&gt;

&lt;!--getenv HTTP_USER_AGENT--&gt;
&lt;!--if substr $exec_result Mozilla--&gt;
 Hey, you are using Netscape!&lt;p&gt;
&lt;!--endif--&gt;

&lt;!--sql database select * from table where user=&#x27;$username&#x27;--&gt;
&lt;!--ifless $numentries 1--&gt;
 Sorry, that record does not exist&lt;p&gt;
&lt;!--endif exit--&gt;
 Welcome &lt;!--$user--&gt;!&lt;p&gt;
 You have &lt;!--$index:0--&gt; credits left in your account.&lt;p&gt;

&lt;!--include /text/footer.html--&gt;
PHP/FI could be used to build simple, dynamic web applications. To accelerate bug reporting and improve the code, Lerdorf initially announced the release of PHP/FI as &quot;Personal Home Page Tools (PHP Tools) version 1.0&quot; on the Usenet discussion group &quot;comp.infosystems.www.authoring.cgi&quot; on 8 June 1995. This release included basic functionality such as Perl-like variables, form handling, and the ability to embed HTML. By this point, the syntax had changed to resemble that of Perl, but was simpler, more limited, and less consistent.

Early PHP was never intended to be a new programming language; rather, it grew organically, with Lerdorf noting in retrospect: &quot;I don&#x27;t know how to stop it [...] there was never any intent to write a programming language [...] I have absolutely no idea how to write a programming language [...] I just kept adding the next logical step on the way.&quot; A development team began to form and, after months of work and beta testing, officially released PHP/FI 2 in November 1997.

The fact that PHP was not originally designed, but instead was developed organically has led to inconsistent naming of functions and inconsistent ordering of their parameters. In some cases, the function names were chosen to match the lower-level libraries which PHP was &quot;wrapping&quot;, while in some very early versions of PHP the length of the function names was used internally as a hash function, so names were chosen to improve the distribution of hash values.

=== PHP 3 and 4 ===

Zeev Suraski and Andi Gutmans rewrote the parser in 1997 and formed the base of PHP 3, changing the language&#x27;s name to the recursive acronym &quot;PHP: Hypertext Preprocessor&quot;. Afterwards, public testing of PHP 3 began, and the official launch came in June 1998. Suraski and Gutmans then started a new rewrite of PHP&#x27;s core, producing the Zend Engine in 1999. They also founded Zend Technologies in Ramat Gan, Israel.

On 22 May 2000, PHP 4, powered by the Zend Engine 1.0, was released. By August 2008, this branch had reached version 4.4.9. PHP 4 is now no longer under development and nor are any security updates planned to be released.

=== PHP 5 ===
On 1 July 2004, PHP 5 was released, powered by the new Zend Engine II. PHP 5 included new features such as improved support for object-oriented programming, the PHP Data Objects (PDO) extension (which defines a lightweight and consistent interface for accessing databases), and numerous performance enhancements. In 2008, PHP 5 became the only stable version under development. Late static binding had been missing from previous versions of PHP, and was added in version 5.3.

Many high-profile open-source projects ceased to support PHP 4 in new code from February 5, 2008, because of the GoPHP5 initiative, provided by a consortium of PHP developers promoting the transition from PHP 4 to PHP 5.

Over time, PHP interpreters became available on most existing 32-bit and 64-bit operating systems, either by building them from the PHP source code or by using pre-built binaries. For PHP versions 5.3 and 5.4, the only available Microsoft Windows binary distributions were 32-bit IA-32 builds, requiring Windows 32-bit compatibility mode while using Internet Information Services (IIS) on a 64-bit Windows platform. PHP version 5.5 made the 64-bit x86-64 builds available for Microsoft Windows.

Official security support for PHP 5.6 ended on 31 December 2018.

=== PHP 6 and Unicode ===
PHP received mixed reviews due to lacking native Unicode support at the core language level. In 2005, a project headed by Andrei Zmievski was initiated to bring native Unicode support throughout PHP, by embedding the International Components for Unicode (ICU) library, and representing text strings as UTF-16 internally. Since this would cause major changes both to the internals of the language and to user code, it was planned to release this as version 6.0 of the language, along with other major features then in development.

However, a shortage of developers who understood the necessary changes, and performance problems arising from conversion to and from UTF-16, which is rarely used in a web context, led to delays in the project. As a result, a PHP 5.3 release was created in 2009, with many non-Unicode features back-ported from PHP 6, notably namespaces. In March 2010, the project in its current form was officially abandoned, and a PHP 5.4 release was prepared to contain most remaining non-Unicode features from PHP 6, such as traits and closure re-binding. Initial hopes were that a new plan would be formed for Unicode integration, but by 2014 none had been adopted.

=== PHP 7 ===
During 2014 and 2015, a new major PHP version was developed, PHP 7. The numbering of this version involved some debate among internal developers. While the PHP 6 Unicode experiments had never been released, several articles and book titles referenced the PHP 6 names, which might have caused confusion if a new release were to reuse the name. After a vote, the name PHP 7 was chosen.

The foundation of PHP 7 is a PHP branch that was originally dubbed &quot;PHP next generation&quot; (&quot;phpng&quot;). It was authored by Dmitry Stogov, Xinchen Hui and Nikita Popov, and aimed to optimize PHP performance by refactoring the Zend Engine while retaining near-complete language compatibility. By 14 July 2014, WordPress-based benchmarks, which served as the main benchmark suite for the phpng project, showed an almost 100% increase in performance. Changes from phpng make it easier to improve performance in future versions, as more compact data structures and other changes are seen as better suited for a successful migration to a just-in-time (JIT) compiler. Because of the significant changes, the reworked Zend Engine was called &quot;Zend Engine 3&quot;, succeeding Zend Engine 2 used in PHP 5.

Because of the major internal changes in phpng, it must receive a new major version number of PHP, rather than a minor PHP 5 release, according to PHP&#x27;s release process. Major versions of PHP are allowed to break backward-compatibility of code and therefore PHP 7 presented an opportunity for other improvements beyond phpng that require backward-compatibility breaks. In particular, it involved the following changes:
* Many fatal or recoverable-level legacy PHP error mechanisms were replaced with modern object-oriented exceptions.
* The syntax for variable dereferencing was reworked to be internally more consistent and complete, allowing the use of the operators codice_1, codice_2, codice_3,codice_4, and codice_5, with arbitrary meaningful left-side expressions.
* Support for legacy PHP 4-style constructor methods was deprecated.
* The behavior of the codice_6 statement was changed to be more predictable.
* Constructors for the few classes built-in to PHP which returned null upon failure were changed to throw an exception instead, for consistency.
* Several unmaintained or deprecated server application programming interfaces (SAPIs) and extensions were removed from the PHP core, most notably the legacy codice_7 extension.
* The behavior of the codice_8 operator was changed to remove support for strings.
* Support was removed for legacy ASP-style delimiters codice_9 and codice_10 and codice_11.
* An oversight allowing a switch statement to have multiple codice_12 clauses was fixed.
* Support for hexadecimal number support in some implicit conversions from strings to number types was removed.
* The left-shift and right-shift operators were changed to behave more consistently across platforms.
* Conversions between floating-point numbers and integers were changed (e.g. infinity changed to convert to zero) and implemented more consistently across platforms.

PHP 7 also included new language features. Most notably, it introduced return type declarations for functions which complement the existing parameter type declarations, and support for the scalar types (integer, float, string, and boolean) in parameter and return type declarations.

=== PHP 8 ===
PHP 8 was released on 26 November 2020, and is currently the second-most used PHP major version. PHP 8 is a major version and has breaking changes from previous versions. New features and notable changes include:

==== Just-in-time compilation ====
Just-in-time compilation is supported in PHP 8.

PHP 8&#x27;s JIT compiler can provide substantial performance improvements for some use cases, while (then PHP) developer Nikita Popov stated that the performance improvements for most websites will be less substantial than the upgrade from PHP 5 to PHP 7. Substantial improvements are expected more for mathematical-type operations than for common web-development use cases. Additionally, the JIT compiler provides the future potential to move some code from C to PHP, due to the performance improvements for some use cases.

==== Addition of the match expression ====
PHP 8 introduced the expression. The match expression is conceptually similar to a statement and is more compact for some use cases. Because is an expression, its result can be assigned to a variable or returned from a function.

==== Type changes and additions ====
PHP 8 introduced union types, a new return type, and a new type.

&quot;Attributes&quot;, often referred to as &quot;annotations&quot; in other programming languages, were added in PHP 8, which allow metadata to be added to classes.

 was changed from being a statement to being an expression. This allows exceptions to be thrown in places that were not previously possible.

==== Syntax changes and additions ====
PHP 8 includes changes to allow alternate, more concise, or more consistent syntaxes in a number of scenarios. For example, the nullsafe operator is similar to the null coalescing operator , but used when calling methods. The following code snippet will not throw an error if returns null:
$human_readable_date = $user-&gt;getBirthday()?-&gt;diffForHumans();
Constructor property promotion has been added as &quot;syntactic sugar,&quot; allowing class properties to be set automatically when parameters are passed into a class constructor. This reduces the amount of boilerplate code that must be written.

Other minor changes include support for use of on objects, which serves as an alternative for the use of ; non-capturing catches in try-catch blocks; variable syntax tweaks to resolve inconsistencies; support for named arguments; and support for trailing commas in parameter lists, which adds consistency with support for trailing commas in other contexts, such as in arrays.

==== Standard library changes and additions ====
* Weak maps were added in PHP 8. A holds references to objects, but these references do not prevent such objects from being garbage collected. This can provide performance improvements in scenarios where data is being cached; this is of particular relevance for object–relational mappings (ORM).
* Various adjustments to interfaces, such as adding support for creating objects from interfaces, and the addition of a interface that can be used for type hinting.
* Various new functions including , , and ; ; ; and 
* Object implementation of 

==== Additional changes ====
* Type annotations were also added into PHP&#x27;s C source code itself to allow internal functions and methods to have &quot;complete type information in reflection.&quot;
* Inheritance with private methods
* Abstract methods in traits improvements

=== PHP 8.1 ===
PHP 8.1 was released on November 25, 2021. It added support for enumerations (also called &quot;enums&quot;), declaring properties as codice_13 (which prevents modification of the property after initialization), and array unpacking with string keys. The new never type can be used to indicate that a function does not return.

=== PHP 8.2 ===
PHP 8.2 was released on December 8, 2022. New in this release are codice_13 classes (whose instance properties are implicitly readonly), disjunctive normal form (DNF) types, and the codice_15 extension, which provides a pseudorandom number generator with an object-oriented API, Sensitive Parameter value redaction, and a ton of other features.

=== PHP 8.3 ===
PHP 8.3 was released on November 23, 2023. This release introduced readonly array properties, allowing arrays to be declared as immutable after initialization. It also added support for class aliases for built-in PHP classes, new methods for random float generation in the Random extension, and enhanced PHP INI settings with fallback value support. Additionally, the new function provides improved API for stream manipulation, among other updates and deprecations.

=== PHP 8.4 ===
PHP 8.4 was released on November 21, 2024.

=== Release history ===

Beginning on 28 June 2011, the PHP Development Team implemented a timeline for the release of new versions of PHP. Under this system, at least one release should occur every month. Once per year, a minor release should occur which may include new features. Every minor release should at least be supported for two years with security and bug fixes, followed by at least one year of only security fixes, for a total of a three-year release process for every minor release. No new features, unless small and self-contained, are to be introduced into a minor release during the three-year release process.

== Mascot ==
The mascot of the PHP project is the &quot;elePHPant&quot;, a blue elephant with the PHP logo on its side, designed by Vincent Pontier in 1998. &quot;The (PHP) letters were forming the shape of an elephant if viewed in a sideways angle.&quot; The elePHPant is sometimes differently coloured when in plush toy form.

Many variations of this mascot have been made over the years. Only the elePHPants based on the original design by Vincent Pontier are considered official by the community. These are collectable and some of them are extremely rare.

== Syntax ==

The following &quot;Hello, World!&quot; program is written in PHP code embedded in an HTML document:
&lt;!DOCTYPE html&gt;
&lt;html&gt;
 &lt;head&gt;
 &lt;title&gt;PHP &quot;Hello, World!&quot; program&lt;/title&gt;
 &lt;/head&gt;
 &lt;body&gt;
 &lt;p&gt;&lt;?= &#x27;Hello, World!&#x27; ?&gt;&lt;/p&gt;
 &lt;/body&gt;
&lt;/html&gt;
However, as no requirement exists for PHP code to be embedded in HTML, the simplest version of &quot;Hello, World!&quot; may be written like this, with the closing tag ?&gt; omitted as preferred in files containing pure PHP code.
&lt;?php echo &#x27;Hello, World!&#x27;;
The PHP interpreter only executes PHP code within its delimiters. Anything outside of its delimiters is not processed by PHP, although the non-PHP text is still subject to control structures described in PHP code. The most common delimiters are &lt;?php to open and ?&gt; to close PHP sections. The shortened form &lt;? also exists. This short delimiter makes script files less portable since support for them can be disabled in the local PHP configuration and it is therefore discouraged. Conversely, there is no recommendation against the echo short tag &lt;?=. Prior to PHP 5.4.0, this short syntax for echo only works with the codice_16 configuration setting enabled, while for PHP 5.4.0 and later it is always available. The purpose of all these delimiters is to separate PHP code from non-PHP content, such as JavaScript code or HTML markup. So the shortest &quot;Hello, World!&quot; program written in PHP is:

&lt;?=&#x27;Hello, World!&#x27;;

The first form of delimiters, &lt;?php and ?&gt;, in XHTML and other XML documents, creates correctly formed XML processing instructions. This means that the resulting mixture of PHP code and other markups in the server-side file is itself well-formed XML.
Variables are prefixed with a dollar symbol, and a type does not need to be specified in advance. PHP 5 introduced &quot;type declarations&quot; that allow functions to force their parameters to be objects of a specific class, arrays, interfaces or callback functions. However, before PHP 7, type declarations could not be used with scalar types such as integers or strings.

Below is an example of how PHP variables are declared and initialized.
&lt;?php
 $name = &#x27;John&#x27;; // variable of string type being declared and initialized
 $age = 18; // variable of integer type being declared and initialized
 $height = 5.3; // variable of double type being declared and initialized
 echo $name . &#x27; is &#x27; . $height . &quot;m tall\n&quot;; // concatenating variables and strings
 echo &quot;$name is $age years old.&quot;; // interpolating variables to string


Unlike function and class names, variable names are case-sensitive. Both double-quoted (&quot;&quot;) and heredoc strings provide the ability to interpolate a variable&#x27;s value into the string. PHP treats newlines as whitespace in the manner of a free-form language, and statements are terminated by a semicolon. PHP has three types of comment syntax: /* */ marks block and inline comments; // or # are used for one-line comments. The codice_17 statement is one of several facilities PHP provides to output text.

In terms of keywords and language syntax, PHP is similar to C-style syntax. if conditions, for and while loops and function returns are similar in syntax to languages such as C, C++, C#, Java and Perl.

=== Data types ===
PHP is loosely typed. It stores integers in a platform-dependent range, either as a 32, 64 or 128-bit signed integer equivalent to the C-language long type. Unsigned integers are converted to signed values in certain situations, which is different behaviour to many other programming languages. Integer variables can be assigned using decimal (positive and negative), octal, hexadecimal, and binary notations.

Floating-point numbers are also stored in a platform-specific range. They can be specified using floating-point notation, or two forms of scientific notation. PHP has a native Boolean type that is similar to the native Boolean types in Java and C++. Using the Boolean type conversion rules, non-zero values are interpreted as true and zero as false, as in Perl and C++.

The null data type represents a variable that has no value; codice_18 is the only allowed value for this data type.

Variables of the &quot;resource&quot; type represent references to resources from external sources. These are typically created by functions from a particular extension, and can only be processed by functions from the same extension; examples include file, image, and database resources.

Arrays can contain elements of any type that PHP can handle, including resources, objects, and even other arrays. Order is preserved in lists of values and in hashes with both keys and values, and the two can be intermingled. PHP also supports strings, which can be used with single quotes, double quotes, nowdoc or heredoc syntax.

The Standard PHP Library (SPL) attempts to solve standard problems and implements efficient data access interfaces and classes.

=== Functions ===
PHP defines a large array of functions in the core language and many are also available in various extensions; these functions are well documented online PHP documentation. However, the built-in library has a wide variety of naming conventions and associated inconsistencies, as described under history above.

Custom functions may be defined by the developer:
function myAge(int $birthYear): string
 // calculate the age by subtracting the birth year from the current year.
 $yearsOld = date(&#x27;Y&#x27;) - $birthYear;

 // return the age in a descriptive string.
 return $yearsOld . ($yearsOld == 1 ? &#x27; year&#x27; : &#x27; years&#x27;);

echo &#x27;I am currently &#x27; . myAge(1995) . &#x27; old.&#x27;;
As of 2025, the output of the above sample program is &quot;I am currently 30 years old.&quot;

In lieu of function pointers, functions in PHP can be referenced by a string containing their name. In this manner, normal PHP functions can be used, for example, as callbacks or within function tables. User-defined functions may be created at any time without being prototyped. Functions may be defined inside code blocks, permitting a run-time decision as to whether or not a function should be defined. There is a codice_19 function that determines whether a function with a given name has already been defined. Function calls must use parentheses, with the exception of zero-argument class constructor functions called with the PHP operator codice_20, in which case parentheses are optional.

Since PHP 4.0.1 codice_21, a thin wrapper around codice_22, allowed normal PHP functions to be created during program execution; it was deprecated in PHP 7.2 and removed in PHP 8.0 in favor of syntax for anonymous functions or &quot;closures&quot; that can capture variables from the surrounding scope, which was added in PHP 5.3. Shorthand arrow syntax was added in PHP 7.4:
function getAdder($x) {
 return fn($y) =&gt; $x + $y;

$adder = getAdder(8);
echo $adder(2); // prints &quot;10&quot;
In the example above, codice_23 function creates a closure using passed argument , which takes an additional argument , and returns the created closure to the caller. Such a function is a first-class object, meaning that it can be stored in a variable, passed as a parameter to other functions, etc.

Unusually for a dynamically typed language, PHP supports type declarations on function parameters, which are enforced at runtime. This has been supported for classes and interfaces since PHP 5.0, for arrays since PHP 5.1, for &quot;callables&quot; since PHP 5.4, and scalar (integer, float, string and boolean) types since PHP 7.0. PHP 7.0 also has type declarations for function return types, expressed by placing the type name after the list of parameters, preceded by a colon. For example, the codice_24 function from the earlier example could be annotated with types like so in PHP 7:
function getAdder(int $x): Closure
 return fn(int $y): int =&gt; $x + $y;

$adder = getAdder(8);
echo $adder(2); // prints &quot;10&quot;
echo $adder(null); // throws an exception because an incorrect type was passed
$adder = getAdder([]); // would also throw an exception
By default, scalar type declarations follow weak typing principles. So, for example, if a parameter&#x27;s type is codice_25, PHP would allow not only integers, but also convertible numeric strings, floats or Booleans to be passed to that function, and would convert them. However, PHP 7 has a &quot;strict typing&quot; mode which, when used, disallows such conversions for function calls and returns within a file.

=== PHP objects ===
Basic object-oriented programming functionality was added in PHP 3 and improved in PHP 4. This allowed for PHP to gain further abstraction, making creative tasks easier for programmers using the language. Object handling was completely rewritten for PHP 5, expanding the feature set and enhancing performance. In previous versions of PHP, objects were handled like value types. The drawback of this method was that code had to make heavy use of PHP&#x27;s &quot;reference&quot; variables if it wanted to modify an object it was passed rather than creating a copy of it. In the new approach, objects are referenced by handle, and not by value.

PHP 5 introduced private and protected member variables and methods, along with abstract classes, final classes, abstract methods, and final methods. It also introduced a standard way of declaring constructors and destructors, similar to that of other object-oriented languages such as C++, and a standard exception handling model. Furthermore, PHP 5 added interfaces and allowed for multiple interfaces to be implemented. There are special interfaces that allow objects to interact with the runtime system. Objects implementing ArrayAccess can be used with array syntax and objects implementing Iterator or IteratorAggregate can be used with the codice_6 language construct. There is no virtual table feature in the engine, so static variables are bound with a name instead of a reference at compile time.

If the developer creates a copy of an object using the reserved word codice_27, the Zend engine will check whether a codice_28 method has been defined. If not, it will call a default codice_28 which will copy the object&#x27;s properties. If a codice_28 method is defined, then it will be responsible for setting the necessary properties in the created object. For convenience, the engine will supply a function that imports the properties of the source object, so the programmer can start with a by-value of the source object and only override properties that need to be changed.

The visibility of PHP properties and methods is defined using the keywords codice_31, codice_32, and codice_33. The default is public, if only var is used; codice_34 is a synonym for codice_31. Items declared codice_31 can be accessed everywhere. codice_33 limits access to inherited classes (and to the class that defines the item). codice_32 limits visibility only to the class that defines the item. Objects of the same type have access to each other&#x27;s private and protected members even though they are not the same instance.

==== Example ====
The following is a basic example of object-oriented programming in PHP 8:
&lt;?php

abstract class User
 protected string $name;

 public function __construct(string $name)
 // make first letter uppercase and the rest lowercase
 $this-&gt;name = ucfirst(strtolower($name));

 public function greet(): string
 return &quot;Hello, my name is &quot; . $this-&gt;name;

 abstract public function job(): string;

class Student extends User
 public function __construct(string $name, private string $course)
 parent::__construct($name);

 public function job(): string
 return &quot;I learn &quot; . $this-&gt;course;
}

class Teacher extends User
 public function __construct(string $name, private array $teachingCourses)
 parent::__construct($name);

 public function job(): string
 return &quot;I teach &quot; . implode(&quot;, &quot;, $this-&gt;teachingCourses);
}

$students = [
 new Student(&quot;Alice&quot;, &quot;Computer Science&quot;),
 new Student(&quot;Bob&quot;, &quot;Computer Science&quot;),
 new Student(&quot;Charlie&quot;, &quot;Business Studies&quot;),

$teachers = [
 new Teacher(&quot;Dan&quot;, [&quot;Computer Science&quot;, &quot;Information Security&quot;]),
 new Teacher(&quot;Erin&quot;, [&quot;Computer Science&quot;, &quot;3D Graphics Programming&quot;]),
 new Teacher(&quot;Frankie&quot;, [&quot;Online Marketing&quot;, &quot;Business Studies&quot;, &quot;E-commerce&quot;]),

foreach ([$students, $teachers] as $users) {
 echo $users[0]::class . &quot;s:\n&quot;;

 array_walk($users, function (User $user) {
 echo &quot;{$user-&gt;greet()}, {$user-&gt;job()}\n&quot;;
}
This program outputs the following:


== Implementations ==
The only complete PHP implementation is the original, known simply as PHP. It is the most widely used and is powered by the Zend Engine. To disambiguate it from other implementations, it is sometimes unofficially called &quot;Zend PHP&quot;. The Zend Engine compiles PHP source code on-the-fly into an internal format that it can execute, thus it works as an interpreter. It is also the &quot;reference implementation&quot; of PHP, as PHP has no formal specification, and so the semantics of Zend PHP define the semantics of PHP. Due to the complex and nuanced semantics of PHP, defined by how Zend works, it is difficult for competing implementations to offer complete compatibility.

PHP&#x27;s single-request-per-script-execution model, and the fact that the Zend Engine is an interpreter, leads to inefficiency; as a result, various products have been developed to help improve PHP performance. In order to speed up execution time and not have to compile the PHP source code every time the web page is accessed, PHP scripts can also be deployed in the PHP engine&#x27;s internal format by using an opcode cache, which works by caching the compiled form of a PHP script (opcodes) in shared memory to avoid the overhead of parsing and compiling the code every time the script runs. An opcode cache, Zend Opcache, is built into PHP since version 5.5. Another example of a widely used opcode cache is the Alternative PHP Cache (APC), which is available as a PECL extension.

While Zend PHP is still the most popular implementation, several other implementations have been developed. Some of these are compilers or support JIT compilation, and hence offer performance benefits over Zend PHP at the expense of lacking full PHP compatibility. Alternative implementations include the following:

* HHVM (HipHop Virtual Machine) – developed at Facebook and available as open source, it converts PHP code into a high-level bytecode (commonly known as an intermediate language), which is then translated into x86-64 machine code dynamically at runtime by a just-in-time (JIT) compiler, resulting in up to 6× performance improvements. However, since version 7.2 Zend has outperformed HHVM, and HHVM 3.24 is the last version to officially support PHP.
** HipHop – developed at Facebook and available as open source, it transforms the PHP scripts into C++ code and then compiles the resulting code, reducing the server load up to 50%. In early 2013, Facebook deprecated it in favour of HHVM due to multiple reasons, including deployment difficulties and lack of support for the whole PHP language, including the codice_21 and codice_22 constructs.
* Parrot – a virtual machine designed to run dynamic languages efficiently; the cross-translator Pipp transforms the PHP source code into the Parrot intermediate representation, which is then translated into the Parrot&#x27;s bytecode and executed by the virtual machine.
* PeachPie – a second-generation compiler to .NET Common Intermediate Language (CIL) bytecode, built on the Roslyn platform; successor of Phalanger, sharing several architectural components
* Phalanger – compiles PHP into .Net Common Intermediate Language bytecode; predecessor of PeachPie
* Quercus – compiles PHP into Java bytecode

== Licensing ==
PHP is free software released under the PHP License, which stipulates that:

This restriction on the use of &quot;PHP&quot; makes the PHP License incompatible with the GNU General Public License (GPL), while the Zend License is incompatible due to an advertising clause similar to that of the original BSD license.

== Development and community ==
PHP includes various free and open-source libraries in its source distribution or uses them in resulting PHP binary builds. PHP is fundamentally an Internet-aware system with built-in modules for accessing File Transfer Protocol (FTP) servers and many database servers, including PostgreSQL, MySQL, Microsoft SQL Server and SQLite (which is an embedded database), LDAP servers, and others. Numerous functions are familiar to C programmers, such as those in the stdio family, are available in standard PHP builds.

PHP allows developers to write extensions in C to add functionality to the PHP language. PHP extensions can be compiled statically into PHP or loaded dynamically at runtime. Numerous extensions have been written to add support for the Windows API, process management on Unix-like operating systems, multibyte strings (Unicode), cURL, and several popular compression formats. Other PHP features made available through extensions include integration with Internet Relay Chat (IRC), dynamic generation of images and Adobe Flash content, &quot;PHP Data Objects&quot; (PDO) as an abstraction layer used for accessing databases, and even speech synthesis. Some of the language&#x27;s core functions, such as those dealing with strings and arrays, are also implemented as extensions. The PHP Extension Community Library (PECL) project is a repository for extensions to the PHP language.

Some other projects, such as &quot;Zephir&quot;, provide the ability for PHP extensions to be created in a high-level language and compiled into native PHP extensions. Such an approach, instead of writing PHP extensions directly in C, simplifies the development of extensions and reduces the time required for programming and testing.

By December 2018 the PHP Group consisted of ten people: Thies C. Arntzen, Stig Bakken, Shane Caraveo, Andi Gutmans, Rasmus Lerdorf, Sam Ruby, Sascha Schumann, Zeev Suraski, Jim Winstead, and Andrei Zmievski.

Zend Technologies provides a PHP Certification based on PHP 8 exam (and previously based on PHP 7 and 5.5) for programmers to become certified PHP developers.

== The PHP Foundation ==

On 26 November 2021, the JetBrains blog announced the creation of The PHP Foundation, which will sponsor the design and development of PHP.

The foundation hires &quot;Core Developers&quot; to work on the PHP language&#x27;s core repository. Roman Pronskiy, a member of the foundation&#x27;s board, said that they aim to pay &quot;market salaries&quot; to developers.

The response to the foundation has mostly been positive, with the foundation being praised for better supporting the language and helping to stop the decrease in the language&#x27;s popularity. However, it has also been criticised for adding breaking changes to minor versions of PHP, such as in PHP 8.2 where initialising members of a class out-with the original class scope would cause deprecation errors, these changes impacted a number of open source projects including WordPress.
Germany&#x27;s Sovereign Tech Fund provided more than 200,000 Euros to support the PHP Foundation.

== Installation and configuration ==
There are two primary ways for adding support for PHP to a web server – as a native web server module, or as a CGI executable. PHP has a direct module interface called server application programming interface (SAPI), which is supported by many web servers including Apache HTTP Server, Microsoft IIS and iPlanet Web Server. Some other web servers, such as OmniHTTPd, support the Internet Server Application Programming Interface (ISAPI), which is Microsoft&#x27;s web server module interface. If PHP has no module support for a web server, it can always be used as a Common Gateway Interface (CGI) or FastCGI processor; in that case, the web server is configured to use PHP&#x27;s CGI executable to process all requests to PHP files.

PHP-FPM (FastCGI Process Manager) is an alternative FastCGI implementation for PHP, bundled with the official PHP distribution since version 5.3.3. When compared to the older FastCGI implementation, it contains some additional features, mostly useful for heavily loaded web servers.

When using PHP for command-line scripting, a PHP command-line interface (CLI) executable is needed. PHP supports a CLI server application programming interface (SAPI) since PHP 4.3.0. The main focus of this SAPI is developing shell applications using PHP. There are quite a few differences between the CLI SAPI and other SAPIs, although they do share many of the same behaviours.

PHP has a direct module interface called SAPI for different web servers; in case of PHP 5 and Apache 2.0 on Windows, it is provided in form of a DLL file called , which is a module that, among other functions, provides an interface between PHP and the web server, implemented in a form that the server understands. This form is what is known as a SAPI.

There are different kinds of SAPIs for various web server extensions. For example, in addition to those listed above, other SAPIs for the PHP language include the Common Gateway Interface and command-line interface.

PHP can also be used for writing desktop graphical user interface (GUI) applications, by using the or discontinued PHP-GTK extension. PHP-GTK is not included in the official PHP distribution, and as an extension, it can be used only with PHP versions 5.1.0 and newer. The most common way of installing PHP-GTK is by compiling it from the source code.

When PHP is installed and used in cloud environments, software development kits (SDKs) are provided for using cloud-specific features. For example:
* Amazon Web Services provides the AWS SDK for PHP
* Microsoft Azure can be used with the Windows Azure SDK for PHP.

Numerous configuration options are supported, affecting both core PHP features and extensions. Configuration file codice_41 is searched for in different locations, depending on the way PHP is used. The configuration file is split into various sections, while some of the configuration options can be also set within the web server configuration.

== Use ==
PHP is a general-purpose scripting language that is especially suited to server-side web development, in which case PHP generally runs on a web server. Any PHP code in a requested file is executed by the PHP runtime, usually to create dynamic web page content or dynamic images used on websites or elsewhere. It can also be used for command-line scripting and client-side graphical user interface (GUI) applications. PHP can be deployed on most web servers, many operating systems and platforms, and can be used with many relational database management systems (RDBMS). Most web hosting providers support PHP for use by their clients. It is available free of charge, and the PHP Group provides the complete source code for users to build, customize and extend for their own use.
Originally designed to create dynamic web pages, PHP now focuses mainly on server-side scripting, and it is similar to other server-side scripting languages that provide dynamic content from a web server to a client, such as Python, Microsoft&#x27;s ASP.NET, Sun Microsystems&#x27; JavaServer Pages, and codice_42. PHP has also attracted the development of many software frameworks that provide building blocks and a design structure to promote rapid application development (RAD). Some of these include PRADO, CakePHP, Symfony, CodeIgniter, Laravel, Yii Framework, Phalcon and Laminas, offering features similar to other web frameworks.

The LAMP architecture has become popular in the web industry as a way of deploying web applications. PHP is commonly used as the &quot;P&quot; in this bundle alongside Linux, Apache and MySQL, although the &quot;P&quot; may also refer to Python, Perl, or some mix of the three. Similar packages, WAMP and MAMP, are also available for Windows and macOS, with the first letter standing for the respective operating system. Although both PHP and Apache are provided as part of the macOS base install, users of these packages seek a simpler installation mechanism that can be more easily kept up to date.

For specific and more advanced usage scenarios, PHP offers a well-defined and documented way for writing custom extensions in C or C++. Besides extending the language itself in form of additional libraries, extensions are providing a way for improving execution speed where it is critical and there is room for improvements by using a true compiled language. PHP also offers well-defined ways for embedding itself into other software projects. That way PHP can be easily used as an internal scripting language for another project, also providing tight interfacing with the project&#x27;s specific internal data structures.

PHP received mixed reviews due to lacking support for multithreading at the core language level, though using threads is made possible by the &quot;pthreads&quot; PECL extension.

A command line interface, php-cli, and two ActiveX Windows Script Host scripting engines for PHP have been produced.

=== Popularity and usage statistics ===

PHP is used for Web content management systems including MediaWiki, WordPress, Joomla, Drupal, Moodle, eZ Publish, eZ Platform, and SilverStripe.

, PHP was used in more than 240 million websites (39% of those sampled) and was installed on 2.1 million web servers.

 (two months after PHP 8.4&#x27;s release), PHP is used as the server-side programming language on 75.0% of websites where the language could be determined; PHP 7 is the most used version of the language with 47.1% of websites using PHP being on that version, while 40.6% use PHP 8, 12.2% use PHP 5 and 0.1% use PHP 4.

== Security ==
In 2019, 11% of all vulnerabilities listed by the National Vulnerability Database were linked to PHP; historically, about 30% of all vulnerabilities listed since 1996 in this database are linked to PHP. Technical security flaws of the language itself or of its core libraries are not frequent (22 in 2009, about 1% of the total although PHP applies to about 20% of programs listed). Recognizing that programmers make mistakes, some languages include taint checking to automatically detect the lack of input validation which induces many issues. Such a feature has been proposed for PHP in the past, but either been rejected or the proposal abandoned.

Third-party projects such as Suhosin and Snuffleupagus aim to remove or change dangerous parts of the language.

Historically, old versions of PHP had some configuration parameters and default values for such runtime settings that made some PHP applications prone to security issues. Among these, codice_43 and codice_44 configuration directives were the best known; the latter made any URL parameters become PHP variables, opening a path for serious security vulnerabilities by allowing an attacker to set the value of any uninitialized global variable and interfere with the execution of a PHP script. Support for &quot;magic quotes&quot; and &quot;register globals&quot; settings has been deprecated since PHP 5.3.0, and removed from PHP 5.4.0.

Another example for the potential runtime-settings vulnerability comes from failing to disable PHP execution (for example by using the codice_45 configuration directive) for the directory where uploaded files are stored; enabling it can result in the execution of malicious code embedded within the uploaded files. The best practice is to either locate the image directory outside of the document root available to the web server and serve it via an intermediary script or disable PHP execution for the directory which stores the uploaded files.

Also, enabling the dynamic loading of PHP extensions (via codice_46 configuration directive) in a shared web hosting environment can lead to security issues.

Implied type conversions that result in different values being treated as equal, sometimes against the programmer&#x27;s intent, can lead to security issues. For example, the result of the comparison is codice_47, because strings that are parsable as numbers are converted to numbers; in this case, the first compared value is treated as scientific notation having the value (), which is zero. Errors like this resulted in authentication vulnerabilities in Simple Machines Forum, Typo3 and phpBB when MD5 password hashes were compared. The recommended way is to use codice_48 (for timing attack safety), codice_49 or the identity operator (codice_50), as results in codice_51.

In a 2013 analysis of over 170,000 website defacements, published by Zone-H, the most frequently (53%) used technique was the exploitation of file inclusion vulnerability, mostly related to insecure usage of the PHP language constructs codice_52, codice_53, and codice_54.

=== Cryptographic Security ===
PHP includes codice_55 and codice_56functions which use a pseudorandom number generator, and are not cryptographically secure. As of version 8.1, the codice_57 function is included, which uses a cryptographically secure source of randomness provided by the system.

There are two attacks that can be performed over PHP entropy sources: &quot;seed attack&quot; and &quot;state recovery attack&quot;. As of 2012, a $250 GPU can perform up to 2 MD5 calculations per second, while a $750 GPU can perform four times as many calculations at the same time. In combination with a &quot;birthday attack&quot; this can lead to serious security vulnerabilities.

=== Long-Term Support ===
The PHP development team provides official bug fixes for 2 years following release of each minor version, followed by another 2 years where only security fixes are released. After this, the release is considered end of life and no longer officially supported.

Extended Long-Term Support beyond this is available from commercial providers, such as Zend and others

== See also ==

* Comparison of programming languages
* List of Apache–MySQL–PHP packages
* List of PHP accelerators
* List of PHP editors
* PEAR (PHP Extension and Application Repository)
* PHP accelerator
* Template processor
* XAMPP (free and open-source cross-platform web server solution stack package)
* Zend Server
== References ==
== Further reading ==

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="0" end="3" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q951497" start="9" end="24" title="general-purpose programming language" label="general-purpose"/>
<link wikidata="Q187432" start="25" end="43" title="scripting language" label="scripting language"/>
<link wikidata="Q386275" start="59" end="74" title="web development" label="web development"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030924" start="105" end="120" title="Danish Canadians" label="Danish-Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482740" start="121" end="131" title="programmer" label="programmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q92768" start="132" end="146" title="Rasmus Lerdorf" label="Rasmus Lerdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136722" start="185" end="209" title="reference implementation" label="reference implementation"/>
<link wikidata="Q466981" start="328" end="345" title="recursive acronym" label="recursive acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="411" end="421" title="web server" label="web server"/>
<link wikidata="Q183065" start="431" end="442" title="interpreter (computing)" label="interpreter"/>
<link wikidata="Q184148" start="460" end="466" title="plugin (computing)" label="module"/>
<link wikidata="Q308980" start="470" end="476" title="daemon (computing)" label="daemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q264364" start="482" end="506" title="Common Gateway Interface" label="Common Gateway Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q183065" start="560" end="571" title="interpreter (computing)" label="interpreted"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="642" end="646" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="650" end="656" title="binary number" label="binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="702" end="706" title="HTTP" label="HTTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978623" start="725" end="744" title="web template system" label="web template system"/>
<link wikidata="Q131093" start="751" end="776" title="content management system" label="content management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330336" start="783" end="796" title="web framework" label="web framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="988" end="1010" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="1015" end="1020" title="unmanned aerial vehicle" label="drone"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="1078" end="1090" title="command-line interface" label="command line"/>
<link wikidata="Q189473" start="1138" end="1149" title="Zend Engine" label="Zend Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="1154" end="1167" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q376841" start="1187" end="1198" title="PHP License" label="PHP License"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="1283" end="1299" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q241317" start="1305" end="1314" title="computing platform" label="platforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437424" start="1364" end="1384" title="formal specification" label="formal specification"/>
<link wikidata="Q245962" start="1416" end="1430" title="implementation" label="implementation"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="1451" end="1459" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q92768" start="2013" end="2027" title="Rasmus Lerdorf" label="Rasmus Lerdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q264364" start="2042" end="2066" title="Common Gateway Interface" label="Common Gateway Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="2085" end="2086" title="C-programming" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737701" start="2118" end="2135" title="personal homepage" label="personal homepage"/>
<link wikidata="Q287539" start="2167" end="2175" title="web form" label="web form"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="2201" end="2209" title="database" label="database"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152399" start="2332" end="2338" title="Syntax (programming languages)" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650567" start="2887" end="2910" title="dynamic web application" label="dynamic web application"/>
<link wikidata="Q179550" start="2927" end="2930" title="software bug" label="bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="3084" end="3090" title="Usenet" label="Usenet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3221" end="3240" title="Local variable#Local variables in Perl" label="Perl-like variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="3282" end="3286" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="3307" end="3313" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="3346" end="3350" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670534" start="3446" end="3466" title="Programming language theory" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211457" start="3832" end="3836" title="Beta development stage" label="beta"/>
<link wikidata="Q183427" start="4286" end="4299" title="hash function" label="hash function"/>
<link wikidata="Q183427" start="4353" end="4364" title="hash values" label="hash values"/>
<link wikidata="Q64050" start="4388" end="4400" title="Zeev Suraski" label="Zeev Suraski"/>
<link wikidata="Q466178" start="4405" end="4417" title="Andi Gutmans" label="Andi Gutmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q194152" start="4430" end="4436" title="parser" label="parser"/>
<link wikidata="Q466981" start="4516" end="4533" title="recursive acronym" label="recursive acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319106" start="4700" end="4707" title="rewrite (programming)" label="rewrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q189473" start="4742" end="4753" title="Zend Engine" label="Zend Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189477" start="4781" end="4798" title="Zend Technologies" label="Zend Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q192807" start="4802" end="4811" title="Ramat Gan" label="Ramat Gan"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="4813" end="4819" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="5187" end="5214" title="object-oriented programming" label="object-oriented programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q16928028" start="5437" end="5456" title="Late static binding" label="Late static binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="5820" end="5826" title="32-bit" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q252132" start="5831" end="5837" title="64-bit" label="64-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="5987" end="6004" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q262238" start="6038" end="6043" title="IA-32" label="IA-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q11341" start="6108" end="6137" title="Internet Information Services" label="Internet Information Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q272629" start="6206" end="6212" title="x86-64" label="x86-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="6395" end="6402" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="6514" end="6521" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q823839" start="6563" end="6599" title="International Components for Unicode" label="International Components for Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q740701" start="6648" end="6654" title="UTF-16" label="UTF-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q925385" start="7964" end="7970" title="branching (version control)" label="branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q13166" start="8255" end="8264" title="WordPress" label="WordPress"/>
<link wikidata="Q110546" start="8579" end="8591" title="Just-in-time compilation" label="just-in-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859422" start="8818" end="8831" title="Software versioning" label="major version"/>
<link wikidata="Q471748" start="9276" end="9286" title="Exception (computer science)" label="exceptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273595" start="9615" end="9633" title="foreach loop" label="codice_6 statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q927521" start="9852" end="9892" title="server application programming interface" label="server application programming interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q838092" start="10194" end="10210" title="switch statement" label="switch statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q879126" start="10375" end="10385" title="left-shift operator" label="left-shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q879126" start="10390" end="10401" title="right-shift operator" label="right-shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q877977" start="10827" end="10833" title="Variable (computer science)" label="scalar"/>
<link wikidata="Q110546" start="11185" end="11209" title="Just-in-time compilation" label="Just-in-time compilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q110546" start="11247" end="11259" title="just-in-time compilation" label="JIT compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506270" start="12650" end="12674" title="null coalescing operator" label="null coalescing operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q734781" start="12900" end="12915" title="syntactic sugar" label="syntactic sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049476" start="13013" end="13024" title="Constructor (object-oriented programming)" label="constructor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938355" start="13053" end="13069" title="boilerplate code" label="boilerplate code"/>
<link wikidata="Q322202" start="13643" end="13660" title="Garbage collection (computer science)" label="garbage collected"/>
<link wikidata="Q165596" start="13737" end="13743" title="Cache (computing)" label="cached"/>
<link wikidata="Q58748" start="13781" end="13806" title="object–relational mapping" label="object–relational mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q760170" start="14422" end="14434" title="enumerated type" label="enumerations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546108" start="14616" end="14626" title="bottom type" label="never type"/>
<link wikidata="Q903789" start="14838" end="14861" title="disjunctive normal form" label="disjunctive normal form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623338" start="14921" end="14950" title="pseudorandom number generator" label="pseudorandom number generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="14975" end="14978" title="API" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="16299" end="16307" title="elephant" label="elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q682582" start="16531" end="16540" title="plush toy" label="plush toy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131303" start="16808" end="16841" title="&amp;quot;Hello, World!&amp;quot; program" label="&amp;quot;Hello, World!&amp;quot; program"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="16880" end="16884" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641420" start="17452" end="17461" title="delimiter" label="delimiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q868299" start="17570" end="17587" title="control structure" label="control structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="18214" end="18224" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q131303" start="18262" end="18295" title="&amp;quot;Hello, World!&amp;quot; program" label="&amp;quot;Hello, World!&amp;quot; program"/>
<link wikidata="Q166074" start="18403" end="18408" title="XHTML" label="XHTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="18419" end="18422" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483527" start="18621" end="18629" title="sigil (computer programming)" label="prefixed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11110" start="18637" end="18650" title="dollar sign" label="dollar symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188648" start="18658" end="18662" title="primitive type" label="type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205349" start="18856" end="18873" title="callback function" label="callback function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609764" start="19586" end="19593" title="heredoc" label="heredoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q184914" start="19689" end="19696" title="newline" label="newline"/>
<link wikidata="Q591615" start="19701" end="19711" title="whitespace character" label="whitespace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499621" start="19731" end="19749" title="free-form language" label="free-form language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19820" end="19834" title="comparison of programming languages (syntax)#Comments" label="comment syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q106650558" start="20227" end="20240" title="strong and weak typing" label="loosely typed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359789" start="20322" end="20328" title="signed number representations" label="signed"/>
<link wikidata="Q729138" start="20329" end="20336" title="integer (computer science)" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q838047" start="20355" end="20375" title="C variable types and declarations" label="C-language long type"/>
<link wikidata="Q76463" start="20588" end="20593" title="octal" label="octal"/>
<link wikidata="Q82828" start="20595" end="20606" title="hexadecimal" label="hexadecimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q864135" start="20612" end="20618" title="binary code" label="binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="20631" end="20652" title="Floating-point number" label="Floating-point number"/>
<link wikidata="Q219142" start="20769" end="20788" title="scientific notation" label="scientific notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q520777" start="20807" end="20814" title="Boolean data type" label="Boolean"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="20867" end="20871" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="20876" end="20879" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="20987" end="20991" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q207440" start="21567" end="21573" title="hash table" label="hashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="21652" end="21659" title="string (computing)" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609764" start="21724" end="21731" title="heredoc" label="heredoc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22183" end="22190" title="#History" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736305" start="22710" end="22726" title="function pointer" label="function pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205349" start="22865" end="22874" title="Callback function" label="callbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282545" start="22885" end="22899" title="function table" label="function table"/>
<link wikidata="Q81613" start="22966" end="22976" title="Function prototype" label="prototyped"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268939" start="23036" end="23053" title="dynamic dispatch" label="run-time decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049476" start="23293" end="23304" title="constructor (computer science)" label="constructor"/>
<link wikidata="Q567612" start="23600" end="23618" title="anonymous function" label="anonymous function"/>
<link wikidata="Q535335" start="23629" end="23637" title="Closure (computer programming)" label="closures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410440" start="24155" end="24164" title="parameter (computer programming)" label="parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="25496" end="25523" title="object-oriented programming" label="object-oriented programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q59627259" start="25855" end="25865" title="value type" label="value type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575058" start="26107" end="26113" title="handle (computing)" label="handle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814247" start="26173" end="26188" title="member variable" label="member variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781552" start="26214" end="26230" title="abstract type" label="abstract classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q190087" start="26232" end="26245" title="final type" label="final classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q815844" start="26247" end="26262" title="abstract method" label="abstract method"/>
<link wikidata="Q815844" start="26269" end="26281" title="final method" label="final method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049476" start="26331" end="26343" title="Constructor (computer science)" label="constructors"/>
<link wikidata="Q735151" start="26348" end="26359" title="Destructor (computer science)" label="destructors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="26420" end="26423" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q471748" start="26440" end="26458" title="exception handling" label="exception handling"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808" start="26491" end="26501" title="Interface (computing)" label="interfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q216601" start="26642" end="26649" title="object (computer science)" label="Objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q121079" start="26692" end="26697" title="array data type" label="array"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326388" start="26730" end="26738" title="Iterator" label="Iterator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326388" start="26742" end="26759" title="IteratorAggregate" label="IteratorAggregate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486712" start="26790" end="26808" title="language construct" label="language construct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755692" start="26822" end="26835" title="virtual table" label="virtual table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896011" start="26862" end="26877" title="static variable" label="static variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q15912075" start="27528" end="27538" title="Visibility (computer science)" label="visibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192029" start="27590" end="27598" title="Keyword (computer programming)" label="keywords"/>
<link wikidata="Q877977" start="27667" end="27670" title="variable (programming)" label="var"/>
<link wikidata="Q212542" start="27798" end="27813" title="inherited class" label="inherited class"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="28114" end="28141" title="object-oriented programming" label="object-oriented programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q189473" start="29859" end="29870" title="Zend Engine" label="Zend Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="29993" end="30001" title="Compiler" label="compiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="30006" end="30017" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q183065" start="30094" end="30105" title="Interpreter (computing)" label="interpreter"/>
<link wikidata="Q766483" start="30837" end="30843" title="opcode" label="opcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q165596" start="30866" end="30873" title="Cache (computing)" label="caching"/>
<link wikidata="Q764810" start="30921" end="30934" title="Shared memory (interprocess communication)" label="shared memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q194152" start="30960" end="30967" title="parsing" label="parsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="30972" end="30981" title="compiling" label="compiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593252" start="31036" end="31048" title="Zend Opcache" label="Zend Opcache"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593252" start="31140" end="31161" title="Alternative PHP Cache" label="Alternative PHP Cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q568694" start="31193" end="31197" title="PHP Extension Community Library" label="PECL"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="31336" end="31344" title="compiler" label="compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q110546" start="31357" end="31372" title="JIT compilation" label="JIT compilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150679" start="31529" end="31533" title="HHVM" label="HHVM"/>
<link wikidata="Q244916" start="31683" end="31704" title="intermediate language" label="intermediate language"/>
<link wikidata="Q110546" start="31785" end="31797" title="Just-in-time compiler" label="just-in-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409361" start="31981" end="31987" title="HipHop for PHP" label="HipHop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="32077" end="32080" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354914" start="32375" end="32381" title="Parrot virtual machine" label="Parrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139848" start="32515" end="32549" title="Parrot intermediate representation" label="Parrot intermediate representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q64137519" start="32647" end="32655" title="PeachPie" label="PeachPie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289" start="32691" end="32694" title=".NET Framework" label="NET"/>
<link wikidata="Q263544" start="32695" end="32723" title="Common Intermediate Language" label="Common Intermediate Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840207" start="32753" end="32759" title="Roslyn (compiler)" label="Roslyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463808" start="32837" end="32846" title="Phalanger (compiler)" label="Phalanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145742" start="32937" end="32944" title="Quercus (software)" label="Quercus"/>
<link wikidata="Q137496" start="32965" end="32978" title="Java bytecode" label="Java bytecode"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="33003" end="33016" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q376841" start="33036" end="33047" title="PHP License" label="PHP License"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="33164" end="33190" title="GNU General Public License" label="GNU General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q191307" start="33298" end="33309" title="BSD license" label="BSD license"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593253" start="33365" end="33395" title="list of PHP libraries" label="free and open-source libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="33492" end="33500" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42283" start="33550" end="33572" title="File Transfer Protocol" label="File Transfer Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q192490" start="33624" end="33634" title="PostgreSQL" label="PostgreSQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q850" start="33636" end="33641" title="MySQL" label="MySQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q215819" start="33643" end="33663" title="Microsoft SQL Server" label="Microsoft SQL Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q319417" start="33668" end="33674" title="SQLite" label="SQLite"/>
<link wikidata="Q188816" start="33708" end="33712" title="Lightweight Directory Access Protocol" label="LDAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q13402954" start="33805" end="33810" title="stdio.h" label="stdio"/>
<link wikidata="Q184148" start="33889" end="33899" title="Software extension" label="extensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="33903" end="33904" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q828191" start="34093" end="34104" title="Windows API" label="Windows API"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="34128" end="34137" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="34138" end="34154" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="34176" end="34183" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q286306" start="34186" end="34190" title="cURL" label="cURL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351368" start="34212" end="34231" title="archive format" label="compression formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q73" start="34311" end="34330" title="Internet Relay Chat" label="Internet Relay Chat"/>
<link wikidata="Q165658" start="34371" end="34382" title="Adobe Flash" label="Adobe Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q16346" start="34490" end="34506" title="speech synthesis" label="speech synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q568694" start="34639" end="34670" title="PHP Extension Community Library" label="PHP Extension Community Library"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35131" end="35147" title="Thies C. Arntzen" label="Thies C. Arntzen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35149" end="35160" title="Stig Bakken" label="Stig Bakken"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35162" end="35175" title="Shane Caraveo" label="Shane Caraveo"/>
<link wikidata="Q466178" start="35177" end="35189" title="Andi Gutmans" label="Andi Gutmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q92768" start="35191" end="35205" title="Rasmus Lerdorf" label="Rasmus Lerdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408097" start="35207" end="35215" title="Sam Ruby" label="Sam Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35217" end="35232" title="Sascha Schumann" label="Sascha Schumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q64050" start="35234" end="35246" title="Zeev Suraski" label="Zeev Suraski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35248" end="35260" title="Jim Winstead" label="Jim Winstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q254208" start="35266" end="35281" title="Andrei Zmievski" label="Andrei Zmievski"/>
<link wikidata="Q189477" start="35284" end="35301" title="Zend Technologies" label="Zend Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q189477" start="35313" end="35330" title="Zend Certified Engineer" label="PHP Certification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688472" start="35495" end="35504" title="JetBrains" label="JetBrains"/>
<link wikidata="Q13166" start="36313" end="36322" title="WordPress" label="WordPress"/>
<link wikidata="Q115946387" start="36339" end="36358" title="Sovereign Tech Fund" label="Sovereign Tech Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q927521" start="36629" end="36669" title="server application programming interface" label="server application programming interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q11354" start="36727" end="36745" title="Apache HTTP Server" label="Apache HTTP Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q11341" start="36747" end="36760" title="Internet Information Services" label="Microsoft IIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225115" start="36765" end="36783" title="Oracle iPlanet Web Server" label="iPlanet Web Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434299" start="36840" end="36889" title="Internet Server Application Programming Interface" label="Internet Server Application Programming Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="36908" end="36917" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q264364" start="37028" end="37052" title="Common Gateway Interface" label="Common Gateway Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397631" start="37062" end="37069" title="FastCGI" label="FastCGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="37529" end="37551" title="command-line interface" label="command-line interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q927521" start="37599" end="37639" title="server application programming interface" label="server application programming interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="37706" end="37711" title="command line interface" label="shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q380319" start="38006" end="38009" title="Dynamic-link library" label="DLL"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="38473" end="38497" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q254208" start="38547" end="38554" title="PHP-GTK" label="PHP-GTK"/>
<link wikidata="Q483639" start="38818" end="38823" title="Cloud computing" label="cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q467707" start="38838" end="38862" title="software development kit" label="software development kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q456157" start="38934" end="38953" title="Amazon Web Services" label="Amazon Web Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q725967" start="38985" end="39000" title="Microsoft Azure" label="Microsoft Azure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209289" start="39480" end="39491" title="server-side scripting" label="server-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q386275" start="39492" end="39507" title="web development" label="web development"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="39547" end="39557" title="web server" label="web server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077724" start="39595" end="39603" title="execution (computing)" label="executed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650567" start="39642" end="39658" title="dynamic web page" label="dynamic web page"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="39740" end="39752" title="command-line" label="command-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q146813" start="39767" end="39778" title="client-side" label="client-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="39779" end="39803" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="39870" end="39886" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q241317" start="39892" end="39901" title="computing platform" label="platforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q192588" start="39929" end="39966" title="relational database management system" label="relational database management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5892272" start="39982" end="39993" title="web hosting" label="web hosting"/>
<link wikidata="Q36774" start="40224" end="40232" title="web page" label="web page"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209289" start="40261" end="40282" title="server-side scripting" label="server-side scripting"/>
<link wikidata="Q528166" start="40395" end="40401" title="client (computing)" label="client"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="40411" end="40417" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="40419" end="40428" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q178817" start="40436" end="40443" title="ASP.NET" label="ASP.NET"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="40445" end="40461" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun Microsystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q183169" start="40468" end="40484" title="JavaServer Pages" label="JavaServer Pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q271680" start="40548" end="40566" title="software framework" label="software framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q795549" start="40631" end="40660" title="rapid application development" label="rapid application development"/>
<link wikidata="Q151778" start="40690" end="40695" title="PRADO (framework)" label="PRADO"/>
<link wikidata="Q647055" start="40697" end="40704" title="CakePHP" label="CakePHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322933" start="40706" end="40713" title="Symfony" label="Symfony"/>
<link wikidata="Q339829" start="40715" end="40726" title="CodeIgniter" label="CodeIgniter"/>
<link wikidata="Q13634357" start="40728" end="40735" title="Laravel" label="Laravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466168" start="40737" end="40750" title="Yii Framework" label="Yii Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q15840357" start="40752" end="40759" title="Phalcon (framework)" label="Phalcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q189475" start="40764" end="40771" title="Laminas" label="Laminas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330336" start="40808" end="40821" title="web framework" label="web framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q191342" start="40829" end="40846" title="LAMP (software bundle)" label="LAMP architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="40993" end="40998" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q11354" start="41000" end="41006" title="Apache HTTP Server" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q850" start="41011" end="41016" title="MySQL" label="MySQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="41063" end="41069" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="41071" end="41075" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q191342" start="41121" end="41125" title="WAMP (software bundle)" label="WAMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125478" start="41130" end="41134" title="MAMP" label="MAMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="41159" end="41166" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="41171" end="41176" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="41553" end="41554" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="41558" end="41561" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q188860" start="41623" end="41632" title="Library (computing)" label="libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q651794" start="41767" end="41784" title="compiled language" label="compiled language"/>
<link wikidata="Q187432" start="41918" end="41936" title="scripting language" label="scripting language"/>
<link wikidata="Q175263" start="42033" end="42047" title="data structure" label="data structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q213092" start="42105" end="42119" title="Multithreading (software)" label="multithreading"/>
<link wikidata="Q568694" start="42214" end="42218" title="PHP Extension Community Library" label="PECL"/>
<link wikidata="Q302022" start="42274" end="42281" title="ActiveX" label="ActiveX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152468" start="42282" end="42301" title="Windows Script Host" label="Windows Script Host"/>
<link wikidata="Q45211" start="42406" end="42435" title="Web content management system" label="Web content management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q83" start="42447" end="42456" title="MediaWiki" label="MediaWiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q13166" start="42458" end="42467" title="WordPress" label="WordPress"/>
<link wikidata="Q13167" start="42469" end="42475" title="Joomla" label="Joomla"/>
<link wikidata="Q170855" start="42477" end="42483" title="Drupal" label="Drupal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190434" start="42485" end="42491" title="Moodle" label="Moodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q284693" start="42493" end="42503" title="eZ Publish" label="eZ Publish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345967" start="42505" end="42516" title="eZ Platform" label="eZ Platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q653262" start="42522" end="42534" title="SilverStripe" label="SilverStripe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35127" start="42577" end="42584" title="website" label="website"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="42642" end="42652" title="web server" label="web server"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979334" start="43041" end="43072" title="National Vulnerability Database" label="National Vulnerability Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676227" start="43441" end="43455" title="taint checking" label="taint checking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306762" start="43492" end="43508" title="data validation" label="input validation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619259" start="43672" end="43679" title="Suhosin" label="Suhosin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730964" start="44265" end="44277" title="magic quotes" label="magic quotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662525" start="45037" end="45055" title="shared web hosting" label="shared web hosting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333515" start="45106" end="45121" title="type conversion" label="type conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q219142" start="45436" end="45455" title="scientific notation" label="scientific notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141743" start="45555" end="45576" title="Simple Machines Forum" label="Simple Machines Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q618512" start="45578" end="45583" title="Typo3" label="Typo3"/>
<link wikidata="Q14270" start="45588" end="45593" title="phpBB" label="phpBB"/>
<link wikidata="Q185235" start="45599" end="45602" title="MD5" label="MD5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496793" start="45603" end="45618" title="password hashing" label="password hashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665075" start="45679" end="45692" title="timing attack" label="timing attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182546" start="45811" end="45829" title="website defacement" label="website defacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073887" start="45845" end="45851" title="Zone-H" label="Zone-H"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143161" start="45918" end="45946" title="file inclusion vulnerability" label="file inclusion vulnerability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623338" start="46139" end="46168" title="pseudorandom number generator" label="pseudorandom number generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q183484" start="46499" end="46502" title="Graphics processing unit" label="GPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q185235" start="46523" end="46526" title="MD5" label="MD5"/>
<link wikidata="Q615485" start="46659" end="46674" title="birthday attack" label="birthday attack"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46971" end="46982" title="Software release life cycle#End-of-life" label="end of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q189477" start="47107" end="47111" title="Zend (company)" label="Zend"/>
<link wikidata="Q54878378" start="47142" end="47177" title="Comparison of programming languages" label="Comparison of programming languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q191342" start="47180" end="47213" title="List of Apache–MySQL–PHP packages" label="List of Apache–MySQL–PHP packages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593252" start="47216" end="47240" title="List of PHP accelerators" label="List of PHP accelerators"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820620" start="47243" end="47262" title="List of PHP editors" label="List of PHP editors"/>
<link wikidata="Q568694" start="47265" end="47269" title="PEAR" label="PEAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q438556" start="47315" end="47330" title="PHP accelerator" label="PHP accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q351507" start="47333" end="47351" title="Template processor" label="Template processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q324073" start="47354" end="47359" title="XAMPP" label="XAMPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069026" start="47434" end="47445" title="Zend Server" label="Zend Server"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24132" wikidata="Q170473" url="?curid=24132" title="Priam">
<text>In Greek mythology, Priam (; , ) was the legendary and last king of Troy during the Trojan War. He was the son of Laomedon. His many children included notable characters such as Hector, Paris, and Cassandra.

==Etymology==
Most scholars take the etymology of the name from the Luwian 𒉺𒊑𒀀𒈬𒀀 (Pa-ri-a-mu-a-, or “exceptionally courageous”), attested as the name of a man from Zazlippa, in Kizzuwatna. A similar form is attested transcribed in Greek as &quot;Paramoas&quot; near Kaisareia in Cappadocia.
Some have identified Priam with the historical figure of Piyama-Radu, a warlord active in the vicinity of Wilusa. However, this identification is disputed, and is highly unlikely, given that he was known in Hittite records as being an ally of the Ahhiyawa against Wilusa.

A popular folk etymology derives the name from the Greek verb , meaning &#x27;to buy&#x27;. This in turn gives rise to a story of Priam&#x27;s sister Hesione ransoming his freedom with a veil, from Heracles, thereby &#x27;buying&#x27; him. This story is attested in the &quot;Bibliotheca&quot; and in other influential mythographical works dated to the first and second centuries AD. These sources are, however, dated much later than the first attestations of the name Priamos or Pariya-muwas, and thus are more problematic.

== Description ==
Priam was described by the chronicler Malalas in his account of the &quot;Chronography&quot; as &quot;tall for the age, big, good, ruddy-colored, light-eyed, long-nosed, eyebrows meeting, keen-eyed, gray, restrained.&quot; Meanwhile, in the account of Dares the Phrygian, he was illustrated as &quot;. . .had a handsome face and a pleasant voice. He was large and swarthy.&quot;

== Marriage and children ==
: &quot;See List of children of Priam&quot;

Priam is said to have fathered fifty sons and many daughters, with his chief wife Hecuba, daughter of the Phrygian king Dymas and many other wives and concubines. These children include famous mythological figures such as Hector, Paris, Helenus, Cassandra, Deiphobus, Troilus, Laodice, Polyxena, Creusa, and Polydorus. Priam was killed when he was around 80 years old by Achilles&#x27; son Neoptolemus.

== Life ==
In Book 3 of Homer&#x27;s &quot;Iliad&quot;, Priam tells Helen of Troy that he once helped King Mygdon of Phrygia in a battle against the Amazons.

When Hector is killed by Achilles, the Greek warrior treats the body with disrespect and refuses to give it back. According to Homer in book XXIV of the &quot;Iliad&quot;, Zeus sends the god Hermes to escort King Priam, Hector&#x27;s father and the ruler of Troy, into the Greek camp. Priam tearfully pleads with Achilles to take pity on a father bereft of his son and return Hector&#x27;s body. He invokes the memory of Achilles&#x27; own father, Peleus. Priam begs Achilles to pity him, saying &quot;I have endured what no one on earth has ever done before – I put my lips to the hands of the man who killed my son.&quot; Deeply moved, Achilles relents and returns Hector&#x27;s corpse to the Trojans. Both sides agree to a temporary truce, and Achilles gives Priam leave to hold a proper funeral for Hector, complete with funeral games. He promises that no Greek will engage in combat for at least nine days, but on the twelfth day of peace, the Greeks would all stand once more and the mighty war would continue.

Priam is killed during the Sack of Troy by Achilles&#x27; son Neoptolemus (also known as Pyrrhus). His death is graphically related in Book II of Virgil&#x27;s &quot;Aeneid&quot;. In Virgil&#x27;s description, Neoptolemus first kills Priam&#x27;s son Polites in front of his father as he seeks sanctuary on the altar of Zeus. Priam rebukes Neoptolemus, throwing a spear at him, harmlessly hitting his shield. Neoptolemus then drags Priam to the altar and there kills him too. Priam&#x27;s death is alternatively depicted in some Greek vases. In this version, Neoptolemus clubs Priam to death with the corpse of the latter&#x27;s baby grandson, Astyanax.

== Gallery ==
== Family tree ==
==Cultural depiction==
&quot;In film&quot;
* &quot;Helen of Troy&quot; - played by Cedric Hardwicke.
* &quot;The Trojan Horse&quot; - played by Carlo Tamberlani.
* &quot;Troy&quot; - played by Peter O&#x27;Toole. 

&quot;In TV series&quot;
* &quot;Helen of Troy&quot; - played by John Rhys-Davies.
* &quot;&quot; - played by David Threlfall.

&quot;In theater&quot; 
* &quot;Les Troyens&quot; in which King Priam plays a minor role. 
* &quot;King Priam&quot;.

==See also==

*Priam&#x27;s Treasure

== Notes ==
== References ==
* Apollodorus, &quot;The Library&quot; with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. ISBN 0-674-99135-4. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
*Homer, &quot;The Iliad&quot; with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, Ph.D. in two volumes. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Homer, &quot;Homeri Opera&quot; in five volumes. Oxford, Oxford University Press. 1920. . Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Smith, William; &quot;Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology&quot;, London (1873). &quot;Priamus&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q170473" start="20" end="25" title="Priam" label="Priam"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="68" end="72" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="84" end="94" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q332324" start="114" end="122" title="Laomedon" label="Laomedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q159666" start="178" end="184" title="Hector" label="Hector"/>
<link wikidata="Q167646" start="186" end="191" title="Paris (mythology)" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q170779" start="197" end="206" title="Cassandra" label="Cassandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q10713" start="277" end="283" title="Luwian" label="Luwian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047069" start="386" end="396" title="Kizzuwatna" label="Kizzuwatna"/>
<link wikidata="Q217265" start="488" end="498" title="Cappadocia" label="Cappadocia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322744" start="557" end="568" title="Piyama-Radu" label="Piyama-Radu"/>
<link wikidata="Q337767" start="606" end="612" title="Wilusa" label="Wilusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514911" start="747" end="755" title="Ahhiyawa" label="Ahhiyawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="971" end="979" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="1049" end="1060" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Bibliotheca"/>
<link wikidata="Q312491" start="1355" end="1362" title="John Malalas" label="Malalas"/>
<link wikidata="Q544378" start="1569" end="1587" title="Dares Phrygius" label="Dares the Phrygian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744763" start="1737" end="1762" title="List of children of Priam" label="List of children of Priam"/>
<link wikidata="Q193433" start="1852" end="1858" title="Hecuba" label="Hecuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q149386" start="1876" end="1883" title="Phrygians" label="Phrygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17486774" start="1890" end="1895" title="Dymas of Phrygia" label="Dymas"/>
<link wikidata="Q159666" start="1992" end="1998" title="Hector" label="Hector"/>
<link wikidata="Q167646" start="2000" end="2005" title="Paris (mythology)" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q729332" start="2007" end="2014" title="Helenus" label="Helenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170779" start="2016" end="2025" title="Cassandra" label="Cassandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q736813" start="2027" end="2036" title="Deiphobus" label="Deiphobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q867342" start="2038" end="2045" title="Troilus" label="Troilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178583" start="2047" end="2054" title="Laodice (daughter of Priam)" label="Laodice"/>
<link wikidata="Q750236" start="2056" end="2064" title="Polyxena" label="Polyxena"/>
<link wikidata="Q375174" start="2066" end="2072" title="Creusa (wife of Aeneas)" label="Creusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q346634" start="2078" end="2087" title="Polydorus (son of Priam)" label="Polydorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="2198" end="2203" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="2217" end="2222" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q164061" start="2242" end="2255" title="Helen of Troy" label="Helen of Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647552" start="2281" end="2298" title="Mygdon of Phrygia" label="Mygdon of Phrygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134154" start="2323" end="2330" title="Amazons" label="Amazons"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="2358" end="2366" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="2505" end="2509" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="2524" end="2530" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q178641" start="2781" end="2787" title="Peleus" label="Peleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627579" start="3378" end="3390" title="Sack of Troy" label="Sack of Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q322639" start="3413" end="3424" title="Neoptolemus" label="Neoptolemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="3497" end="3503" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="3517" end="3523" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q334787" start="3995" end="4003" title="Astyanax" label="Astyanax"/>
<link wikidata="Q938924" start="4083" end="4108" title="Helen of Troy (film)" label="&amp;quot;Helen of Troy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q527735" start="4121" end="4137" title="Cedric Hardwicke" label="Cedric Hardwicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q886189" start="4141" end="4169" title="The Trojan Horse (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Trojan Horse&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659882" start="4182" end="4198" title="Carlo Tamberlani" label="Carlo Tamberlani"/>
<link wikidata="Q186587" start="4202" end="4218" title="Troy (film)" label="&amp;quot;Troy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q103876" start="4231" end="4249" title="Peter O&amp;#x27;Toole" label="Peter O&amp;#x27;Toole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601950" start="4286" end="4299" title="Helen of Troy (miniseries)" label="Helen of Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16455" start="4318" end="4334" title="John Rhys-Davies" label="John Rhys-Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240418" start="4363" end="4378" title="David Threlfall" label="David Threlfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q472325" start="4413" end="4424" title="Les Troyens" label="Les Troyens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068944" start="4480" end="4490" title="King Priam" label="King Priam"/>
<link wikidata="Q304483" start="4514" end="4535" title="Priam&amp;#x27;s Treasure" label="Priam&amp;#x27;s Treasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="4568" end="4579" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="4880" end="4885" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="4887" end="4908" title="Iliad" label="&amp;quot;The Iliad&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q559411" start="5249" end="5263" title="William Smith (lexicographer)" label="Smith, William"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210336" start="5271" end="5324" title="Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology" label="Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24133" wikidata="Q163335" url="?curid=24133" title="Principia Mathematica">
<text>The Principia Mathematica (often abbreviated PM) is a three-volume work on the foundations of mathematics written by the mathematician–philosophers Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell and published in 1910, 1912, and 1913. In 1925–1927, it appeared in a second edition with an important &quot;Introduction to the Second Edition&quot;, an &quot;Appendix A&quot; that replaced ✱9 with a new &quot;Appendix B&quot; and &quot;Appendix C&quot;. &quot;PM&quot; was conceived as a sequel to Russell&#x27;s 1903 &quot;The Principles of Mathematics&quot;, but as &quot;PM&quot; states, this became an unworkable suggestion for practical and philosophical reasons: &quot;The present work was originally intended by us to be comprised in a second volume of &quot;Principles of Mathematics&quot;... But as we advanced, it became increasingly evident that the subject is a very much larger one than we had supposed; moreover on many fundamental questions which had been left obscure and doubtful in the former work, we have now arrived at what we believe to be satisfactory solutions.&quot;

&quot;PM&quot;, according to its introduction, had three aims: (1) to analyze to the greatest possible extent the ideas and methods of mathematical logic and to minimize the number of primitive notions, axioms, and inference rules; (2) to precisely express mathematical propositions in symbolic logic using the most convenient notation that precise expression allows; (3) to solve the paradoxes that plagued logic and set theory at the turn of the 20th century, like Russell&#x27;s paradox.

This third aim motivated the adoption of the theory of types in &quot;PM&quot;. The theory of types adopts grammatical restrictions on formulas that rule out the unrestricted comprehension of classes, properties, and functions. The effect of this is that formulas such as would allow the comprehension of objects like the Russell set turn out to be ill-formed: they violate the grammatical restrictions of the system of &quot;PM&quot;.

&quot;PM&quot; sparked interest in symbolic logic and advanced the subject, popularizing it and demonstrating its power. The Modern Library placed &quot;PM&quot; 23rd in their list of the top 100 English-language nonfiction books of the twentieth century.

== Scope of foundations laid ==

The &quot;Principia&quot; covered only set theory, cardinal numbers, ordinal numbers, and real numbers. Deeper theorems from real analysis were not included, but by the end of the third volume it was clear to experts that a large amount of known mathematics could &quot;in principle&quot; be developed in the adopted formalism. It was also clear how lengthy such a development would be.

A fourth volume on the foundations of geometry had been planned, but the authors admitted to intellectual exhaustion upon completion of the third.

== Theoretical basis ==

As noted in the criticism of the theory by Kurt Gödel (below), unlike a formalist theory, the &quot;logicistic&quot; theory of &quot;PM&quot; has no &quot;precise statement of the syntax of the formalism&quot;. Furthermore in the theory, it is almost immediately observable that &quot;interpretations&quot; (in the sense of model theory) are presented in terms of &quot;truth-values&quot; for the behaviour of the symbols &quot;⊢&quot; (assertion of truth), &quot;~&quot; (logical not), and &quot;V&quot; (logical inclusive OR).

Truth-values: &quot;PM&quot; embeds the notions of &quot;truth&quot; and &quot;falsity&quot; in the notion &quot;primitive proposition&quot;. A raw (pure) formalist theory would not provide the meaning of the symbols that form a &quot;primitive proposition&quot;—the symbols themselves could be absolutely arbitrary and unfamiliar. The theory would specify only &quot;how the symbols behave based on the grammar of the theory&quot;. Then later, by &quot;assignment&quot; of &quot;values&quot;, a model would specify an &quot;interpretation&quot; of what the formulas are saying. Thus in the formal Kleene symbol set below, the &quot;interpretation&quot; of what the symbols commonly mean, and by implication how they end up being used, is given in parentheses, e.g., &quot;¬ (not)&quot;. But this is not a pure Formalist theory.

=== Contemporary construction of a formal theory ===
The following formalist theory is offered as contrast to the logicistic theory of &quot;PM&quot;. A contemporary formal system would be constructed as follows:
# &quot;Symbols used&quot;: This set is the starting set, and other symbols can appear but only by &quot;definition&quot; from these beginning symbols. A starting set might be the following set derived from Kleene 1952: 
#* &quot;logical symbols&quot;:
#** &quot;→&quot; (implies, IF-THEN, and &quot;⊃&quot;),
#** &quot;&amp;&quot; (and),
#** &quot;V&quot; (or),
#** &quot;¬&quot; (not),
#** &quot;∀&quot; (for all),
#** &quot;∃&quot; (there exists);
#* &quot;predicate symbol&quot;: &quot;=&quot; (equals);
#* &quot;function symbols&quot;:
#** &quot;+&quot; (arithmetic addition),
#** &quot;∙&quot; (arithmetic multiplication),
#** &quot;&#x27;&quot; (successor);
#* &quot;individual symbol&quot; &quot;0&quot; (zero);
#* &quot;variables&quot; &quot;&quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;, &quot;c&quot;&quot;, etc.; and 
#* &quot;parentheses&quot; &quot;(&quot; and &quot;)&quot;.
# &quot;Symbol strings&quot;: The theory will build &quot;strings&quot; of these symbols by concatenation (juxtaposition).
# &quot;Formation rules&quot;: The theory specifies the rules of syntax (rules of grammar) usually as a recursive definition that starts with &quot;0&quot; and specifies how to build acceptable strings or &quot;well-formed formulas&quot; (wffs). This includes a rule for &quot;substitution&quot; of strings for the symbols called &quot;variables&quot;.
# &quot;Transformation rule(s)&quot;: The axioms that specify the behaviours of the symbols and symbol sequences.
# &quot;Rule of inference, detachment, &quot;modus ponens&quot; &quot;: The rule that allows the theory to &quot;detach&quot; a &quot;conclusion&quot; from the &quot;premises&quot; that led up to it, and thereafter to discard the &quot;premises&quot; (symbols to the left of the line │, or symbols above the line if horizontal). If this were not the case, then substitution would result in longer and longer strings that have to be carried forward. Indeed, after the application of modus ponens, nothing is left but the conclusion, the rest disappears forever. Contemporary theories often specify as their first axiom the classical or modus ponens or &quot;the rule of detachment&quot;: The symbol &quot;│&quot; is usually written as a vertical line, here &quot;⊃&quot; means &quot;implies&quot;. The symbols &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot; are &quot;stand-ins&quot; for strings; this form of notation is called an &quot;axiom schema&quot; (i.e., there is a countable number of specific forms the notation could take). This can be read in a manner similar to IF-THEN but with a difference: given symbol string IF &quot;A&quot; and &quot;A&quot; implies &quot;B&quot; THEN &quot;B&quot; (and retain only &quot;B&quot; for further use). But the symbols have no &quot;interpretation&quot; (e.g., no &quot;truth table&quot; or &quot;truth values&quot; or &quot;truth functions&quot;) and modus ponens proceeds mechanistically, by grammar alone.

=== Construction ===

The theory of &quot;PM&quot; has both significant similarities, and similar differences, to a contemporary formal theory. Kleene states that &quot;this deduction of mathematics from logic was offered as intuitive axiomatics. The axioms were intended to be believed, or at least to be accepted as plausible hypotheses concerning the world&quot;. Indeed, unlike a Formalist theory that manipulates symbols according to rules of grammar, &quot;PM&quot; introduces the notion of &quot;truth-values&quot;, i.e., truth and falsity in the &quot;real-world&quot; sense, and the &quot;assertion of truth&quot; almost immediately as the fifth and sixth elements in the structure of the theory (&quot;PM&quot; 1962:4–36):
# &quot;Variables&quot;
# &quot;Uses of various letters&quot;
# &quot;The fundamental functions of propositions&quot;: &quot;the Contradictory Function&quot; symbolised by &quot;~&quot; and the &quot;Logical Sum or Disjunctive Function&quot; symbolised by &quot;∨&quot; being taken as primitive and logical implication &quot;defined&quot; (the following example also used to illustrate 9. &quot;Definition&quot; below) as&quot;p&quot; ⊃ &quot;q&quot; .=. ~ &quot;p&quot; ∨ &quot;q&quot; Df. (&quot;PM&quot; 1962:11) and logical product defined as &quot;p&quot; . &quot;q&quot; .=. ~(~&quot;p&quot; ∨ ~&quot;q&quot;) Df. (&quot;PM&quot; 1962:12)
# &quot;Equivalence&quot;: &quot;Logical&quot; equivalence, not arithmetic equivalence: &quot;≡&quot; given as a demonstration of how the symbols are used, i.e., &quot;Thus &#x27; &quot;p&quot; ≡ &quot;q&quot; &#x27; stands for &#x27;( &quot;p&quot; ⊃ &quot;q&quot; ) . ( &quot;q&quot; ⊃ &quot;p&quot; )&#x27;.&quot; (&quot;PM&quot; 1962:7). Notice that to &quot;discuss&quot; a notation &quot;PM&quot; identifies a &quot;meta&quot;-notation with &quot;[space] ... [space]&quot;:Logical equivalence appears again as a &quot;definition&quot;:&quot;p&quot; ≡ &quot;q&quot; .=. ( &quot;p&quot; ⊃ &quot;q&quot; ) . ( &quot;q&quot; ⊃ &quot;p&quot; ) (&quot;PM&quot; 1962:12),Notice the appearance of parentheses. This &quot;grammatical&quot; usage is not specified and appears sporadically; parentheses do play an important role in symbol strings, however, e.g., the notation &quot;(&quot;x&quot;)&quot; for the contemporary &quot;∀&quot;x&quot;&quot;.
# &quot;Truth-values&quot;: &quot;The &#x27;Truth-value&#x27; of a proposition is &quot;truth&quot; if it is true, and &quot;falsehood&quot; if it is false&quot; (this phrase is due to Gottlob Frege) (&quot;PM&quot; 1962:7).
# &quot;Assertion-sign&quot;: &quot;&#x27;⊦. &quot;p&quot; may be read &#x27;it is true that&#x27; ... thus &#x27;⊦: &quot;p&quot; .⊃. &quot;q&quot; &#x27; means &#x27;it is true that &quot;p&quot; implies &quot;q&quot; &#x27;, whereas &#x27;⊦. &quot;p&quot; .⊃⊦. &quot;q&quot; &#x27; means &#x27; &quot;p&quot; is true; therefore &quot;q&quot; is true&#x27;. The first of these does not necessarily involve the truth either of &quot;p&quot; or of &quot;q&quot;, while the second involves the truth of both&quot; (&quot;PM&quot; 1962:92).
# &quot;Inference&quot;: &quot;PM&quot;″s version of &quot;modus ponens&quot;. &quot;[If] &#x27;⊦. &quot;p&quot; &#x27; and &#x27;⊦ (&quot;p&quot; ⊃ &quot;q&quot;)&#x27; have occurred, then &#x27;⊦ . &quot;q&quot; &#x27; will occur if it is desired to put it on record. The process of the inference cannot be reduced to symbols. Its sole record is the occurrence of &#x27;⊦. &quot;q&quot; &#x27; [in other words, the symbols on the left disappear or can be erased]&quot; (&quot;PM&quot; 1962:9).
# &quot;The use of dots&quot;
# &quot;Definitions&quot;: These use the &quot;=&quot; sign with &quot;Df&quot; at the right end.
# &quot;Summary of preceding statements&quot;: brief discussion of the primitive ideas &quot;~ &quot;p&quot; and &quot;p&quot; ∨ &quot;q&quot;&quot; and &quot;⊦&quot; prefixed to a proposition.
# &quot;Primitive propositions&quot;: the axioms or postulates. This was significantly modified in the second edition.
# &quot;Propositional functions&quot;: The notion of &quot;proposition&quot; was significantly modified in the second edition, including the introduction of &quot;atomic&quot; propositions linked by logical signs to form &quot;molecular&quot; propositions, and the use of substitution of molecular propositions into atomic or molecular propositions to create new expressions.
# &quot;The range of values and total variation&quot;
# &quot;Ambiguous assertion and the real variable&quot;: This and the next two sections were modified or abandoned in the second edition. In particular, the distinction between the concepts defined in sections 15. &quot;Definition and the real variable&quot; and 16 &quot;Propositions connecting real and apparent variables&quot; was abandoned in the second edition.
# &quot;Formal implication and formal equivalence&quot;
# &quot;Identity&quot;
# &quot;Classes and relations&quot;
# &quot;Various descriptive functions of relations&quot;
# &quot;Plural descriptive functions&quot;
# &quot;Unit classes&quot;

=== Primitive ideas ===

Cf. &quot;PM&quot; 1962:90–94, for the first edition:
* (1) &quot;Elementary propositions&quot;.
* (2) &quot;Elementary propositions of functions&quot;.
* (3) &quot;Assertion&quot;: introduces the notions of &quot;truth&quot; and &quot;falsity&quot;.
* (4) &quot;Assertion of a propositional function&quot;.
* (5) &quot;Negation&quot;: &quot;If &quot;p&quot; is any proposition, the proposition &quot;not-&quot;p&quot;, or &quot;p&quot; is false,&quot; will be represented by &quot;~&quot;p&quot;&quot; &quot;.
* (6) &quot;Disjunction&quot;: &quot;If &quot;p&quot; and &quot;q&quot; are any propositions, the proposition &quot;&quot;p&quot; or &quot;q&quot;, i.e., &quot;either &quot;p&quot; is true or &quot;q&quot; is true,&quot; where the alternatives are to be not mutually exclusive, will be represented by &quot;&quot;p&quot; ∨ &quot;q&quot;&quot; &quot;.
* (cf. section B)

=== Primitive propositions ===

The &quot;first&quot; edition (see discussion relative to the second edition, below) begins with a definition of the sign &quot;⊃&quot;

✱1.01. &quot;p&quot; ⊃ &quot;q&quot; .=. ~ &quot;p&quot; ∨ &quot;q&quot;. Df.

✱1.1. Anything implied by a true elementary proposition is true. Pp modus ponens

(✱1.11 was abandoned in the second edition.)

✱1.2. ⊦: &quot;p&quot; ∨ &quot;p&quot; .⊃. &quot;p&quot;. Pp principle of tautology

✱1.3. ⊦: &quot;q&quot; .⊃. &quot;p&quot; ∨ &quot;q&quot;. Pp principle of addition

✱1.4. ⊦: &quot;p&quot; ∨ &quot;q&quot; .⊃. &quot;q&quot; ∨ &quot;p&quot;. Pp principle of permutation

✱1.5. ⊦: &quot;p&quot; ∨ ( &quot;q&quot; ∨ &quot;r&quot; ) .⊃. &quot;q&quot; ∨ ( &quot;p&quot; ∨ &quot;r&quot; ). Pp associative principle

✱1.6. ⊦:. &quot;q&quot; ⊃ &quot;r&quot; .⊃: &quot;p&quot; ∨ &quot;q&quot; .⊃. &quot;p&quot; ∨ &quot;r&quot;. Pp principle of summation

✱1.7. If &quot;p&quot; is an elementary proposition, ~&quot;p&quot; is an elementary proposition. Pp

✱1.71. If &quot;p&quot; and &quot;q&quot; are elementary propositions, &quot;p&quot; ∨ &quot;q&quot; is an elementary proposition. Pp

✱1.72. If φ&quot;p&quot; and ψ&quot;p&quot; are elementary propositional functions which take elementary propositions as arguments, φ&quot;p&quot; ∨ ψ&quot;p&quot; is an elementary proposition. Pp

Together with the &quot;Introduction to the Second Edition&quot;, the second edition&#x27;s Appendix A abandons the entire section ✱9. This includes six primitive propositions ✱9 through ✱9.15 together with the Axioms of reducibility.

The revised theory is made difficult by the introduction of the Sheffer stroke (&quot;|&quot;) to symbolise &quot;incompatibility&quot; (i.e., if both elementary propositions &quot;p&quot; and &quot;q&quot; are true, their &quot;stroke&quot; &quot;p&quot; | &quot;q&quot; is false), the contemporary logical NAND (not-AND). In the revised theory, the Introduction presents the notion of &quot;atomic proposition&quot;, a &quot;datum&quot; that &quot;belongs to the philosophical part of logic&quot;. These have no parts that are propositions and do not contain the notions &quot;all&quot; or &quot;some&quot;. For example: &quot;this is red&quot;, or &quot;this is earlier than that&quot;. Such things can exist &quot;ad finitum&quot;, i.e., even an &quot;infinite enumeration&quot; of them to replace &quot;generality&quot; (i.e., the notion of &quot;for all&quot;). &quot;PM&quot; then &quot;advance[s] to molecular propositions&quot; that are all linked by &quot;the stroke&quot;. Definitions give equivalences for &quot;~&quot;, &quot;∨&quot;, &quot;⊃&quot;, and &quot;.&quot;.

The new introduction defines &quot;elementary propositions&quot; as atomic and molecular positions together. It then replaces all the primitive propositions ✱1.2 to ✱1.72 with a single primitive proposition framed in terms of the stroke:
: &quot;If &quot;p&quot;, &quot;q&quot;, &quot;r&quot; are elementary propositions, given &quot;p&quot; and &quot;p&quot;|(&quot;q&quot;|&quot;r&quot;), we can infer &quot;r&quot;. This is a primitive proposition.&quot;

The new introduction keeps the notation for &quot;there exists&quot; (now recast as &quot;sometimes true&quot;) and &quot;for all&quot; (recast as &quot;always true&quot;). Appendix A strengthens the notion of &quot;matrix&quot; or &quot;predicative function&quot; (a &quot;primitive idea&quot;, &quot;PM&quot; 1962:164) and presents four new Primitive propositions as ✱8.1–✱8.13.
✱88. Multiplicative axiom

✱120. Axiom of infinity

==Ramified types and the axiom of reducibility==

In simple type theory objects are elements of various disjoint &quot;types&quot;. Types are implicitly built up as follows. If τ1...,τ&quot;m&quot; are types then there is a type (τ1...,τ&quot;m&quot;) that can be thought of as the class of propositional functions of τ1...,τ&quot;m&quot; (which in set theory is essentially the set of subsets of τ1×...×τ&quot;m&quot;). In particular there is a type () of propositions, and there may be a type ι (iota) of &quot;individuals&quot; from which other types are built. Russell and Whitehead&#x27;s notation for building up types from other types is rather cumbersome, and the notation here is due to Church.

In the ramified type theory of PM all objects are elements of various disjoint ramified types. Ramified types are implicitly built up as follows. If τ1...,τ&quot;m&quot;,σ1...,σ&quot;n&quot; are ramified types then as in simple type theory there is a type (τ1...,τ&quot;m&quot;,σ1...,σ&quot;n&quot;) of &quot;predicative&quot; propositional functions of τ1...,τ&quot;m&quot;,σ1...,σ&quot;n&quot;. However, there are also ramified types (τ1...,τ&quot;m&quot;|σ1...,σ&quot;n&quot;) that can be thought of as the classes of propositional functions of τ1...τ&quot;m&quot; obtained from propositional functions of type (τ1...,τ&quot;m&quot;,σ1...,σ&quot;n&quot;) by quantifying over σ1...,σ&quot;n&quot;. When &quot;n&quot;=0 (so there are no σs) these propositional functions are called predicative functions or matrices. This can be confusing because modern mathematical practice does not distinguish between predicative and non-predicative functions, and in any case PM never defines exactly what a &quot;predicative function&quot; actually is: this is taken as a primitive notion.

Russell and Whitehead found it impossible to develop mathematics while maintaining the difference between predicative and non-predicative functions, so they introduced the axiom of reducibility, saying that for every non-predicative function there is a predicative function taking the same values. In practice this axiom essentially means that the elements of type (τ1...,τ&quot;m&quot;|σ1...,σ&quot;n&quot;) can be identified with the elements of type (τ1...,τ&quot;m&quot;), which causes the hierarchy of ramified types to collapse down to simple type theory. (Strictly speaking, PM allows two propositional functions to be different even if they take the same values on all arguments; this differs from modern mathematical practice where one normally identifies two such functions.)

In Zermelo set theory one can model the ramified type theory of PM as follows. One picks a set ι to be the type of individuals. For example, ι might be the set of natural numbers, or the set of atoms (in a set theory with atoms) or any other set one is interested in. Then if τ1...,τ&quot;m&quot; are types, the type (τ1...,τ&quot;m&quot;) is the power set of the product τ1×...×τ&quot;m&quot;, which can also be thought of informally as the set of (propositional predicative) functions from this product to a 2-element set {true,false}. The ramified type (τ1...,τ&quot;m&quot;|σ1...,σ&quot;n&quot;) can be modeled
as the product of the type (τ1...,τ&quot;m&quot;,σ1...,σ&quot;n&quot;) with the set of sequences of &quot;n&quot; quantifiers (∀ or ∃) indicating which quantifier should be applied to each variable σ&quot;i&quot;. (One can vary this slightly by allowing the σs to be quantified in any order, or allowing them to occur before some of the τs, but this makes little difference except to the bookkeeping.)

The introduction to the second edition cautions:
One point in regard to which improvement is obviously desirable is the axiom of reducibility ... . This axiom has a purely pragmatic justification ... but it is clearly not the sort of axiom with which we can rest content. On this subject, however, it cannot be said that a satisfactory solution is yet obtainable. Dr Leon Chwistek [Theory of Constructive Types] took the heroic course of dispensing with the axiom without adopting any substitute; from his work it is clear that this course compels us to sacrifice a great deal of ordinary mathematics. There is another course, recommended by Wittgenstein† (†Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, *5.54ff) for philosophical reasons. This is to assume that functions of propositions are always truth-functions, and that a function can only occur in a proposition through its values. (...) [Working through the consequences] ... the theory of inductive cardinals and ordinals survives; but it seems that the theory of infinite Dedekindian and well-ordered series largely collapses, so that irrationals, and real numbers generally, can no longer be adequately dealt with. Also Cantor&#x27;s proof that 2n &gt; n breaks down unless n is finite.

It might be possible to sacrifice infinite well-ordered series to logical rigour, but the theory of real numbers is an integral part of ordinary mathematics, and can hardly be the subject of reasonable doubt. We are therefore justified (sic) in supposing that some logical axioms which is true will justify it. The axiom required may be more restricted than the axiom of reducibility, but if so, it remains to be discovered.
== Notation ==

One author observes that &quot;The notation in that work has been superseded by the subsequent development of logic during the 20th century, to the extent that the beginner has trouble reading PM at all&quot;; while much of the symbolic content can be converted to modern notation, the original notation itself is &quot;a subject of scholarly dispute&quot;, and some notation &quot;embodies substantive logical doctrines so that it cannot simply be replaced by contemporary symbolism&quot;.

Kurt Gödel was harshly critical of the notation: &quot;What is missing, above all, is a precise statement of the syntax of the formalism. Syntactical considerations are omitted even in cases where they are necessary for the cogency of the proofs.&quot; This is reflected in the example below of the symbols &quot;&quot;p&quot;, &quot;q&quot;, &quot;r&quot;&quot; and &quot;⊃&quot; that can be formed into the string &quot;&quot;p&quot; ⊃ &quot;q&quot; ⊃ &quot;r&quot;&quot;. &quot;PM&quot; requires a &quot;definition&quot; of what this symbol-string means in terms of other symbols; in contemporary treatments the &quot;formation rules&quot; (syntactical rules leading to &quot;well formed formulas&quot;) would have prevented the formation of this string.

Source of the notation: Chapter I &quot;Preliminary Explanations of Ideas and Notations&quot; begins with the source of the elementary parts of the notation (the symbols =⊃≡−ΛVε and the system of dots):
:&quot;The notation adopted in the present work is based upon that of Peano, and the following explanations are to some extent modeled on those which he prefixes to his &quot;Formulario Mathematico&quot; [i.e., Peano 1889]. His use of dots as brackets is adopted, and so are many of his symbols&quot; (&quot;PM&quot; 1927:4).
PM changed Peano&#x27;s Ɔ to ⊃, and also adopted a few of Peano&#x27;s later symbols, such as ℩ and ι, and Peano&#x27;s practice of turning letters upside down.

&quot;PM&quot; adopts the assertion sign &quot;⊦&quot; from Frege&#x27;s 1879 &quot;Begriffsschrift&quot;:
:&quot;(I)t may be read &#x27;it is true that&#x27;&quot;
Thus to assert a proposition &quot;p&quot; &quot;PM&quot; writes:
:&quot;⊦. &quot;p&quot;.&quot; (&quot;PM&quot; 1927:92)
(Observe that, as in the original, the left dot is square and of greater size than the full stop on the right.)
Most of the rest of the notation in PM was invented by Whitehead.

=== An introduction to the notation of &quot;Section A Mathematical Logic&quot; (formulas ✱1–✱5.71) ===

&quot;PM&quot;″s dots are used in a manner similar to parentheses. Each dot (or multiple dot) represents either a left or right parenthesis or the logical symbol ∧. More than one dot indicates the &quot;depth&quot; of the parentheses, for example, &quot;.&quot;, &quot;:&quot; or &quot;:.&quot;, &quot;::&quot;. However the position of the matching right or left parenthesis is not indicated explicitly in the notation but has to be deduced from some rules that are complex and at times ambiguous. Moreover, when the dots stand for a logical symbol ∧ its left and right operands have to be deduced using similar rules. First one has to decide based on context whether the dots stand for a left or right parenthesis or a logical symbol. Then one has to decide how far the other corresponding parenthesis is: here one carries on until one meets either a larger number of dots, or the same number of dots next that have equal or greater &quot;force&quot;, or the end of the line. Dots next to the signs ⊃, ≡,∨, =Df have greater force than dots next to (&quot;x&quot;), (∃&quot;x&quot;) and so on, which have greater force than dots indicating a logical product ∧.

Example 1. The line
:✱3.4. ⊢ : p . q . ⊃ . p ⊃ q
corresponds to
:⊢ ((p ∧ q) ⊃ (p ⊃ q)).
The two dots standing together immediately following the assertion-sign indicate that what is asserted is the entire line: since there are two of them, their scope is greater than that of any of the single dots to their right. They are replaced by a left parenthesis standing where the dots are and a right parenthesis at the end of the formula, thus:
:⊢ (p . q . ⊃ . p ⊃ q).
(In practice, these outermost parentheses, which enclose an entire formula, are usually suppressed.) The first of the single dots, standing between two propositional variables, represents conjunction. It belongs to the third group and has the narrowest scope. Here it is replaced by the modern symbol for conjunction &quot;∧&quot;, thus
:⊢ (p ∧ q . ⊃ . p ⊃ q).
The two remaining single dots pick out the main connective of the whole formula. They illustrate the utility of the dot notation in picking out those connectives which are relatively more important than the ones which surround them. The one to the left of the &quot;⊃&quot; is replaced by a pair of parentheses, the right one goes where the dot is and the left one goes as far to the left as it can without crossing a group of dots of greater force, in this case the two dots which follow the assertion-sign, thus
:⊢ ((p ∧ q) ⊃ . p ⊃ q)
The dot to the right of the &quot;⊃&quot; is replaced by a left parenthesis which goes where the dot is and a right parenthesis which goes as far to the right as it can without going beyond the scope already established by a group of dots of greater force (in this case the two dots which followed the assertion-sign). So the right parenthesis which replaces the dot to the right of the &quot;⊃&quot; is placed in front of the right parenthesis which replaced the two dots following the assertion-sign, thus
:⊢ ((p ∧ q) ⊃ (p ⊃ q)).

Example 2, with double, triple, and quadruple dots:
:✱9.521. ⊢ : : (∃x). φx . ⊃ . q : ⊃ : . (∃x). φx . v . r : ⊃ . q v r
stands for
:((((∃x)(φx)) ⊃ (q)) ⊃ ((((∃x) (φx)) v (r)) ⊃ (q v r)))

Example 3, with a double dot indicating a logical symbol (from volume 1, page 10):
:&quot;p&quot;⊃&quot;q&quot;:&quot;q&quot;⊃&quot;r&quot;.⊃.&quot;p&quot;⊃&quot;r&quot;
stands for
:(&quot;p&quot;⊃&quot;q&quot;) ∧ ((&quot;q&quot;⊃&quot;r&quot;)⊃(&quot;p&quot;⊃&quot;r&quot;))
where the double dot represents the logical symbol ∧ and can be viewed as having the higher priority as a non-logical single dot.

Later in section ✱14, brackets &quot;[ ]&quot; appear, and in sections ✱20 and following, braces &quot;{ }&quot; appear. Whether these symbols have specific meanings or are just for visual clarification is unclear. Unfortunately the single dot (but also &quot;:&quot;, &quot;:.&quot;, &quot;::&quot;, etc.) is also used to symbolise &quot;logical product&quot; (contemporary logical AND often symbolised by &quot;&amp;&quot; or &quot;∧&quot;).

Logical implication is represented by Peano&#x27;s &quot;Ɔ&quot; simplified to &quot;⊃&quot;, logical negation is symbolised by an elongated tilde, i.e., &quot;~&quot; (contemporary &quot;~&quot; or &quot;¬&quot;), the logical OR by &quot;v&quot;. The symbol &quot;=&quot; together with &quot;Df&quot; is used to indicate &quot;is defined as&quot;, whereas in sections ✱13 and following, &quot;=&quot; is defined as (mathematically) &quot;identical with&quot;, i.e., contemporary mathematical &quot;equality&quot; (cf. discussion in section ✱13). Logical equivalence is represented by &quot;≡&quot; (contemporary &quot;if and only if&quot;); &quot;elementary&quot; propositional functions are written in the customary way, e.g., &quot;&quot;f&quot;(&quot;p&quot;)&quot;, but later the function sign appears directly before the variable without parenthesis e.g., &quot;φ&quot;x&quot;&quot;, &quot;χ&quot;x&quot;&quot;, etc.

Example, &quot;PM&quot; introduces the definition of &quot;logical product&quot; as follows:
:✱3.01. &quot;p&quot; . &quot;q&quot; .=. ~(~&quot;p&quot; v ~&quot;q&quot;) Df.
:: where &quot;&quot;p&quot; . &quot;q&quot;&quot; is the logical product of &quot;p&quot; and &quot;q&quot;.
:✱3.02. &quot;p&quot; ⊃ &quot;q&quot; ⊃ &quot;r&quot; .=. &quot;p&quot; ⊃ &quot;q&quot; . &quot;q&quot; ⊃ &quot;r&quot; Df.
:: This definition serves merely to abbreviate proofs.

Translation of the formulas into contemporary symbols: Various authors use alternate symbols, so no definitive translation can be given. However, because of criticisms such as that of Kurt Gödel below, the best contemporary treatments will be very precise with respect to the &quot;formation rules&quot; (the syntax) of the formulas.

The first formula might be converted into modern symbolism as follows:
: (&quot;p&quot; &amp; &quot;q&quot;) =df (~(~&quot;p&quot; v ~&quot;q&quot;))
alternately
: (&quot;p&quot; &amp; &quot;q&quot;) =df (¬(¬&quot;p&quot; v ¬&quot;q&quot;))
alternately
: (&quot;p&quot; ∧ &quot;q&quot;) =df (¬(¬&quot;p&quot; v ¬&quot;q&quot;))
etc.

The second formula might be converted as follows:
: (&quot;p&quot; → &quot;q&quot; → &quot;r&quot;) =df (&quot;p&quot; → &quot;q&quot;) &amp; (&quot;q&quot; → &quot;r&quot;)
But note that this is not (logically) equivalent to (&quot;p&quot; → (&quot;q&quot; → &quot;r&quot;)) nor to ((&quot;p&quot; → &quot;q&quot;) → &quot;r&quot;), and these two are not logically equivalent either.

=== An introduction to the notation of &quot;Section B Theory of Apparent Variables&quot; (formulas ✱8–✱14.34) ===

These sections concern what is now known as predicate logic, and predicate logic with identity (equality).

:* NB: As a result of criticism and advances, the second edition of &quot;PM&quot; (1927) replaces ✱9 with a new ✱8 (Appendix A). This new section eliminates the first edition&#x27;s distinction between real and apparent variables, and it eliminates &quot;the primitive idea &#x27;assertion of a propositional function&#x27;. To add to the complexity of the treatment, ✱8 introduces the notion of substituting a &quot;matrix&quot;, and the Sheffer stroke:
:::* Matrix: In contemporary usage, &quot;PM&quot;″s &quot;matrix&quot; is (at least for propositional functions), a truth table, i.e., &quot;all&quot; truth-values of a propositional or predicate function.
:::* Sheffer stroke: Is the contemporary logical NAND (NOT-AND), i.e., &quot;incompatibility&quot;, meaning:
::::&quot;Given two propositions &quot;p&quot; and &quot;q&quot;, then &#x27; &quot;p&quot; | &quot;q&quot; &#x27; means &quot;proposition &quot;p&quot; is incompatible with proposition &quot;q&quot;&quot;, i.e., if both propositions &quot;p&quot; and &quot;q&quot; evaluate as true, then and only then &quot;p&quot; | &quot;q&quot; evaluates as false.&quot; After section ✱8 the Sheffer stroke sees no usage.

Section ✱10: The existential and universal &quot;operators&quot;: &quot;PM&quot; adds &quot;(&quot;x&quot;)&quot; to represent the contemporary symbolism &quot;for all &quot;x&quot; &quot; i.e., &quot; ∀&quot;x&quot;&quot;, and it uses a backwards serifed E to represent &quot;there exists an &quot;x&quot;&quot;, i.e., &quot;(Ǝx)&quot;, i.e., the contemporary &quot;∃x&quot;. The typical notation would be similar to the following:
: &quot;(&quot;x&quot;) . φ&quot;x&quot;&quot; means &quot;for all values of variable &quot;x&quot;, function φ evaluates to true&quot;
: &quot;(Ǝ&quot;x&quot;) . φ&quot;x&quot;&quot; means &quot;for some value of variable &quot;x&quot;, function φ evaluates to true&quot;

Sections ✱10, ✱11, ✱12: Properties of a variable extended to all individuals: section ✱10 introduces the notion of &quot;a property&quot; of a &quot;variable&quot;. &quot;PM&quot; gives the example: φ is a function that indicates &quot;is a Greek&quot;, and ψ indicates &quot;is a man&quot;, and χ indicates &quot;is a mortal&quot; these functions then apply to a variable &quot;x&quot;. &quot;PM&quot; can now write, and evaluate:
: (&quot;x&quot;) . ψ&quot;x&quot;
The notation above means &quot;for all &quot;x&quot;, &quot;x&quot; is a man&quot;. Given a collection of individuals, one can evaluate the above formula for truth or falsity. For example, given the restricted collection of individuals { Socrates, Plato, Russell, Zeus } the above evaluates to &quot;true&quot; if we allow for Zeus to be a man. But it fails for:
: (&quot;x&quot;) . φ&quot;x&quot;
because Russell is not Greek. And it fails for
: (&quot;x&quot;) . χ&quot;x&quot;
because Zeus is not a mortal.

Equipped with this notation &quot;PM&quot; can create formulas to express the following: &quot;If all Greeks are men and if all men are mortals then all Greeks are mortals&quot;. (&quot;PM&quot; 1962:138)
:(&quot;x&quot;) . φ&quot;x&quot; ⊃ ψ&quot;x&quot; :(&quot;x&quot;). ψ&quot;x&quot; ⊃ χ&quot;x&quot; :⊃: (&quot;x&quot;) . φ&quot;x&quot; ⊃ χ&quot;x&quot;

Another example: the formula:
:✱10.01. (Ǝ&quot;x&quot;). φ&quot;x&quot; . = . ~(&quot;x&quot;) . ~φ&quot;x&quot; Df.

means &quot;The symbols representing the assertion &#x27;There exists at least one &quot;x&quot; that satisfies function φ&#x27; is defined by the symbols representing the assertion &#x27;It&#x27;s not true that, given all values of &quot;x&quot;, there are no values of &quot;x&quot; satisfying φ&#x27;&quot;.

The symbolisms ⊃&quot;x&quot; and &quot;≡&quot;x&quot;&quot; appear at ✱10.02 and ✱10.03. Both are abbreviations for universality (i.e., for all) that bind the variable &quot;x&quot; to the logical operator. Contemporary notation would have simply used parentheses outside of the equality (&quot;=&quot;) sign:
:✱10.02 φ&quot;x&quot; ⊃&quot;x&quot; ψ&quot;x&quot; .=. (&quot;x&quot;). φ&quot;x&quot; ⊃ ψ&quot;x&quot; Df
:: Contemporary notation: ∀&quot;x&quot;(φ(&quot;x&quot;) → ψ(&quot;x&quot;)) (or a variant)
:✱10.03 φ&quot;x&quot; ≡&quot;x&quot; ψ&quot;x&quot; .=. (&quot;x&quot;). φ&quot;x&quot; ≡ ψ&quot;x&quot; Df
:: Contemporary notation: ∀&quot;x&quot;(φ(&quot;x&quot;) ↔︎ ψ(&quot;x&quot;)) (or a variant)

&quot;PM&quot; attributes the first symbolism to Peano.

Section ✱11 applies this symbolism to two variables. Thus the following notations: ⊃&quot;x&quot;, ⊃&quot;y&quot;, ⊃&quot;x, y&quot; could all appear in a single formula.

Section ✱12 reintroduces the notion of &quot;matrix&quot; (contemporary truth table), the notion of logical types, and in particular the notions of &quot;first-order&quot; and &quot;second-order&quot; functions and propositions.

New symbolism &quot;φ ! &quot;x&quot;&quot; represents any value of a first-order function. If a circumflex &quot;^&quot; is placed over a variable, then this is an &quot;individual&quot; value of &quot;y&quot;, meaning that &quot;ŷ&quot; indicates &quot;individuals&quot; (e.g., a row in a truth table); this distinction is necessary because of the matrix/extensional nature of propositional functions.

Now equipped with the matrix notion, &quot;PM&quot; can assert its controversial axiom of reducibility: a function of one or two variables (two being sufficient for &quot;PM&quot;″s use) &quot;where all its values are given&quot; (i.e., in its matrix) is (logically) equivalent (&quot;≡&quot;) to some &quot;predicative&quot; function of the same variables. The one-variable definition is given below as an illustration of the notation (&quot;PM&quot; 1962:166–167):

✱12.1 ⊢: (Ǝ &quot;f&quot;): φ&quot;x&quot; .≡&quot;x&quot;. &quot;f&quot; ! &quot;x&quot; Pp;
:: Pp is a &quot;Primitive proposition&quot; (&quot;Propositions assumed without proof&quot;) (&quot;PM&quot; 1962:12, i.e., contemporary &quot;axioms&quot;), adding to the 7 defined in section ✱1 (starting with ✱1.1 modus ponens). These are to be distinguished from the &quot;primitive ideas&quot; that include the assertion sign &quot;⊢&quot;, negation &quot;~&quot;, logical OR &quot;V&quot;, the notions of &quot;elementary proposition&quot; and &quot;elementary propositional function&quot;; these are as close as &quot;PM&quot; comes to rules of notational formation, i.e., syntax.

This means: &quot;We assert the truth of the following: There exists a function &quot;f&quot; with the property that: given all values of &quot;x&quot;, their evaluations in function φ (i.e., resulting their matrix) is logically equivalent to some &quot;f&quot; evaluated at those same values of &quot;x&quot;. (and vice versa, hence logical equivalence)&quot;. In other words: given a matrix determined by property φ applied to variable &quot;x&quot;, there exists a function &quot;f&quot; that, when applied to the &quot;x&quot; is logically equivalent to the matrix. Or: every matrix φ&quot;x&quot; can be represented by a function &quot;f&quot; applied to &quot;x&quot;, and vice versa.

✱13: The identity operator &quot;=&quot; : This is a definition that uses the sign in two different ways, as noted by the quote from &quot;PM&quot;:

:✱13.01. &quot;x&quot; = &quot;y&quot; .=: (φ): φ ! &quot;x&quot; . ⊃ . φ ! &quot;y&quot; Df
means:
:&quot;This definition states that &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; are to be called identical when every predicative function satisfied by &quot;x&quot; is also satisfied by &quot;y&quot; ... Note that the second sign of equality in the above definition is combined with &quot;Df&quot;, and thus is not really the same symbol as the sign of equality which is defined&quot;.
The not-equals sign &quot;≠&quot; makes its appearance as a definition at ✱13.02.

✱14: Descriptions:
:&quot;A &quot;description&quot; is a phrase of the form &quot;the term &quot;y&quot; which satisfies φ&quot;ŷ&quot;, where φ&quot;ŷ&quot; is some function satisfied by one and only one argument.&quot;
From this &quot;PM&quot; employs two new symbols, a forward &quot;E&quot; and an inverted iota &quot;℩&quot;. Here is an example:
:✱14.02. E ! ( ℩&quot;y&quot;) (φ&quot;y&quot;) .=: ( Ǝ&quot;b&quot;):φ&quot;y&quot; . ≡&quot;y&quot; . &quot;y&quot; = &quot;b&quot; Df.
This has the meaning:
: &quot;The &quot;y&quot; satisfying φ&quot;ŷ&quot; exists,&quot; which holds when, and only when φ&quot;ŷ&quot; is satisfied by one value of &quot;y&quot; and by no other value.&quot; (&quot;PM&quot; 1967:173–174)

=== Introduction to the notation of the theory of classes and relations ===

The text leaps from section ✱14 directly to the foundational sections ✱20 GENERAL THEORY OF CLASSES and ✱21 GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIONS. &quot;Relations&quot; are what is known in contemporary set theory as sets of ordered pairs. Sections ✱20 and ✱22 introduce many of the symbols still in contemporary usage. These include the symbols &quot;ε&quot;, &quot;⊂&quot;, &quot;∩&quot;, &quot;∪&quot;, &quot;–&quot;, &quot;Λ&quot;, and &quot;V&quot;: &quot;ε&quot; signifies &quot;is an element of&quot; (&quot;PM&quot; 1962:188); &quot;⊂&quot; (✱22.01) signifies &quot;is contained in&quot;, &quot;is a subset of&quot;; &quot;∩&quot; (✱22.02) signifies the intersection (logical product) of classes (sets); &quot;∪&quot; (✱22.03) signifies the union (logical sum) of classes (sets); &quot;–&quot; (✱22.03) signifies negation of a class (set); &quot;Λ&quot; signifies the null class; and &quot;V&quot; signifies the universal class or universe of discourse.

Small Greek letters (other than &quot;ε&quot;, &quot;ι&quot;, &quot;π&quot;, &quot;φ&quot;, &quot;ψ&quot;, &quot;χ&quot;, and &quot;θ&quot;) represent classes (e.g., &quot;α&quot;, &quot;β&quot;, &quot;γ&quot;, &quot;δ&quot;, etc.) (&quot;PM&quot; 1962:188):
: &quot;x&quot; ε α
:: &quot;The use of single letter in place of symbols such as &quot;ẑ&quot;(φ&quot;z&quot;) or &quot;ẑ&quot;(φ ! &quot;z&quot;) is practically almost indispensable, since otherwise the notation rapidly becomes intolerably cumbrous. Thus &#x27; &quot;x&quot; ε α&#x27; will mean &#x27; &quot;x&quot; is a member of the class α&#x27;&quot;. (&quot;PM&quot; 1962:188)
:α ∪ –α = V
::The union of a set and its inverse is the universal (completed) set.
:α ∩ –α = Λ
::The intersection of a set and its inverse is the null (empty) set.

When applied to relations in section ✱23 CALCULUS OF RELATIONS, the symbols &quot;⊂&quot;, &quot;∩&quot;, &quot;∪&quot;, and &quot;–&quot; acquire a dot: for example: &quot;⊍&quot;, &quot;∸&quot;.

The notion, and notation, of &quot;a class&quot; (set): In the first edition &quot;PM&quot; asserts that no new primitive ideas are necessary to define what is meant by &quot;a class&quot;, and only two new &quot;primitive propositions&quot; called the axioms of reducibility for classes and relations respectively (&quot;PM&quot; 1962:25). But before this notion can be defined, &quot;PM&quot; feels it necessary to create a peculiar notation &quot;&quot;ẑ&quot;(φ&quot;z&quot;)&quot; that it calls a &quot;fictitious object&quot;. (&quot;PM&quot; 1962:188)
: ⊢: &quot;x&quot; ε &quot;ẑ&quot;(φ&quot;z&quot;) .≡. (φ&quot;x&quot;)
:: &quot;i.e., &#x27; &quot;x&quot; is a member of the class determined by (φ&quot;ẑ&quot;)&#x27; is [logically] equivalent to &#x27; &quot;x&quot; satisfies (φ&quot;ẑ&quot;),&#x27; or to &#x27;(φ&quot;x&quot;) is true.&#x27;&quot;. (&quot;PM&quot; 1962:25)

At least &quot;PM&quot; can tell the reader how these fictitious objects behave, because &quot;A class is wholly determinate when its membership is known, that is, there cannot be two different classes having the same membership&quot; (&quot;PM&quot; 1962:26). This is symbolised by the following equality (similar to ✱13.01 above:
: &quot;ẑ&quot;(φ&quot;z&quot;) = &quot;ẑ&quot;(ψ&quot;z&quot;) . ≡ : (&quot;x&quot;): φ&quot;x&quot; .≡. ψ&quot;x&quot;
::&quot;This last is the distinguishing characteristic of classes, and justifies us in treating &quot;ẑ&quot;(ψ&quot;z&quot;) as the class determined by [the function] ψ&quot;ẑ&quot;.&quot; (&quot;PM&quot; 1962:188)

Perhaps the above can be made clearer by the discussion of classes in &quot;Introduction to the Second Edition&quot;, which disposes of the &quot;Axiom of Reducibility&quot; and replaces it with the notion: &quot;All functions of functions are extensional&quot; (&quot;PM&quot; 1962:xxxix), i.e.,
: φ&quot;x&quot; ≡&quot;x&quot; ψ&quot;x&quot; .⊃. (&quot;x&quot;): ƒ(φ&quot;ẑ&quot;) ≡ ƒ(ψ&quot;ẑ&quot;) (&quot;PM&quot; 1962:xxxix)

This has the reasonable meaning that &quot;IF for all values of &quot;x&quot; the &quot;truth-values&quot; of the functions φ and ψ of &quot;x&quot; are [logically] equivalent, THEN the function ƒ of a given φ&quot;ẑ&quot; and ƒ of ψ&quot;ẑ&quot; are [logically] equivalent.&quot; &quot;PM&quot; asserts this is &quot;obvious&quot;:
: &quot;This is obvious, since φ can only occur in ƒ(φ&quot;ẑ&quot;) by the substitution of values of φ for &quot;p, q, r, ...&quot; in a [logical-] function, and, if φ&quot;x&quot; ≡ ψ&quot;x&quot;, the substitution of φ&quot;x&quot; for &quot;p&quot; in a [logical-] function gives the same truth-value to the truth-function as the substitution of ψ&quot;x&quot;. Consequently there is no longer any reason to distinguish between functions classes, for we have, in virtue of the above,
: φ&quot;x&quot; ≡&quot;x&quot; ψ&quot;x&quot; .⊃. (&quot;x&quot;). φ&quot;ẑ&quot; = . ψ&quot;ẑ&quot;&quot;.
Observe the change to the equality &quot;=&quot; sign on the right. &quot;PM&quot; goes on to state that will continue to hang onto the notation &quot;&quot;ẑ&quot;(φ&quot;z&quot;)&quot;, but this is merely equivalent to φ&quot;ẑ&quot;, and this is a class. (all quotes: &quot;PM&quot; 1962:xxxix).

== Consistency and criticisms ==

According to Carnap&#x27;s &quot;Logicist Foundations of Mathematics&quot;, Russell wanted a theory that could plausibly be said to derive all of mathematics from purely logical axioms. However, Principia Mathematica required, in addition to the basic axioms of type theory, three further axioms that seemed to not be true as mere matters of logic, namely the axiom of infinity, the axiom of choice, and the axiom of reducibility. Since the first two were existential axioms, Russell phrased mathematical statements depending on them as conditionals. But reducibility was required to be sure that the formal statements even properly express statements of real analysis, so that statements depending on it could not be reformulated as conditionals. Frank Ramsey tried to argue that Russell&#x27;s ramification of the theory of types was unnecessary, so that reducibility could be removed, but these arguments seemed inconclusive.

Beyond the status of the axioms as logical truths, one can ask the following questions about any system such as PM:
* whether a contradiction could be derived from the axioms (the question of inconsistency), and
* whether there exists a mathematical statement which could neither be proven nor disproven in the system (the question of completeness).

Propositional logic itself was known to be consistent, but the same had not been established for &quot;Principia&quot;&#x27;s axioms of set theory. (See Hilbert&#x27;s second problem.) Russell and Whitehead suspected that the system in PM is incomplete: for example, they pointed out that it does not seem powerful enough to show that the cardinal ℵω exists. However, one can ask if some recursively axiomatizable extension of it is complete and consistent.

===Gödel 1930, 1931===

In 1930, Gödel&#x27;s completeness theorem showed that first-order predicate logic itself was complete in a much weaker sense—that is, any sentence that is unprovable from a given set of axioms must actually be false in some model of the axioms. However, this is not the stronger sense of completeness desired for Principia Mathematica, since a given system of axioms (such as those of Principia Mathematica) may have many models, in some of which a given statement is true and in others of which that statement is false, so that the statement is left undecided by the axioms.

Gödel&#x27;s incompleteness theorems cast unexpected light on these two related questions.

Gödel&#x27;s first incompleteness theorem showed that no recursive extension of &quot;Principia&quot; could be both consistent and complete for arithmetic statements. (As mentioned above, Principia itself was already known to be incomplete for some non-arithmetic statements.) According to the theorem, within every sufficiently powerful recursive logical system (such as &quot;Principia&quot;), there exists a statement &quot;G&quot; that essentially reads, &quot;The statement &quot;G&quot; cannot be proved.&quot; Such a statement is a sort of Catch-22: if &quot;G&quot; is provable, then it is false, and the system is therefore inconsistent; and if &quot;G&quot; is not provable, then it is true, and the system is therefore incomplete.

Gödel&#x27;s second incompleteness theorem (1931) shows that no formal system extending basic arithmetic can be used to prove its own consistency. Thus, the statement &quot;there are no contradictions in the &quot;Principia&quot; system&quot; cannot be proven in the &quot;Principia&quot; system unless there &quot;are&quot; contradictions in the system (in which case it can be proven both true and false).

=== Wittgenstein 1919, 1939 ===
By the second edition of &quot;PM&quot;, Russell had removed his &quot;axiom of reducibility&quot; to a new axiom (although he does not state it as such). Gödel 1944:126 describes it this way:
This new proposal resulted in a dire outcome. An &quot;extensional stance&quot; and restriction to a second-order predicate logic means that a propositional function extended to all individuals such as &quot;All &#x27;x&#x27; are blue&quot; now has to list all of the &#x27;x&#x27; that satisfy (are true in) the proposition, listing them in a possibly infinite conjunction: e.g. &quot;x1&quot; ∧ &quot;x2&quot; ∧ . . . ∧ &quot;xn&quot; ∧ . . .. Ironically, this change came about as the result of criticism from Ludwig Wittgenstein in his 1919 &quot;Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus&quot;. As described by Russell in the Introduction to the Second Edition of &quot;PM&quot;:

In other words, the fact that an infinite list cannot realistically be specified means that the concept of &quot;number&quot; in the infinite sense (i.e. the continuum) cannot be described by the new theory proposed in &quot;PM Second Edition&quot;.

Wittgenstein in his &quot;Lectures on the Foundations of Mathematics, Cambridge 1939&quot; criticised &quot;Principia&quot; on various grounds, such as:
* It purports to reveal the fundamental basis for arithmetic. However, it is our everyday arithmetical practices such as counting which are fundamental; for if a persistent discrepancy arose between counting and &quot;Principia&quot;, this would be treated as evidence of an error in &quot;Principia&quot; (e.g., that Principia did not characterise numbers or addition correctly), not as evidence of an error in everyday counting.
* The calculating methods in &quot;Principia&quot; can only be used in practice with very small numbers. To calculate using large numbers (e.g., billions), the formulae would become too long, and some short-cut method would have to be used, which would no doubt rely on everyday techniques such as counting (or else on non-fundamental and hence questionable methods such as induction). So again &quot;Principia&quot; depends on everyday techniques, not vice versa.

Wittgenstein did, however, concede that &quot;Principia&quot; may nonetheless make some aspects of everyday arithmetic clearer.

===Gödel 1944===
Gödel offered a &quot;critical but sympathetic discussion of the logicistic order of ideas&quot; in his 1944 article &quot;Russell&#x27;s Mathematical Logic&quot;. He wrote:
==Contents==

===Part I Mathematical logic. Volume I ✱1 to ✱43===

This section describes the propositional and predicate calculus, and gives the basic properties of classes, relations, and types.

===Part II Prolegomena to cardinal arithmetic. Volume I ✱50 to ✱97===

This part covers various properties of relations, especially those needed for cardinal arithmetic.

===Part III Cardinal arithmetic. Volume II ✱100 to ✱126===

This covers the definition and basic properties of cardinals. A cardinal is defined to be an equivalence class of similar classes (as opposed to ZFC, where a cardinal is a special sort of von Neumann ordinal). Each type has its own collection of cardinals associated with it, and there is a considerable amount of bookkeeping necessary for comparing cardinals of different types. PM define addition, multiplication and exponentiation of cardinals, and compare different definitions of finite and infinite cardinals. ✱120.03 is the Axiom of infinity.

===Part IV Relation-arithmetic. Volume II ✱150 to ✱186===

A &quot;relation-number&quot; is an equivalence class of isomorphic relations. PM defines analogues of addition, multiplication, and exponentiation for arbitrary relations. The addition and multiplication is similar to the usual definition of addition and multiplication of ordinals in ZFC, though the definition of exponentiation of relations in PM is not equivalent to the usual one used in ZFC.

===Part V Series. Volume II ✱200 to ✱234 and volume III ✱250 to ✱276===

This covers series, which is PM&#x27;s term for what is now called a totally ordered set. In particular it covers complete series, continuous functions between series with the order topology (though of course they do not use this terminology), well-ordered series, and series without &quot;gaps&quot; (those with a member strictly between any two given members).

===Part VI Quantity. Volume III ✱300 to ✱375===

This section constructs the ring of integers, the fields of rational and real numbers, and &quot;vector-families&quot;, which are related to what are now called torsors over abelian groups.

==Comparison with set theory==

This section compares the system in PM with the usual mathematical foundations of ZFC. The system of PM is roughly comparable in strength with Zermelo set theory (or more precisely a version of it where the axiom of separation has all quantifiers bounded).
* The system of propositional logic and predicate calculus in PM is essentially the same as that used now, except that the notation and terminology has changed.
* The most obvious difference between PM and set theory is that in PM all objects belong to one of a number of disjoint types. This means that everything gets duplicated for each (infinite) type: for example, each type has its own ordinals, cardinals, real numbers, and so on. This results in a lot of bookkeeping to relate the various types with each other.
* In ZFC functions are normally coded as sets of ordered pairs. In PM functions are treated rather differently. First of all, &quot;function&quot; means &quot;propositional function&quot;, something taking values true or false. Second, functions are not determined by their values: it is possible to have several different functions all taking the same values (for example, one might regard 2&quot;x&quot;+2 and 2(&quot;x&quot;+1) as different functions on grounds that the computer programs for evaluating them are different). The functions in ZFC given by sets of ordered pairs correspond to what PM call &quot;matrices&quot;, and the more general functions in PM are coded by quantifying over some variables. In particular PM distinguishes between functions defined using quantification and functions not defined using quantification, whereas ZFC does not make this distinction.
* PM has no analogue of the axiom of replacement, though this is of little practical importance as this axiom is used very little in mathematics outside set theory.
* PM emphasizes relations as a fundamental concept, whereas in modern mathematical practice it is functions rather than relations that are treated as more fundamental; for example, category theory emphasizes morphisms or functions rather than relations. (However, there is an analogue of categories called allegories that models relations rather than functions, and is quite similar to the type system of PM.)
* In PM, cardinals are defined as classes of similar classes, whereas in ZFC cardinals are special ordinals. In PM there is a different collection of cardinals for each type with some complicated machinery for moving cardinals between types, whereas in ZFC there is only 1 sort of cardinal. Since PM does not have any equivalent of the axiom of replacement, it is unable to prove the existence of cardinals greater than ℵω.
* In PM ordinals are treated as equivalence classes of well-ordered sets, and as with cardinals there is a different collection of ordinals for each type. In ZFC there is only one collection of ordinals, usually defined as von Neumann ordinals. One strange quirk of PM is that they do not have an ordinal corresponding to 1, which causes numerous unnecessary complications in their theorems. The definition of ordinal exponentiation αβ in PM is not equivalent to the usual definition in ZFC and has some rather undesirable properties: for example, it is not continuous in β and is not well ordered (so is not even an ordinal).
* The constructions of the integers, rationals and real numbers in ZFC have been streamlined considerably over time since the constructions in PM.

==Differences between editions==
Apart from corrections of misprints, the main text of PM is unchanged between the first and second editions. The main text in Volumes 1 and 2 was reset, so that it occupies fewer pages in each. In the second edition, Volume 3 was not reset, being photographically reprinted with the same page numbering; corrections were still made. The total number of pages (excluding the endpapers) in the first edition is 1,996; in the second, 2,000. Volume 1 has five new additions:
* A 54-page introduction by Russell describing the changes they would have made had they had more time and energy. The main change he suggests is the removal of the controversial axiom of reducibility, though he admits that he knows no satisfactory substitute for it. He also seems more favorable to the idea that a function should be determined by its values (as is usual in modern mathematical practice).
* Appendix A, numbered as *8, 15 pages, about the Sheffer stroke.
* Appendix B, numbered as *89, discussing induction without the axiom of reducibility.
* Appendix C, 8 pages, discussing propositional functions.
* An 8-page list of definitions at the end, giving a much-needed index to the 500 or so notations used.

In 1962, Cambridge University Press published a shortened paperback edition containing parts of the second edition of Volume 1: the new introduction (and the old), the main text up to *56, and Appendices A and C..

== Editions ==
The first edition was reprinted in 2009 by Merchant Books, , , .

== Legacy ==

Andrew D. Irvine says that &quot;PM&quot; sparked interest in symbolic logic and advanced the subject by popularizing it; it showcased the powers and capacities of symbolic logic; and it showed how advances in philosophy of mathematics and symbolic logic could go hand-in-hand with tremendous fruitfulness. &quot;PM&quot; was in part brought about by an interest in logicism, the view on which all mathematical truths are logical truths. Though flawed, &quot;PM&quot; would be influential in several later advances in meta-logic, including Gödel&#x27;s incompleteness theorems.

The logical notation in &quot;PM&quot; was not widely adopted, possibly because its foundations are often considered a form of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory.

Scholarly, historical, and philosophical interest in &quot;PM&quot; is great and ongoing, and mathematicians continue to work with &quot;PM&quot;, whether for the historical reason of understanding the text or its authors, or for furthering insight into the formalizations of math and logic.

The Modern Library placed &quot;PM&quot; 23rd in their list of the top 100 English-language nonfiction books of the twentieth century.

== See also ==
* Axiomatic set theory
* Boolean algebra
* Information Processing Language – first computational demonstration of theorems in PM
* &quot;Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy&quot;

== Footnotes ==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy:
** &quot;Principia Mathematica&quot; – by A. D. Irvine
** The Notation in &quot;Principia Mathematica&quot; – by Bernard Linsky.
* Proposition ✱54.43 in a more modern notation (Metamath)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q833585" start="79" end="105" title="foundations of mathematics" label="foundations of mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q183372" start="148" end="170" title="Alfred North Whitehead" label="Alfred North Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="175" end="191" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q163335" start="383" end="385" title="Principia Mathematica" label="✱9"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758358" start="518" end="547" title="The Principles of Mathematics" label="The Principles of Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453739" start="1271" end="1287" title="primitive notion" label="primitive notion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17736" start="1290" end="1295" title="axiom" label="axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068763" start="1302" end="1316" title="inference rule" label="inference rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166618" start="1373" end="1387" title="Mathematical logic" label="symbolic logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="1505" end="1515" title="set theory" label="set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q33401" start="1554" end="1576" title="Russell&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="Russell&amp;#x27;s paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056428" start="1634" end="1639" title="system of types" label="types"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822096" start="2141" end="2155" title="Modern Library" label="Modern Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="2345" end="2355" title="set theory" label="set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q163875" start="2357" end="2373" title="cardinal numbers" label="cardinal numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q191780" start="2375" end="2390" title="ordinal numbers" label="ordinal numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="2396" end="2408" title="real numbers" label="real numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q854531" start="2431" end="2444" title="real analysis" label="real analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="2732" end="2740" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q41390" start="2910" end="2920" title="Kurt Gödel" label="Kurt Gödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433067" start="2939" end="2955" title="Formalism (mathematics)" label="formalist theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q467606" start="3191" end="3203" title="model theory" label="model theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q335148" start="3995" end="4001" title="Stephen Cole Kleene" label="Kleene"/>
<link wikidata="Q126002" start="5405" end="5418" title="concatenation" label="concatenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17736" start="5831" end="5837" title="axioms" label="axioms"/>
<link wikidata="Q655742" start="6538" end="6550" title="modus ponens" label="modus ponens"/>
<link wikidata="Q60028" start="9856" end="9869" title="Gottlob Frege" label="Gottlob Frege"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874243" start="14977" end="14991" title="Sheffer stroke" label="Sheffer stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874243" start="15221" end="15225" title="Sheffer stroke" label="NAND"/>
<link wikidata="Q92741" start="17584" end="17590" title="Alonzo Church" label="Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830560" start="18846" end="18867" title="axiom of reducibility" label="axiom of reducibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q57248" start="19464" end="19471" title="Ernst Zermelo" label="Zermelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q711431" start="20846" end="20859" title="Leon Chwistek" label="Leon Chwistek"/>
<link wikidata="Q41390" start="22647" end="22657" title="Kurt Gödel" label="Kurt Gödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q191029" start="23679" end="23684" title="Giuseppe Peano" label="Peano"/>
<link wikidata="Q814390" start="24181" end="24196" title="Begriffsschrift" label="Begriffsschrift"/>
<link wikidata="Q41390" start="30338" end="30348" title="Kurt Gödel" label="Kurt Gödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055684" start="31369" end="31384" title="predicate logic" label="predicate logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874243" start="31873" end="31887" title="Sheffer stroke" label="Sheffer stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606768" start="31978" end="32000" title="propositional function" label="propositional function"/>
<link wikidata="Q219079" start="32006" end="32017" title="truth table" label="truth table"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874243" start="32145" end="32149" title="Sheffer stroke" label="NAND"/>
<link wikidata="Q219079" start="36110" end="36121" title="truth table" label="truth table"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830560" start="36754" end="36775" title="axiom of reducibility" label="axiom of reducibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q655742" start="37452" end="37464" title="modus ponens" label="modus ponens"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="37815" end="37821" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="40220" end="40230" title="set theory" label="set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q191290" start="40242" end="40254" title="ordered pair" label="ordered pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830560" start="42240" end="42262" title="Axiom of reducibility" label="axioms of reducibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q76519" start="45256" end="45262" title="Carnap" label="Carnap"/>
<link wikidata="Q920450" start="45603" end="45620" title="axiom of infinity" label="axiom of infinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q179692" start="45626" end="45641" title="axiom of choice" label="axiom of choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830560" start="45651" end="45672" title="axiom of reducibility" label="axiom of reducibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q315387" start="45991" end="46003" title="Frank Ramsey (mathematician)" label="Frank Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311695" start="46208" end="46221" title="logical truth" label="logical truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319773" start="46365" end="46378" title="inconsistency" label="inconsistency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144319" start="46410" end="46432" title="mathematical statement" label="mathematical statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q15846555" start="46508" end="46520" title="completeness (logic)" label="completeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q200694" start="46524" end="46543" title="Propositional logic" label="Propositional logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424667" start="46677" end="46706" title="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s second problem" label="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s second problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q902052" start="47016" end="47049" title="Gödel&amp;#x27;s completeness theorem" label="Gödel&amp;#x27;s completeness theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q467606" start="47232" end="47237" title="Model theory" label="model"/>
<link wikidata="Q200787" start="47585" end="47621" title="Gödel&amp;#x27;s incompleteness theorems" label="Gödel&amp;#x27;s incompleteness theorems"/>
<link wikidata="Q649732" start="48025" end="48039" title="logical system" label="logical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250696" start="48224" end="48232" title="Catch-22 (logic)" label="Catch-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q200787" start="48420" end="48462" title="Gödel&amp;#x27;s second incompleteness theorem" label="Gödel&amp;#x27;s second incompleteness theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q649732" start="48484" end="48497" title="formal system" label="formal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="49567" end="49586" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q655717" start="49605" end="49635" title="Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus" label="Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41390" start="51176" end="51181" title="Kurt Gödel" label="Gödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q191849" start="51924" end="51927" title="Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory" label="ZFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361825" start="55184" end="55204" title="axiom of replacement" label="axiom of replacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731385" start="55627" end="55637" title="Allegory (category theory)" label="allegories"/>
<link wikidata="Q191780" start="56378" end="56397" title="von Neumann ordinal" label="von Neumann ordinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16192768" start="58468" end="58484" title="Andrew David Irvine" label="Andrew D. Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q845691" start="58834" end="58842" title="logicism" label="logicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q200787" start="59008" end="59044" title="Gödel&amp;#x27;s incompleteness theorems" label="Gödel&amp;#x27;s incompleteness theorems"/>
<link wikidata="Q191849" start="59174" end="59201" title="Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory" label="Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822096" start="59501" end="59515" title="Modern Library" label="Modern Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="59650" end="59670" title="Axiomatic set theory" label="Axiomatic set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q173183" start="59673" end="59688" title="Boolean algebra" label="Boolean algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q776372" start="59691" end="59722" title="Information Processing Language" label="Information Processing Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q544347" start="59785" end="59824" title="Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy" label="Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q824553" start="59904" end="59939" title="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16192768" start="59983" end="59995" title="Andrew David Irvine" label="A. D. Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822975" start="60118" end="60126" title="Metamath" label="Metamath"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24135" wikidata="Q839078" url="?curid=24135" title="Prime Minister of Canada">
<text>The prime minister of Canada () is the head of government of Canada. Under the Westminster system, the prime minister governs with the confidence of a majority of the elected House of Commons; as such, the prime minister typically sits as a member of Parliament (MP) and leads the largest party or a coalition of parties. As first minister, the prime minister selects ministers to form the Cabinet.

Not outlined in any constitutional document, the prime minister is appointed by the monarch&#x27;s representative, the governor general, and the office exists per long-established convention. Constitutionally, executive authority is vested in the monarch (who is the head of state), but the powers of the monarch and governor general are nearly always exercised on the advice of the Cabinet, which is collectively responsible to the House of Commons. Canadian prime ministers are appointed to the Privy Council and styled as the Right Honourable (), a privilege maintained for life.

The prime minister is supported by the Prime Minister&#x27;s Office and heads the Privy Council Office. The prime minister also selects individuals for appointment as governor general (in the federal jurisdiction) and lieutenant governor (in the provinces), as well as to the Senate of Canada, Supreme Court of Canada, other federal courts, and the chairs and boards of various Crown corporations.

Since Confederation in 1867, 23 prime ministers (twenty-two men and one woman) have formed 29 ministries. Justin Trudeau, the current prime minister, took office on November 4, 2015, following the 2015 federal election, wherein his Liberal Party won a majority of seats. Trudeau&#x27;s Liberals subsequently won a plurality of seats in the 2019 and 2021 elections, leaving Trudeau with minority governments. On January 6, 2025, Trudeau announced his intention to resign from leadership of his Liberal Party and as prime minister. He will remain as prime minister and Liberal Party leader until a replacement is chosen on March 9, 2025.

==Origin of the office==
The position of prime minister is not outlined in any Canadian constitutional document and is mentioned only in a few sections of the &quot;Constitution Act, 1982&quot;, and the &quot;Letters Patent, 1947&quot;, issued by King George VI. The office and its functions are instead governed by constitutional conventions and modelled on the same office in the United Kingdom.

==Qualifications and selection==
In 2008, a public opinion survey showed that 51% of Canadians believed they voted to directly elect the prime minister. In fact, the prime minister, along with the other ministers in Cabinet, is appointed by the governor general on behalf of the monarch. By the conventions of responsible government, the foundation of parliamentary democracy, the governor general will call to form a government the individual most likely to receive the support, or confidence, of a majority of the directly elected members of the House of Commons; as a practical matter, this is often the leader of the party, or a coalition of parties, whose members form a majority, or a very large plurality, of seats in the House of Commons. No document is needed to begin the appointment; a party leader becomes prime minister-designate as soon as he accepts the governor general&#x27;s invitation to form a government.

A prime minister who has given intention to resign may advise the governor general on whom to appoint as the next prime minister. However, if the prime minister is resigning because he has lost the confidence of the House of Commons, the viceroy is not obligated to follow that advice. If the leader of the opposition is unable or unwilling to form a government, the governor general can consult whomever she wishes.

While there is no legal requirement for the prime minister to be an MP, for practical and political reasons the prime minister is expected to win a seat very promptly. However, in rare circumstances individuals who are not sitting members of the House of Commons have been appointed to the position of prime minister. Two former prime ministers—John Joseph Caldwell Abbott and Mackenzie Bowell—served in the 1890s while members of the Senate. Both, in their roles as government leader in the Senate, succeeded prime ministers who had died in office—John A. Macdonald in 1891 and John Sparrow David Thompson in 1894.

Prime ministers who are not MPs upon their appointment (or who lose their seats while in office) have since been expected to seek election to the House of Commons as soon as possible. For example, William Lyon Mackenzie King, after losing his seat in the 1925 federal election and again in the 1945 Canadian federal election (despite his party being elected government both times), briefly governed without a seat in the House of Commons on both occasions before winning a by-election a few weeks later. Similarly, John Turner replaced Pierre Trudeau as leader of the Liberal Party in 1984 and subsequently was appointed prime minister while not holding a seat in the House of Commons; Turner won a riding in the next election but the Liberal Party was swept from power.

When a prime minister loses their seat in the legislature, or should a new prime minister be appointed without holding a seat, the typical process that follows is that a member in the governing political party will resign to allow the prime minister to run in the resulting by-election. A safe seat is usually chosen; while the Liberal and Conservative parties generally observed a practice of not running a candidate against another party&#x27;s new leader in the by-election, the New Democratic Party and smaller political parties typically do not follow the same practice. However, if the governing party selects a new leader shortly before an election is due, and that new leader is not a member of the legislature, they will normally await the upcoming election before running for a seat in Parliament.

== Term of office ==

The prime minister serves &quot;at His Majesty&#x27;s pleasure&quot;, meaning the post does not have a fixed term, and once appointed and sworn in by the governor general, the prime minister remains in office until they resign, are dismissed, or die.

While the lifespan of a parliament is constitutionally limited to five years, a 2007 amendment to the &quot;Canada Elections Act&quot;, Section 56.1(2) limited the term of a Parliament to four years, with election day being set as the third Monday in October of the fourth calendar year after the previous polling date. The governor general may still, on the advice of the prime minister, dissolve parliament and issue the writs of election prior to the date mandated by the constitution or &quot;Canada Elections Act&quot;; the King–Byng Affair was the only time since Confederation that the governor general refused the prime minister&#x27;s request for a general vote.

Following parliamentary dissolution, should the prime minister&#x27;s party subsequently win a majority of seats in the House of Commons, it is unnecessary to re-appoint the prime minister or for the prime minister to retake the oath of office. If, however, an opposition party wins a majority of seats, the prime minister may resign or choose to meet Parliament to see if the incumbent government can win a confidence vote. Should the prime minister&#x27;s party achieve a minority while an opposition party wins a plurality (i.e., more seats than any other party but less than a majority), the prime minister can attempt to maintain the confidence of the House by forming a coalition with other minority parties, which was last entertained in 1925 or by entering into a confidence-and-supply agreement, or by winning support of other parties on a vote-by-vote basis.

==Role and authority==


Because the prime minister is in practice the most politically powerful member of the Canadian government, they are sometimes erroneously thought to be Canada&#x27;s head of state, when, in fact, that role belongs to the Canadian monarch, represented by the governor general. The prime minister is, instead, the head of government and is responsible for advising the Crown on how to exercise much of the royal prerogative and its executive powers, which are governed by the written constitution and constitutional conventions. However, the function of the prime minister has evolved with increasing power. Today, per the doctrines of constitutional monarchy, the advice given by the prime minister is ordinarily binding, meaning the prime minister effectively carries out those duties ascribed to the sovereign or governor general, leaving the latter to act in predominantly ceremonial fashions. As such, the prime minister, supported by the Office of the Prime Minister (PMO), controls the appointments of many key figures in Canada&#x27;s system of governance, including the governor general, the Cabinet, justices of the Supreme Court, senators, heads of Crown corporations, ambassadors and high commissioners, the provincial lieutenant governors, and approximately 3,100 other positions. Further, the prime minister plays a prominent role in the legislative process—with the majority of bills put before Parliament originating in the Cabinet.
Pierre Trudeau is often credited with, throughout his tenure as prime minister (1968–79, 1980–84), consolidating power in the PMO, which is itself filled by political and administrative staff selected at the prime minister&#x27;s discretion and unaccountable to Parliament. At the end of the 20th century and into the 21st, analysts—such as Jeffrey Simpson, Donald Savoie, Andrew Coyne, and John Gomery—argued that both Parliament and the Cabinet had become eclipsed by prime ministerial power; Savoie wrote: &quot;The Canadian prime minister has little in the way of institutional check, at least inside government, to inhibit his ability to have his way.&quot; Indeed, the position has been described as undergoing a &quot;presidentialization&quot;, to the point that its incumbents publicly outshine the actual head of state (and prime minister&#x27;s spouses are sometimes referred to as &quot;First Lady of Canada&quot;). Former governor general Adrienne Clarkson alluded to what she saw as &quot;an unspoken rivalry&quot; that had developed between the prime minister and the Crown. It has been theorized that such is the case in Canada as its Parliament is less influential on the executive than in other countries with Westminster parliamentary systems; particularly, Canada has fewer MPs, a higher turnover rate of MPs after each election, and a US-style system for selecting political party leaders, leaving them accountable to the party membership rather than caucus (as is the case in the UK).

There do exist checks on the prime minister&#x27;s power: the House of Commons may revoke its confidence in an incumbent prime minister and Cabinet or caucus revolts can quickly bring down a serving premier and even mere threats of such action can persuade or compel a prime minister to resign their post, as happened with Jean Chrétien. The &quot;Reform Act, 2014&quot;, codifies the process by which a caucus may trigger a party leadership review and, if necessary, chose an interim leader, thereby making a prime minister more accountable to the MPs in one&#x27;s party. Caucuses may choose to follow these rules, though the decision would be made by recorded vote, thereby subjecting the party&#x27;s choice to public scrutiny.

The Senate may delay or impede legislation put forward by the Cabinet, such as when Brian Mulroney&#x27;s bill creating the Goods and Services Tax (GST) came before the Senate, and given Canada&#x27;s federal nature, the jurisdiction of the federal government is limited to areas prescribed by the constitution. Further, as executive power is constitutionally vested in the monarch, meaning the royal prerogative belongs to the Crown and not to any of its ministers, the sovereign&#x27;s supremacy over the prime minister in the constitutional order is thus seen as a &quot;rebuff to the pretensions of the elected: As it has been said, when the prime minister bows before the queen, he bows before us [the Canadian people].&quot; Either the sovereign or the governor general may therefore oppose the prime minister&#x27;s will in extreme, crisis situations. Near the end of her time as governor general, Adrienne Clarkson stated: &quot;My constitutional role has lain in what are called &#x27;reserve powers&#x27;: making sure that there is a prime minister and a government in place, and exercising the right &#x27;to encourage, to advise, and to warn&#x27;[...] Without really revealing any secrets, I can tell you that I have done all three.&quot;

==Privileges==
Two official residences are provided to the prime minister—24 Sussex Drive in Ottawa and Harrington Lake, a country retreat in Gatineau Park—as well an office in the Office of the Prime Minister and Privy Council building (formerly known as Langevin Block), across from Parliament Hill. 

For transportation, the prime minister is afforded an armoured car (a car allowance of $2,000 per year) and shared use of two official aircraft—a CC-150 Polaris for international flights and a Challenger 601 for domestic trips. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police also furnish constant personal security for the prime minister and their family. All of the aforementioned is provided through budgets approved by Parliament. 

As of April 2024, the prime minister&#x27;s annual salary is $406,200 (consisting of an MP&#x27;s salary of $203,100 and the prime minister&#x27;s additional salary of $203,100).

Serving or former prime ministers are accorded a state funeral, wherein their casket lies in state in the Centre Block of Parliament Hill. Only Bowell and the Viscount Bennett were given private funerals, Bennett also being the only former prime minister of Canada to die and be buried outside the country and Bowell the only whose funeral was not attended by politicians. John Thompson also died outside Canada, at Windsor Castle, where Queen Victoria permitted his lying-in-state before his body was returned to Canada for a state funeral in Halifax.

Prior to 1919, it was traditional for the monarch to bestow a knighthood on newly appointed Canadian prime ministers. Accordingly, several carried the prefix &quot;Sir&quot; before their name; of the first eight prime ministers of Canada, only Alexander Mackenzie refused the honour of a knighthood from Queen Victoria. Following the 1919 Nickle Resolution, however, the House of Commons declared that it should be against the policy of the Canadian Sovereign (and the Canadian government advising the Monarch when such honours are not within the Monarch&#x27;s personal gift) to bestow aristocratic or chivalric titles to Canadians. The Crown in right of Canada (but not the Crown in right of the United Kingdom, which has periodically bestowed such Imperial honours on such citizens) has since adopted this policy generally, such that the last prime minister to be knighted near appointment was Robert Borden, who was the prime minister at the time the Nickle Resolution was debated in the House of Commons (and was knighted before the resolution). Still, Bennett was, in 1941, six years after he stepped down as prime minister, elevated to the peerage of the United Kingdom by King George VI as Viscount Bennett, of Mickleham in the County of Surrey and of Calgary and Hopewell in Canada. No prime minister has since been titled.

The Canadian Heraldic Authority (CHA) grants former prime ministers an augmentation of honour on the coat of arms of those who apply for them. The heraldic badge, referred to by the CHA as the &quot;mark of the Prime Ministership of Canada&quot;, consists of four red maple leaves joined at the stem on a white field (&quot;Argent four maple leaves conjoined in cross at the stem Gules&quot;); the augmentation is usually a canton or centred in the chief. Joe Clark, Pierre Trudeau, John Turner, Brian Mulroney, Kim Campbell, Jean Chrétien and Paul Martin were granted arms with the augmentation.

==Style of address==

Canada continues the Westminster tradition of using the title &quot;Prime Minister&quot; when one is speaking to the federal head of government directly; the Department of Canadian Heritage advises that the term &quot;Mr. Prime Minister&quot; should not be used in official contexts. The written form of address for the prime minister should use their full parliamentary title: &quot;The Right Honourable [name], [post-nominal letters], Prime Minister of Canada&quot;. However, while in the House of Commons during Question Period, other members of parliament may address the prime minister as &quot;the Right Honourable Member for [prime minister&#x27;s riding]&quot; or simply &quot;the Right Honourable Prime Minister&quot;. Former prime ministers retain the prefix &quot;the Right Honourable&quot; for the remainder of their lives; should they remain sitting MPs, they may be referred as &quot;the Right Honourable Member for [member&#x27;s riding]&quot;, by their portfolio title (if appointed to one), as in &quot;the Right Honourable Minister of National Defence&quot;, or should they become opposition leader, as &quot;the Right Honourable Leader of the Opposition&quot;.

In the decades following Confederation, it was common practice to refer to the prime minister as &quot;Premier of Canada&quot;, a custom that continued during the First World War, around the time of Robert Borden&#x27;s premiership. While contemporary sources will still speak of early prime ministers of Canada as &quot;premier&quot;, the modern practice is such that the federal head of government is known almost exclusively as the &quot;prime minister&quot;, while the provincial and territorial heads of government are termed &quot;premiers&quot; (in French, premiers are addressed as , literally translated as &quot;prime minister of [province]&quot;).

==Prime minister–designate of Canada==

The prime minister–designate of Canada is the person who has been designated as the future prime minister by the governor general, after either the individual&#x27;s political party won a general election or proposed to form either a confidence-and-supply government or coalition government. The term does not apply to incumbent prime ministers.

==Activities post-premiership==

After exiting office, former prime ministers of Canada have engaged in various pursuits. Some remained in politics: Bowell continued as a senator, and Bennett moved to the United Kingdom after being elevated to the House of Lords. A number were leaders of the Official Opposition: John A. Macdonald, Arthur Meighen, Mackenzie King, and Pierre Trudeau, all before being re-appointed as prime minister (Mackenzie King twice); Alexander Mackenzie and John Diefenbaker, both prior to sitting as regular Members of Parliament until their deaths; Wilfrid Laurier dying while still in the post; and Charles Tupper, Louis St. Laurent, and John Turner, each before they returned to private business. Meighen was also appointed to the Senate following his second period as prime minister, but resigned his seat to seek re-election and moved to private enterprise after failing to win a riding. Also returning to civilian life were: Robert Borden, who was Chancellor of Queen&#x27;s and McGill Universities, as well as working in the financial sector; Lester B. Pearson, who was Chancellor of Carleton University; Joe Clark and Kim Campbell, who were university lecturers, Clark also consultant and Campbell working in international diplomacy and as the director of private companies and chairperson of interest groups; while Pierre Trudeau and Jean Chrétien returned to legal practice. Former prime ministers also commonly penned autobiographies—Tupper, for example—or published their memoirs—such as Diefenbaker and Paul Martin.

==See also==

* Historical rankings of prime ministers of Canada
* List of prime ministers of Canada
* List of prime ministers of Canada by time in office
* List of prime ministers of Canada by religious affiliation
* List of books about prime ministers of Canada
* Prime ministers of Canada in popular culture
* Spouse of the prime minister of Canada

== Notes ==

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==

* Official government website of the Office of the Prime Minister
* Prime Minister of Canada on YouTube
* Library of Parliament of Canada
* Canada&#x27;s Best Prime Ministers: 2011 &quot;Maclean&#x27;s&quot; article</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="4" end="28" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="prime minister of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="39" end="57" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="61" end="67" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="79" end="97" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q21406588" start="135" end="145" title="Confidence and supply" label="confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="175" end="191" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q15964890" start="241" end="261" title="Member of Parliament (Canada)" label="member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="300" end="309" title="Coalition government" label="coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6615002" start="325" end="339" title="List of current Canadian first ministers" label="first minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458227" start="390" end="397" title="Cabinet of Canada" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q508840" start="480" end="491" title="Monarchy of Canada" label="the monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="519" end="535" title="Governor General of Canada" label="governor general"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="580" end="590" title="Convention (norm)#Government" label="convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="610" end="629" title="Executive (government)" label="executive authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="667" end="680" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308979" start="769" end="775" title="Advice (constitutional law)" label="advice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="814" end="825" title="Responsible government" label="responsible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631137" start="897" end="910" title="King&amp;#x27;s Privy Council for Canada" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5767753" start="915" end="921" title="Style (manner of address)" label="styled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480896" start="925" end="945" title="the Right Honourable" label="the Right Honourable"/>
<link wikidata="Q24569" start="1023" end="1051" title="Office of the Prime Minister (Canada)" label="Prime Minister&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q24168" start="1066" end="1086" title="Privy Council Office (Canada)" label="Privy Council Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970061" start="1202" end="1221" title="Lieutenant Governor (Canada)" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="1230" end="1239" title="Provinces and territories of Canada" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q841180" start="1260" end="1276" title="Senate of Canada" label="Senate of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="1278" end="1301" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509428" start="1309" end="1323" title="Court system of Canada" label="federal courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189488" start="1362" end="1380" title="Crown corporations of Canada" label="Crown corporations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="1389" end="1402" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q927338" start="1412" end="1430" title="List of prime ministers of Canada" label="23 prime ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861036" start="1474" end="1487" title="List of Canadian ministries" label="29 ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099714" start="1489" end="1503" title="Justin Trudeau" label="Justin Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586271" start="1580" end="1601" title="2015 Canadian federal election" label="2015 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="1615" end="1628" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190721" start="1723" end="1727" title="2019 Canadian federal election" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q73837865" start="1732" end="1746" title="2021 Canadian federal election" label="2021 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980572" start="1769" end="1789" title="Federal minority governments in Canada" label="minority governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q131689733" start="1979" end="1990" title="2025 Liberal Party of Canada leadership election" label="replacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q868875" start="2185" end="2207" title="Constitution Act, 1982" label="Constitution Act, 1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843879" start="2229" end="2249" title="Letters Patent, 1947" label="Letters Patent, 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="2272" end="2281" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="2383" end="2416" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="same office in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="2729" end="2751" title="responsible government" label="responsible government"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="2967" end="2983" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3095" end="3103" title="Majority#Parliamentary rules" label="majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799148" start="3121" end="3130" title="Plurality (voting)" label="plurality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137778" start="3326" end="3343" title="Government formation" label="form a government"/>
<link wikidata="Q128696" start="4109" end="4136" title="John Abbott" label="John Joseph Caldwell Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q128677" start="4141" end="4157" title="Mackenzie Bowell" label="Mackenzie Bowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q841180" start="4199" end="4205" title="Senate of Canada" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506575" start="4231" end="4262" title="Representative of the Government in the Senate" label="government leader in the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q128702" start="4313" end="4330" title="John A. Macdonald" label="John A. Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q128686" start="4343" end="4370" title="John Sparrow David Thompson" label="John Sparrow David Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q128633" start="4578" end="4605" title="William Lyon Mackenzie King" label="William Lyon Mackenzie King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723528" start="4636" end="4657" title="1925 Canadian federal election" label="1925 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723532" start="4675" end="4705" title="1945 Canadian federal election" label="1945 Canadian federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q128568" start="4896" end="4907" title="John Turner" label="John Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q8619" start="4917" end="4931" title="Pierre Trudeau" label="Pierre Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398544" start="5442" end="5451" title="safe seat" label="safe seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="5493" end="5505" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="5635" end="5655" title="New Democratic Party" label="New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q752940" start="6016" end="6046" title="at His Majesty&amp;#x27;s pleasure" label="at His Majesty&amp;#x27;s pleasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865598" start="6274" end="6298" title="Section 4 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms" label="constitutionally limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q476204" start="6441" end="6453" title="election day" label="election day"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038380" start="6659" end="6676" title="Writ of election" label="writs of election"/>
<link wikidata="Q183174" start="6765" end="6781" title="King–Byng affair" label="King–Byng Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="6806" end="6819" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193702" start="7170" end="7186" title="Parliamentary opposition" label="opposition party"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="7585" end="7594" title="Coalition government" label="coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q21406588" start="7681" end="7712" title="Confidence and supply" label="confidence-and-supply agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="7890" end="7909" title="Government of Canada" label="Canadian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="7970" end="7983" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="8116" end="8134" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308979" start="8158" end="8166" title="Advice (constitutional law)" label="advising"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042529" start="8208" end="8225" title="royal prerogative" label="royal prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="8438" end="8461" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308979" start="8467" end="8473" title="Advice (constitutional)" label="advice"/>
<link wikidata="Q24569" start="8746" end="8774" title="Office of the Prime Minister (Canada)" label="Office of the Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="8928" end="8941" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189488" start="8962" end="8980" title="Crown corporations of Canada" label="Crown corporations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561091" start="8982" end="9016" title="List of ambassadors and high commissioners of Canada" label="ambassadors and high commissioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970061" start="9022" end="9053" title="Lieutenant Governor (Canada)" label="provincial lieutenant governors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176732" start="9592" end="9607" title="Jeffrey Simpson" label="Jeffrey Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17198689" start="9609" end="9622" title="Donald J. Savoie" label="Donald Savoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756700" start="9624" end="9636" title="Andrew Coyne" label="Andrew Coyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181606" start="9642" end="9653" title="John Gomery" label="John Gomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580157" start="10084" end="10113" title="Spouse of the prime minister of Canada" label="prime minister&amp;#x27;s spouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q236482" start="10202" end="10219" title="Adrienne Clarkson" label="Adrienne Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="10478" end="10511" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster parliamentary systems"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10722" end="10728" title="Caucus#In Commonwealth nations" label="caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054352" start="10909" end="10922" title="caucus revolt" label="caucus revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q128543" start="11081" end="11094" title="Jean Chrétien" label="Jean Chrétien"/>
<link wikidata="Q128563" start="11575" end="11589" title="Brian Mulroney" label="Brian Mulroney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516365" start="11615" end="11637" title="Goods and services tax (Canada)" label="Goods and Services Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088188" start="11678" end="11706" title="Canadian federalism" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s federal nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q481289" start="12763" end="12781" title="official residence" label="official residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q217304" start="12818" end="12833" title="24 Sussex Drive" label="24 Sussex Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664608" start="12848" end="12863" title="Harrington Lake" label="Harrington Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364212" start="12886" end="12899" title="Gatineau Park" label="Gatineau Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q24559" start="12925" end="12980" title="Office of the Prime Minister and Privy Council" label="Office of the Prime Minister and Privy Council building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589289" start="13029" end="13044" title="Parliament Hill" label="Parliament Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373878" start="13174" end="13191" title="Royal Canadian Air Force VIP aircraft" label="official aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491" start="13194" end="13208" title="Airbus CC-150 Polaris" label="CC-150 Polaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q699843" start="13241" end="13255" title="Bombardier Challenger 600 series" label="Challenger 601"/>
<link wikidata="Q335175" start="13280" end="13309" title="Royal Canadian Mounted Police" label="Royal Canadian Mounted Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373904" start="13332" end="13349" title="Royal Canadian Mounted Police Protective Policing" label="personal security"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603687" start="13700" end="13713" title="State funerals in Canada" label="state funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062237" start="13757" end="13769" title="Centre Block" label="Centre Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q128641" start="13810" end="13826" title="R. B. Bennett" label="Viscount Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="14067" end="14081" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="14089" end="14103" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="14195" end="14202" title="Halifax, Nova Scotia" label="Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="14267" end="14277" title="knighthood" label="knighthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q128708" start="14449" end="14468" title="Alexander Mackenzie (politician)" label="Alexander Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457891" start="14544" end="14561" title="Nickle Resolution" label="Nickle Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769470" start="14792" end="14804" title="British nobility" label="aristocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056721" start="14808" end="14817" title="Chivalry" label="chivalric"/>
<link wikidata="Q128655" start="15102" end="15115" title="Robert Borden" label="Robert Borden"/>
<link wikidata="Q863009" start="15352" end="15381" title="peerage of the United Kingdom" label="peerage of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994591" start="15424" end="15433" title="Mickleham, Surrey" label="Mickleham"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="15465" end="15472" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5900373" start="15477" end="15485" title="Hopewell Hill, New Brunswick" label="Hopewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872809" start="15543" end="15570" title="Canadian Heraldic Authority" label="Canadian Heraldic Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517659" start="15610" end="15632" title="augmentation of honour" label="augmentation of honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="15640" end="15652" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267314" start="15963" end="15969" title="Canton (heraldry)" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475346" start="15988" end="15993" title="Chief (heraldry)" label="chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q128574" start="15995" end="16004" title="Joe Clark" label="Joe Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q128553" start="16051" end="16063" title="Kim Campbell" label="Kim Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056951" start="16317" end="16348" title="Department of Canadian Heritage" label="Department of Canadian Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16572" end="16593" title="[post-nominal letters" label="[post-nominal letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271525" start="16674" end="16689" title="Question Period" label="Question Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973938" start="16814" end="16820" title="Electoral district (Canada)" label="riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q192350" start="17128" end="17137" title="Ministry (government department)" label="portfolio"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="17503" end="17518" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505921" start="17813" end="17859" title="Premier (Canada)" label="provincial and territorial heads of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="18153" end="18169" title="Governor General of Canada" label="governor general"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="18635" end="18649" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015173" start="18680" end="18699" title="Official Opposition (Canada)" label="Official Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q128645" start="18720" end="18734" title="Arthur Meighen" label="Arthur Meighen"/>
<link wikidata="Q128614" start="18868" end="18884" title="John Diefenbaker" label="John Diefenbaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q128664" start="18961" end="18976" title="Wilfrid Laurier" label="Wilfrid Laurier"/>
<link wikidata="Q128672" start="19012" end="19026" title="Charles Tupper" label="Charles Tupper"/>
<link wikidata="Q128626" start="19028" end="19045" title="Louis St. Laurent" label="Louis St. Laurent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420038" start="19379" end="19391" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s University at Kingston" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="19396" end="19415" title="McGill University" label="McGill Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q128604" start="19461" end="19478" title="Lester B. Pearson" label="Lester B. Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041737" start="19502" end="19521" title="Carleton University" label="Carleton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q128529" start="19927" end="19938" title="Paul Martin" label="Paul Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774359" start="19957" end="20005" title="Historical rankings of prime ministers of Canada" label="Historical rankings of prime ministers of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q927338" start="20008" end="20041" title="List of prime ministers of Canada" label="List of prime ministers of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253359" start="20044" end="20095" title="List of prime ministers of Canada by time in office" label="List of prime ministers of Canada by time in office"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594974" start="20098" end="20156" title="List of prime ministers of Canada by religious affiliation" label="List of prime ministers of Canada by religious affiliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608045" start="20159" end="20204" title="List of books about prime ministers of Canada" label="List of books about prime ministers of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243320" start="20207" end="20251" title="Prime ministers of Canada in popular culture" label="Prime ministers of Canada in popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580157" start="20254" end="20292" title="Spouse of the prime minister of Canada" label="Spouse of the prime minister of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184850" start="20567" end="20581" title="Maclean&amp;#x27;s" label="Maclean&amp;#x27;s"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24136" wikidata="Q1277683" url="?curid=24136" title="Process theology">
<text>Process theology is a type of theology developed from Alfred North Whitehead&#x27;s (1861–1947) process philosophy, but most notably by Charles Hartshorne (1897–2000), John B. Cobb (b. 1925), and Eugene H. Peters (1929–1983). Process theology and process philosophy are collectively referred to as &quot;process thought&quot;.

For both Whitehead and Hartshorne, it is an essential attribute of God to affect and be affected by temporal processes, contrary to the forms of theism that hold God to be in all respects non-temporal (eternal), unchanging (immutable), and unaffected by the world (impassible). Process theology does not deny that God is in some respects eternal (will never die), immutable (in the sense that God is unchangingly good), and impassible (in the sense that God&#x27;s eternal aspect is unaffected by actuality), but it contradicts the classical view by insisting that God is in some respects temporal, mutable, and passible.

According to Cobb, &quot;process theology may refer to all forms of theology that emphasize event, occurrence, or becoming over substance. In this sense theology influenced by G. W. F. Hegel is process theology just as much as that influenced by Whitehead. This use of the term calls attention to affinities between these otherwise quite different traditions.&quot; Also Pierre Teilhard de Chardin can be included among process theologians, even if they are generally understood as referring to the Whiteheadian/Hartshornean school, where there continue to be ongoing debates within the field on the nature of God, the relationship of God and the world, and immortality.

== History ==
Various theological and philosophical aspects have been expanded and developed by Charles Hartshorne (1897–2000), John B. Cobb, Eugene H. Peters, and David Ray Griffin. A characteristic of process theology each of these thinkers shared was a rejection of metaphysics that privilege &quot;being&quot; over &quot;becoming&quot;, particularly those of Aristotle and Thomas Aquinas. Hartshorne was deeply influenced by French philosopher Jules Lequier and by Swiss philosopher Charles Secrétan who were probably the first ones to claim that in God liberty of becoming is above his substantiality.

Process theology soon influenced a number of Jewish theologians including Rabbis Max Kadushin, Milton Steinberg, Levi A. Olan, Harry Slominsky, and, to a lesser degree, Abraham Joshua Heschel. Contemporary Jewish theologians who advocate some form of process theology include Bradley Shavit Artson, Lawrence A. Englander, William E. Kaufman, Harold Kushner, Anson Laytner, Michael Lerner, Sandra Lubarsky, Gilbert S. Rosenthal, Lawrence Troster, Donald B. Rossoff, Burton Mindick, and Nahum Ward.

Alan Anderson and Deb Whitehouse have applied process theology to the New Thought variant of Christianity.

Richard Stadelmann has worked to preserve the uniqueness of Jesus in process theology.

==God and the World relationship ==
Whitehead&#x27;s classical statement is a set of antithetical statements that attempt to avoid self-contradiction by shifting them from a set of oppositions into a contrast:

* It is as true to say that God is permanent and the World fluent, as that the World is permanent and God is fluent.
* It is as true to say that God is one and the World many, as that the World is one and God many.
* It is as true to say that, in comparison with the World, God is actual eminently, as that, in comparison with God, the World is actual eminently.
* It is as true to say that the World is immanent in God, as that God is immanent in the World.
* It is as true to say that God transcends the World, as that the World transcends God.
* It is as true to say that God creates the World, as that the World creates God.

== Themes ==
* God is not omnipotent in the sense of being coercive. The divine has the power of persuasion rather than coercion. Process theologians interpret the classical doctrine of omnipotence as involving force and suggest a forbearance in divine power instead. &quot;Persuasion&quot; in the causal sense means that God does not exert unilateral control.
* Reality is not made up of material substances that endure through time but serially ordered, experiential events. These events have both a physical and mental aspect. All experiences (male, female, atomic, and botanical) are important and contribute to reality&#x27;s ongoing and interrelated process.
* The universe is characterized by process and change carried out by the agents of free will. Self-determination characterizes everything in the universe, not just human beings. God cannot totally control any series of events or individuals, but God influences the creaturely exercise of this universal free will by offering possibilities. To say it another way, God has a will in everything, but not everything that occurs is God&#x27;s will.
* God contains the universe but is not identical with it (panentheism, not pantheism or pandeism). Some also call this &quot;theocosmocentrism&quot; to emphasize that God has always been related to some world or another.
* Because God interacts with the changing universe, God is changeable (that is to say, God is affected by the actions that take place in the universe) over time. However, the abstract elements of God (goodness, wisdom, etc.) remain eternally solid.
* Charles Hartshorne believes that people do not experience &quot;subjective&quot; (or personal) immortality, but they do have &quot;objective&quot; immortality because their experiences live on forever in God, who contains all that was. Other process theologians believe that people do have subjective experiences after bodily death.
* Dipolar theism is the idea that God has both a changing aspect (God&#x27;s existence as a Living God) and an unchanging aspect (God&#x27;s eternal essence).

== Relationship to liberation theology ==
Henry Young combines black theology and process theology in his book &quot;Hope in Process&quot;. Young seeks a model for American society that goes beyond the alternatives of integration of blacks into white society and black separateness. He finds useful the process model of the many becoming one. Here the one is a new reality that emerges from the discrete contributions of the many, not the assimilation of the many to an already established one.

Monica Coleman has combined womanist theology and process theology in her book &quot;Making a Way Out of No Way&quot;. In it, she argues that &#x27;making a way out of no way&#x27; and &#x27;creative transformation&#x27; are complementary insights from the respective theological traditions. She is one of many theologians who identify both as a process theologian and feminist/womanist/ecofeminist theologian, which includes persons such as Sallie McFague, Rosemary Radford Ruether, and Marjorie Hewitt Suchocki.

C. Robert Mesle, in his book &quot;Process Theology&quot;, outlines three aspects of a process theology of liberation:

# There is a relational character to the divine which allows God to experience both the joy and suffering of humanity. God suffers just as those who experience oppression and God seeks to actualize all positive and beautiful potentials. God must, therefore, be in solidarity with the oppressed and must also work for their liberation.
# God is not omnipotent in the classical sense and so God does not provide support for the status quo, but rather seeks the actualization of greater good.
# God exercises relational power and not unilateral control. In this way God cannot instantly end evil and oppression in the world. God works in relational ways to help guide persons to liberation.

== Relationship to pluralism ==
Process theology affirms that God is working in all persons to actualize potentialities. In that sense each religious manifestation is the Divine working in a unique way to bring out the beautiful and the good. Additionally, scripture and religion represent human interpretations of the divine. In this sense pluralism is the expression of the diversity of cultural backgrounds and assumptions that people use to approach the Divine.

== Relationship to the doctrine of the incarnation ==

Contrary to Christian orthodoxy, the Christ of mainstream process theology is not the mystical and historically unique union of divine and human natures in one hypostasis, the eternal Logos of God incarnated and identifiable as the man Jesus. Rather God is incarnate in the lives of all people when they act according to a call from God. Jesus fully and in every way responded to God&#x27;s call, thus the person of Jesus is theologically understood as &quot;the divine Word in human form.&quot; Jesus is not singularly or essentially God, but he was perfectly synchronized to God at all moments of life. Cobb expressed the Incarnation in process terms that link it to his understanding of actualization of human potential: Christ&#x27; refers to the Logos as incarnate hence as the process of creative transformation in and of the world&quot;.

== Debate about process theology&#x27;s conception of God’s power ==
A criticism of process theology is that it offers a too severely diminished conception of God’s power. Process theologians argue that God does not have unilateral, coercive control over everything in the universe. In process theology, God cannot override a person’s freedom, nor perform miracles that violate the laws of nature, nor perform physical actions such as causing or halting a flood or an avalanche. Critics argue that this conception diminishes divine power to such a degree that God is no longer worshipful.

The process theology response to this criticism is that the traditional Christian conception of God is actually &quot;not&quot; worshipful as it stands, and that the traditional notion of God’s omnipotence fails to make sense.

First, power is a relational concept. It is not exerted in a vacuum, but always by some entity &quot;A&quot; over some other entity &quot;B&quot;. As such, power requires analysis of both the being exerting power, and the being that power is being exerted upon. To suppose that an entity &quot;A&quot; (in this case, God), can always successfully control any other entity &quot;B&quot; is to say, in effect, that &quot;B&quot; does not exist as a free and individual being in any meaningful sense, since there is no possibility of its resisting &quot;A&quot; if &quot;A&quot; should decide to press the issue.

Mindful of this, process theology makes several important distinctions between different kinds of power. The first distinction is between &quot;coercive&quot; power and &quot;persuasive&quot; power. Coercive power is the kind that is exerted by one physical body over another, such as one billiard ball hitting another, or one arm twisting another. Lifeless bodies (such as the billiard balls) cannot resist such applications of physical force at all, and even living bodies (like arms) can only resist so far, and can be coercively overpowered. While finite, physical creatures can exert coercive power over one another in this way, God—lacking a physical body—&quot;cannot&quot; (not merely &quot;will&quot; not) exert coercive control over the world.

But process theologians argue that coercive power is actually a secondary or derivative form of power, while persuasion is the primary form. Even the act of self-motion (of an arm, for instance) is an instance of persuasive power. The arm may not perform in the way a person wishes it to—it may be broken, or asleep, or otherwise unable to perform the desired action. It is only after the persuasive act of self-motion is successful that an entity can even &quot;begin&quot; to exercise coercive control over other finite physical bodies. But no amount of coercive control can alter the free decisions of other entities; only persuasion can do so.

For example, a child is told by his parent that he must go to bed. The child, as a self-conscious, decision-making individual, can always make the decision to &quot;not&quot; go to bed. The parent may then respond by picking up the child bodily and carrying him to his room, but nothing can force the child to alter his decision to resist the parent&#x27;s directive. It is only the &quot;body&quot; of the child that can be coercively controlled by the body of the physically stronger parent; the child&#x27;s free will remains intact. While process theologians argue that God does not have coercive power, they also argue that God has &quot;supreme persuasive power&quot;, that God is always influencing/persuading us to choose the good.

One classic exchange over the issue of divine power is between philosophers Frederick Sontag and John K. Roth and process theologian David Ray Griffin. Sontag and Roth argued that the process God’s inability to, for instance, stop the genocide at Auschwitz meant that God was not worthy of worship, since there is no point in worshipping a God that cannot save us from such atrocities. Griffin&#x27;s response was as follows:

One of the stronger complaints from Sontag and Roth is that, given the enormity of evil in the world, a deity that is [merely] doing its best is not worthy of worship. The implication is that a deity that is &quot;not&quot; doing its best &quot;is&quot; worthy of worship. For example, in reference to Auschwitz, Roth mocks my God with the statement that “the best that God could possibly do was to permit 10,000 Jews a day to go up in smoke.” Roth prefers a God who had the power to prevent this Holocaust but did not do it! This illustrates how much people can differ in what they consider worthy of worship. For Roth, it is clearly brute &quot;power&quot; that evokes worship. The question is: is this what &quot;should&quot; evoke worship? To refer back to the point about revelation: is this kind of power worship consistent with the Christian claim that divinity is decisively revealed in Jesus? Roth finds my God too small to evoke worship; I find his too gross.

The process argument, then, is that those who cling to the idea of God&#x27;s coercive omnipotence are defending power for power&#x27;s sake, which would seem to be inconsistent with the life of Jesus, who Christians believe died for humanity&#x27;s sins rather than overthrow the Roman empire. Griffin argues that it is actually the God whose omnipotence is defined in the &quot;traditional&quot; way that is not worshipful.

One other distinction process theologians make is between the idea of &quot;unilateral&quot; power versus &quot;relational&quot; power. Unilateral power is the power of a king (or more accurately, a tyrant) who wishes to exert control over his subjects &quot;without&quot; being affected &quot;by&quot; them. However, most people would agree that a ruler who is not changed or affected by the joys and sorrows of his subjects is actually a despicable ruler and a psychopath. Process theologians thus stress that God’s power is relational; rather than being unaffected and unchanged by the world, God is the being &quot;most&quot; affected by every other being in the universe. As process theologian C. Robert Mesle puts it:

Relational power takes great strength. In stark contrast to unilateral power, the radical manifestations of relational power are found in people like Martin Luther King Jr., Mahatma Gandhi, and Jesus. It requires the willingness to endure tremendous suffering while refusing to hate. It demands that we keep our hearts open to those who wish to slam them shut. It means offering to open up a relationship with people who hate us, despise us, and wish to destroy us.

In summation, then, process theologians argue that their conception of God’s power does not diminish God, but just the opposite. Rather than see God as one who unilaterally coerces other beings, judges and punishes them, and is completely unaffected by the joys and sorrows of others, process theologians see God as the one who persuades the universe to love and peace, is supremely affected by even the tiniest of joys and the smallest of sorrows, and is able to love all beings despite the most heinous acts they may commit. God is, as Whitehead says, &quot;the fellow sufferer who understands.&quot;

== See also ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Bruce G. Epperly &quot;Process Theology: A Guide for the Perplexed&quot; (NY: T&amp;T Clark, 2011, ) This is &quot;perhaps the best in-depth introduction to process theology available for non-specialists.&quot;
* Marjorie Hewitt Suchocki&#x27;s &quot;God Christ Church: A Practical Guide to Process Theology&quot;, new rev. ed. (New York: Crossroad, 1989, ) demonstrates the practical integration of process philosophy with Christianity.
* C. Robert Mesle&#x27;s &quot;Process Theology: A Basic Introduction&quot; (St. Louis: Chalice Press, 1993, ) is an introduction to process theology written for the layperson.
* Jewish introductions to classical theism, limited theism and process theology can be found in &quot;A Question of Faith: An Atheist and a Rabbi Debate the Existence of God&quot; (Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson, 1994, ) and &quot;The Case for God&quot; (St. Louis: Chalice Press, 1991, ), both written by Rabbi William E. Kaufman. Jewish variations of process theology are also presented in Harold Kushner&#x27;s &quot;When Bad Things Happen to Good People&quot; (New York: Anchor Books, 2004, ) and Sandra B. Lubarsky and David Ray Griffin, eds., &quot;Jewish Theology and Process Thought&quot; (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1995, ).
* Christian introductions may be found in Schubert M. Ogden&#x27;s &quot;The Reality of God and Other Essays&quot; (Dallas: Southern Methodist University Press, 1992, ); John B. Cobb, &quot;Doubting Thomas: Christology in Story Form&quot; (New York: Crossroad, 1990, ); Charles Hartshorne, &quot;Omnipotence and Other Theological Mistakes&quot; (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1984, ); and Richard Rice, &quot;God&#x27;s Foreknowledge &amp; Man&#x27;s Free Will&quot; (Minneapolis, Minn.: Bethany House Publishers, 1985; rev. ed. of the author&#x27;s &quot;The Openness of God&quot;, cop. 1980; ). In French, the best introduction may be André Gounelle, &quot;Le Dynamisme Créateur de Dieu: Essai sur la Théologie du Process&quot;, édition revue, modifiée et augmentee (Paris: Van Dieren, 2000, ).
* The most important work by Paul S. Fiddes is &quot;The Creative Suffering of God&quot; (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992); see also his short overview &quot;Process Theology,&quot; in A. E. McGrath, ed., &quot;The Blackwell Encyclopaedia of Modern Christian Thought&quot; (Oxford: Blackwell, 1993), 472–76.
* Norman Pittenger&#x27;s thought is exemplified in his &quot;God in Process&quot; (London: SCM Press, 1967, ), &quot;Process-Thought and Christian Faith&quot; (New York: Macmillan Company, 1968, ), and &quot;Becoming and Belonging&quot; (Wilton, CT: Morehouse Publications, 1989, ).
* Constance Wise&#x27;s &quot;Hidden Circles in the Web: Feminist Wicca, Occult Knowledge, and Process Thought&quot; (Lanham, Md.: AltaMira Press, 2008, ) applies process theology to one variety of contemporary Paganism.
* Michel Weber, « Shamanism and proto-consciousness », in René Lebrun, Julien De Vos et É. Van Quickelberghe (éds), &quot;Deus Unicus&quot;, Turnhout, Brepols, coll. Homo Religiosus série II, 14, 2015, pp. 247–260.
*David Ray Griffin &quot;Reenchantment Without Supernaturalism: A Process Philosophy of Religion&quot; (Cornell University Press, 2001, ), an exposition of the central theses of process theology.
*
*
*
**
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

== External links ==
* The Center for Process Studies
* Process and Faith

;Reference works
* An encyclopedic-type article
* Michel Weber and Will Desmond (eds.), &quot;Handbook of Whiteheadian Process Thought&quot;, Frankfurt / Lancaster, Ontos Verlag, Process Thought X1 &amp; X2, 2008 ().</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1277683" start="0" end="16" title="Process theology" label="Process theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q183372" start="54" end="76" title="Alfred North Whitehead" label="Alfred North Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114360" start="96" end="114" title="process philosophy" label="process philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064777" start="136" end="154" title="Charles Hartshorne" label="Charles Hartshorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q980727" start="168" end="180" title="John B. Cobb" label="John B. Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="196" end="212" title="Eugene H. Peters" label="Eugene H. Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q138045" start="530" end="537" title="Eternity" label="eternal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942906" start="552" end="561" title="Immutability (theology)" label="immutable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006093" start="593" end="603" title="Impassibility" label="impassible"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114360" start="1065" end="1073" title="becoming (philosophy)" label="becoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q468777" start="1079" end="1088" title="being" label="substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="1127" end="1141" title="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" label="G. W. F. Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q189564" start="1322" end="1348" title="Pierre Teilhard de Chardin" label="Pierre Teilhard de Chardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064777" start="1719" end="1737" title="Charles Hartshorne" label="Charles Hartshorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q980727" start="1751" end="1763" title="John B. Cobb" label="John B. Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q521358" start="1787" end="1804" title="David Ray Griffin" label="David Ray Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="1892" end="1903" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q468777" start="1925" end="1930" title="being" label="being"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114360" start="1948" end="1956" title="becoming (philosophy)" label="becoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="1986" end="1995" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="2000" end="2014" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188736" start="2071" end="2084" title="Jules Lequier" label="Jules Lequier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027982" start="2110" end="2126" title="Charles Secrétan" label="Charles Secrétan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="2276" end="2282" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="2305" end="2310" title="Rabbi" label="Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794912" start="2312" end="2324" title="Max Kadushin" label="Max Kadushin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858100" start="2326" end="2342" title="Milton Steinberg" label="Milton Steinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535481" start="2344" end="2356" title="Levi Olan" label="Levi A. Olan"/>
<link wikidata="Q215833" start="2400" end="2422" title="Abraham Joshua Heschel" label="Abraham Joshua Heschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955032" start="2507" end="2528" title="Bradley Shavit Artson" label="Bradley Shavit Artson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578582" start="2553" end="2571" title="William E. Kaufman" label="William E. Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826749" start="2573" end="2587" title="Harold Kushner" label="Harold Kushner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981284" start="2604" end="2618" title="Michael Lerner (rabbi)" label="Michael Lerner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2659" end="2675" title="Lawrence Troster" label="Lawrence Troster"/>
<link wikidata="Q940573" start="2799" end="2810" title="New Thought Movement" label="New Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="2822" end="2834" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q487994" start="3010" end="3033" title="Antithesis" label="antithetical statements"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="3781" end="3784" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141803" start="3792" end="3802" title="omnipotent" label="omnipotent"/>
<link wikidata="Q325980" start="3825" end="3833" title="coercive" label="coercive"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="4514" end="4523" title="free will" label="free will"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433910" start="4525" end="4543" title="Self-determination theory" label="Self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="4576" end="4584" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q221390" start="4933" end="4944" title="panentheism" label="panentheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q728455" start="4950" end="4959" title="pantheism" label="pantheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620224" start="4963" end="4971" title="pandeism" label="pandeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782250" start="5148" end="5165" title="Theomorphism" label="God is changeable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187415" start="5297" end="5305" title="Goodness and value theory" label="goodness"/>
<link wikidata="Q799" start="5307" end="5313" title="wisdom" label="wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064777" start="5347" end="5365" title="Charles Hartshorne" label="Charles Hartshorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="5442" end="5453" title="immortality" label="immortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280037" start="5682" end="5696" title="Dipolar theism" label="Dipolar theism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943023" start="5903" end="5917" title="black theology" label="black theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899922" start="6336" end="6350" title="Monica Coleman" label="Monica Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030773" start="6364" end="6381" title="womanist theology" label="womanist theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404996" start="6778" end="6792" title="Sallie McFague" label="Sallie McFague"/>
<link wikidata="Q198346" start="6794" end="6818" title="Rosemary Radford Ruether" label="Rosemary Radford Ruether"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766281" start="6824" end="6848" title="Marjorie Hewitt Suchocki" label="Marjorie Hewitt Suchocki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006816" start="6851" end="6866" title="C. Robert Mesle" label="C. Robert Mesle"/>
<link wikidata="Q206898" start="6946" end="6968" title="liberation theology" label="theology of liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002426" start="8001" end="8010" title="religious pluralism" label="pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8194" end="8213" title="Orthodoxy#Christianity" label="Christian orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="8219" end="8225" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q651118" start="8342" end="8352" title="Hypostasis (philosophy and religion)" label="hypostasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q766575" start="8366" end="8371" title="Logos (Christianity)" label="Logos"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="8418" end="8423" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141803" start="9812" end="9823" title="omnipotence" label="omnipotence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498756" start="12678" end="12694" title="Frederick Sontag" label="Frederick Sontag"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242394" start="12699" end="12711" title="John K. Roth" label="John K. Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q521358" start="12735" end="12752" title="David Ray Griffin" label="David Ray Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="15302" end="15324" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="15326" end="15340" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="15346" end="15351" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766281" start="16492" end="16516" title="Marjorie Hewitt Suchocki" label="Marjorie Hewitt Suchocki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128358" start="16920" end="16936" title="classical theism" label="classical theism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16938" end="16952" title="limited theism" label="limited theism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="17020" end="17027" title="Atheist" label="Atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="17034" end="17039" title="Rabbi" label="Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992427" start="17312" end="17349" title="When Bad Things Happen to Good People" label="When Bad Things Happen to Good People"/>
<link wikidata="Q187900" start="17750" end="17761" title="Christology" label="Christology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150621" start="18383" end="18397" title="Paul S. Fiddes" label="Paul S. Fiddes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052697" start="18670" end="18686" title="Norman Pittenger" label="Norman Pittenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="19163" end="19171" title="Paganism" label="Paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469018" start="19175" end="19187" title="Michel Weber" label="Michel Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q521358" start="19389" end="19406" title="David Ray Griffin" label="David Ray Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469018" start="19733" end="19745" title="Michel Weber" label="Michel Weber"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24138" wikidata="Q1065997" url="?curid=24138" title="Proton decay">
<text>In particle physics, proton decay is a hypothetical form of particle decay in which the proton decays into lighter subatomic particles, such as a neutral pion and a positron. The proton decay hypothesis was first formulated by Andrei Sakharov in 1967. Despite significant experimental effort, proton decay has never been observed. If it does decay via a positron, the proton&#x27;s half-life is constrained to be at least .

According to the Standard Model, the proton, a type of baryon, is stable because baryon number (quark number) is conserved (under normal circumstances; see &quot;Chiral anomaly&quot; for an exception). Therefore, protons will not decay into other particles on their own, because they are the lightest (and therefore least energetic) baryon. Positron emission and electron capture—forms of radioactive decay in which a proton becomes a neutron—are not proton decay, since the proton interacts with other particles within the atom.

Some beyond-the-Standard-Model grand unified theories (GUTs) explicitly break the baryon number symmetry, allowing protons to decay via the Higgs particle, magnetic monopoles, or new X bosons with a half-life of 10 to 10 years. For comparison, the universe is roughly years old. To date, all attempts to observe new phenomena predicted by GUTs (like proton decay or the existence of magnetic monopoles) have failed.

Quantum tunnelling may be one of the mechanisms of proton decay.&lt;ref name=&quot;url[nucl-th/9809006] Time-dependent properties of proton decay from crossing single-particle metastable states in deformed nuclei&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

Quantum gravity (via virtual black holes and Hawking radiation) may also provide a venue of proton decay at magnitudes or lifetimes well beyond the GUT scale decay range above, as well as extra dimensions in supersymmetry.&lt;ref name=&quot;urlProton Decay, Black Holes, and Large Extra Dimensions - NASA/ADS&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

There are theoretical methods of baryon violation other than proton decay including interactions with changes of baryon and/or lepton number other than 1 (as required in proton decay). These included &quot;B&quot; and/or &quot;L&quot; violations of 2, 3, or other numbers, or &quot;B&quot; − &quot;L&quot; violation. Such examples include neutron oscillations and the electroweak sphaleron anomaly at high energies and temperatures that can result between the collision of protons into antileptons or vice versa (a key factor in leptogenesis and non-GUT baryogenesis).

== Baryogenesis ==
One of the outstanding problems in modern physics is the predominance of matter over antimatter in the universe. The universe, as a whole, seems to have a nonzero positive baryon number density – that is, there is more matter than antimatter. Since it is assumed in cosmology that the particles we see were created using the same physics we measure today, it would normally be expected that the overall baryon number should be zero, as matter and antimatter should have been created in equal amounts. This has led to a number of proposed mechanisms for symmetry breaking that favour the creation of normal matter (as opposed to antimatter) under certain conditions. This imbalance would have been exceptionally small, on the order of 1 in every 1010 particles a small fraction of a second after the Big Bang, but after most of the matter and antimatter annihilated, what was left over was all the baryonic matter in the current universe, along with a much greater number of bosons.

Most grand unified theories explicitly break the baryon number symmetry, which would account for this discrepancy, typically invoking reactions mediated by very massive X bosons or massive Higgs bosons (). The rate at which these events occur is governed largely by the mass of the intermediate or particles, so by assuming these reactions are responsible for the majority of the baryon number seen today, a maximum mass can be calculated above which the rate would be too slow to explain the presence of matter today. These estimates predict that a large volume of material will occasionally exhibit a spontaneous proton decay.

== Experimental evidence ==
Proton decay is one of the key predictions of the various grand unified theories (GUTs) proposed in the 1970s, another major one being the existence of magnetic monopoles. Both concepts have been the focus of major experimental physics efforts since the early 1980s. To date, all attempts to observe these events have failed; however, these experiments have been able to establish lower bounds on the half-life of the proton. Currently, the most precise results come from the Super-Kamiokande water Cherenkov radiation detector in Japan: a lower bound on the proton&#x27;s half-life of via positron decay, and similarly, via antimuon decay, close to a supersymmetry (SUSY) prediction of 1034–1036 years. An upgraded version, Hyper-Kamiokande, probably will have sensitivity 5–10 times better than Super-Kamiokande.

== Theoretical motivation ==
Despite the lack of observational evidence for proton decay, some grand unification theories, such as the SU(5) Georgi–Glashow model and SO(10), along with their supersymmetric variants, require it. According to such theories, the proton has a half-life of about ~ years and decays into a positron and a neutral pion that itself immediately decays into two gamma ray photons:

formula_1

Since a positron is an antilepton this decay preserves number, which is conserved in most GUTs.

Additional decay modes are available (e.g.: ), both directly and when catalyzed via interaction with GUT-predicted magnetic monopoles. Though this process has not been observed experimentally, it is within the realm of experimental testability for future planned very large-scale detectors on the megaton scale. Such detectors include the Hyper-Kamiokande.

Early grand unification theories (GUTs) such as the Georgi–Glashow model, which were the first consistent theories to suggest proton decay, postulated that the proton&#x27;s half-life would be at least . As further experiments and calculations were performed in the 1990s, it became clear that the proton half-life could not lie below . Many books from that period refer to this figure for the possible decay time for baryonic matter. More recent findings have pushed the minimum proton half-life to at least – years, ruling out the simpler GUTs (including minimal SU(5) / Georgi–Glashow) and most non-SUSY models. The maximum upper limit on proton lifetime (if unstable), is calculated at , a bound applicable to SUSY models, with a maximum for (minimal) non-SUSY GUTs at .

Although the phenomenon is referred to as &quot;proton decay&quot;, the effect would also be seen in neutrons bound inside atomic nuclei. Free neutrons—those not inside an atomic nucleus—are already known to decay into protons (and an electron and an antineutrino) in a process called beta decay. Free neutrons have a half-life of 10 minutes () due to the weak interaction. Neutrons bound inside a nucleus have an immensely longer half-life – apparently as great as that of the proton.

== Projected proton lifetimes ==
The lifetime of the proton in vanilla SU(5) can be naively estimated as formula_2. Supersymmetric GUTs with reunification scales around   yield a lifetime of around , roughly the current experimental lower bound.

== Decay operators ==

=== Dimension-6 proton decay operators ===
The dimension-6 proton decay operators are formula_3 formula_4 formula_5 and formula_6 where formula_7 is the cutoff scale for the Standard Model. All of these operators violate both baryon number () and lepton number () conservation but not the combination −.

In GUT models, the exchange of an X or Y boson with the mass can lead to the last two operators suppressed by formula_8. The exchange of a triplet Higgs with mass can lead to all of the operators suppressed by formula_9. See &quot;Doublet–triplet splitting problem&quot;.

=== Dimension-5 proton decay operators ===
In supersymmetric extensions (such as the MSSM), we can also have dimension-5 operators involving two fermions and two sfermions caused by the exchange of a tripletino of mass . The sfermions will then exchange a gaugino or Higgsino or gravitino leaving two fermions. The overall Feynman diagram has a loop (and other complications due to strong interaction physics). This decay rate is suppressed by formula_10 where is the mass scale of the superpartners.

=== Dimension-4 proton decay operators ===

In the absence of matter parity, supersymmetric extensions of the Standard Model can give rise to the last operator suppressed by the inverse square of sdown quark mass. This is due to the dimension-4 operators and .

The proton decay rate is only suppressed by formula_11 which is far too fast unless the couplings are very small.

== See also ==
* Age of the universe
* B − L
* Virtual black hole
* Weak hypercharge
* X and Y bosons
* Iron star

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==

* Proton decay at Super-Kamiokande
* Pictorial history of the IMB experiment</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="3" end="19" title="particle physics" label="particle physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065997" start="21" end="33" title="Proton decay" label="proton decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="39" end="51" title="Hypothesis" label="hypothetical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7778426" start="60" end="74" title="particle decay" label="particle decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="88" end="94" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q177013" start="115" end="133" title="subatomic particle" label="subatomic particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4097" start="154" end="158" title="pion" label="pion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229" start="165" end="173" title="positron" label="positron"/>
<link wikidata="Q997" start="227" end="242" title="Andrei Sakharov" label="Andrei Sakharov"/>
<link wikidata="Q18338" start="442" end="456" title="Standard Model" label="Standard Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q159731" start="480" end="486" title="baryon" label="baryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q110346" start="506" end="519" title="baryon number" label="baryon number"/>
<link wikidata="Q110346" start="521" end="533" title="quark number" label="quark number"/>
<link wikidata="Q110346" start="538" end="547" title="conservation of baryon number" label="conserved"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101826" start="587" end="601" title="Chiral anomaly" label="Chiral anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357356" start="766" end="783" title="Positron emission" label="Positron emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q109910" start="788" end="804" title="electron capture" label="electron capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="814" end="831" title="radioactive decay" label="radioactive decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q382037" start="987" end="1009" title="Grand Unified Theory" label="grand unified theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q402" start="1096" end="1110" title="Higgs particle" label="Higgs particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q219708" start="1112" end="1130" title="magnetic monopoles" label="magnetic monopoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996385" start="1139" end="1146" title="X boson" label="X boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q500699" start="1204" end="1233" title="Age of the universe" label="universe is roughly years old"/>
<link wikidata="Q219708" start="1339" end="1357" title="magnetic monopoles" label="magnetic monopoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q175751" start="1373" end="1391" title="Quantum tunnelling" label="Quantum tunnelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q234181" start="1609" end="1624" title="Quantum gravity" label="Quantum gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120995" start="1630" end="1648" title="virtual black hole" label="virtual black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q497396" start="1654" end="1671" title="Hawking radiation" label="Hawking radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193442" start="1817" end="1830" title="supersymmetry" label="supersymmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q110346" start="2141" end="2154" title="Baryon number" label="&amp;quot;B&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q174012" start="2162" end="2175" title="Lepton number" label="&amp;quot;L&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567685" start="2217" end="2246" title="B − L" label="&amp;quot;B&amp;quot; − &amp;quot;L&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q643257" start="2321" end="2330" title="sphaleron" label="sphaleron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101826" start="2331" end="2338" title="chiral anomaly" label="anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q442687" start="2470" end="2482" title="leptogenesis (physics)" label="leptogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="2603" end="2609" title="matter" label="matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q83197" start="2615" end="2625" title="antimatter" label="antimatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="2633" end="2641" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="2796" end="2805" title="physical cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q903282" start="3083" end="3100" title="symmetry breaking" label="symmetry breaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q43101" start="3504" end="3509" title="boson" label="boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996385" start="3682" end="3689" title="X boson" label="X boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q402" start="3702" end="3713" title="Higgs boson" label="Higgs boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q219708" start="4323" end="4341" title="magnetic monopoles" label="magnetic monopoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q647227" start="4647" end="4663" title="Super-Kamiokande" label="Super-Kamiokande"/>
<link wikidata="Q192457" start="4670" end="4689" title="Cherenkov radiation" label="Cherenkov radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151" start="4796" end="4804" title="antimuon" label="antimuon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30752560" start="4896" end="4912" title="Hyper-Kamiokande" label="Hyper-Kamiokande"/>
<link wikidata="Q382037" start="5082" end="5108" title="grand unification theory" label="grand unification theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q684363" start="5122" end="5127" title="SU(5)" label="SU(5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391961" start="5153" end="5159" title="SO(10)" label="SO(10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="5260" end="5269" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229" start="5305" end="5313" title="positron" label="positron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4097" start="5328" end="5332" title="pion" label="pion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="5373" end="5382" title="gamma radiation" label="gamma ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="5383" end="5389" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q82586" start="5427" end="5437" title="lepton" label="antilepton"/>
<link wikidata="Q219708" start="5616" end="5633" title="magnetic monopole" label="magnetic monopole"/>
<link wikidata="Q30752560" start="5840" end="5856" title="Hyper-Kamiokande" label="Hyper-Kamiokande"/>
<link wikidata="Q382037" start="5865" end="5891" title="grand unification theory" label="grand unification theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="6736" end="6743" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="6920" end="6930" title="beta decay" label="beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11418" start="6991" end="7007" title="weak interaction" label="weak interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769942" start="7439" end="7448" title="classical scaling dimension" label="dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q556977" start="7545" end="7557" title="Cutoff (physics)" label="cutoff scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q18338" start="7566" end="7580" title="Standard Model" label="Standard Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q174012" start="7639" end="7652" title="lepton number" label="lepton number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567685" start="7693" end="7694" title="B - L" label="−"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996385" start="7731" end="7743" title="X and Y bosons" label="X or Y boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300166" start="7928" end="7961" title="Doublet–triplet splitting problem" label="Doublet–triplet splitting problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q593810" start="8055" end="8059" title="Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model" label="MSSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347008" start="8132" end="8140" title="sfermion" label="sfermion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060144" start="8226" end="8233" title="gaugino" label="gaugino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617700" start="8237" end="8245" title="Higgsino" label="Higgsino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193188" start="8249" end="8258" title="gravitino" label="gravitino"/>
<link wikidata="Q386272" start="8293" end="8308" title="Feynman diagram" label="Feynman diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051902" start="8456" end="8468" title="superpartner" label="superpartner"/>
<link wikidata="Q866456" start="8534" end="8547" title="matter parity" label="matter parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347008" start="8668" end="8673" title="sdown" label="sdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q500699" start="8866" end="8885" title="Age of the universe" label="Age of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567685" start="8888" end="8893" title="B − L" label="B − L"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120995" start="8896" end="8914" title="Virtual black hole" label="Virtual black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364131" start="8917" end="8933" title="Weak hypercharge" label="Weak hypercharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996385" start="8936" end="8950" title="X and Y bosons" label="X and Y bosons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188143" start="8953" end="8962" title="Iron star" label="Iron star"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24140" wikidata="Q9200" url="?curid=24140" title="Paul the Apostle">
<text>Paul, also named Saul of Tarsus, commonly known as Paul the Apostle and Saint Paul, was a Christian apostle ( AD) who spread the teachings of Jesus in the first-century world. For his contributions towards the New Testament, he is generally regarded as one of the most important figures of the Apostolic Age, and he also founded several Christian communities in Asia Minor and Europe from the mid-40s to the mid-50s AD.

The main source of information on Paul&#x27;s life and works is the Acts of the Apostles in the New Testament. Approximately half of its content documents his travels, preaching and miracles. Paul was not one of the Twelve Apostles, and did not know Jesus during his lifetime. According to the Acts, Paul lived as a Pharisee and participated in the persecution of early disciples of Jesus, possibly Hellenised diaspora Jews converted to Christianity, in the area of Jerusalem, before his conversion. Some time after having approved of the execution of Stephen, Paul was traveling on the road to Damascus so that he might find any Christians there and bring them &quot;bound to Jerusalem&quot;. At midday, a light brighter than the sun shone around both him and those with him, causing all to fall to the ground, with the risen Christ verbally addressing Paul regarding his persecution in a vision. Having been made blind, along with being commanded to enter the city, his sight was restored three days later by Ananias of Damascus. After these events, Paul was baptized, beginning immediately to proclaim that Jesus of Nazareth was the Jewish messiah and the Son of God. He made three missionary journeys to spread the Christian message to non-Jewish communities in Asia Minor, the Greek provinces of Achaia, Macedonia, and Cyprus, as well as Judea and Syria, as narrated in the Acts.

Fourteen of the 27 books in the New Testament have traditionally been attributed to Paul. Seven of the Pauline epistles are undisputed by scholars as being authentic, with varying degrees of argument about the remainder. Pauline authorship of the Epistle to the Hebrews is not asserted in the Epistle itself and was already doubted in the 2nd and 3rd centuries. It was almost unquestioningly accepted from the 5th to the 16th centuries that Paul was the author of Hebrews, but that view is now almost universally rejected by scholars. The other six are believed by some scholars to have come from followers writing in his name, using material from Paul&#x27;s surviving letters and letters written by him that no longer survive. Other scholars argue that the idea of a pseudonymous author for the disputed epistles raises many problems.

Today, Paul&#x27;s epistles continue to be vital roots of the theology, worship and pastoral life in the Latin and Protestant traditions of the West, as well as the Eastern Catholic and Orthodox traditions of the East. Paul&#x27;s influence on Christian thought and practice has been characterized as being as &quot;profound as it is pervasive&quot;, among that of many other apostles and missionaries involved in the spread of the Christian faith.

Christians, notably in the Lutheran tradition, have classically read Paul as advocating for a law-free Gospel against Judaism. Polemicists and scholars likewise, especially during the early 20th century, have alleged that Paul corrupted or hijacked Christianity, often by introducing pagan or Hellenistic themes to the early church. There has since been increasing acceptance of Paul as a fundamentally Jewish figure in line with the original disciples in Jerusalem over past misinterpretations, manifested through movements like &quot;Paul Within Judaism&quot;.

== Names ==

Paul&#x27;s Jewish name was &quot;Saul&quot; (), perhaps after the biblical King Saul, the first king of Israel and, like Paul, a member of the Tribe of Benjamin; the Latin name Paulus, meaning small, was not a result of his conversion as is commonly believed but a second name for use in communicating with a Greco-Roman audience.

According to the Acts of the Apostles, he was a Roman citizen. As such, he bore the Latin name , which translates in biblical Greek as (). It was typical for the Jews of that time to have two names: one Hebrew, the other Latin or Greek.

Jesus called him &quot;Saul, Saul&quot; in &quot;the Hebrew tongue&quot; in the Acts of the Apostles, when he had the vision which led to his conversion on the road to Damascus. Later, in a vision to Ananias of Damascus, &quot;the Lord&quot; referred to him as &quot;Saul, of Tarsus&quot;. When Ananias came to restore his sight, he called him &quot;Brother Saul&quot;.

In Acts 13:9, Saul is called &quot;Paul&quot; for the first time on the island of Cyprus, much later than the time of his conversion. The author of Luke–Acts indicates that the names were interchangeable: &quot;Saul, who also is called Paul.&quot; He refers to him as Paul through the remainder of Acts. This was apparently Paul&#x27;s preference since he is called Paul in all other Bible books where he is mentioned, including those that he authored. Adopting his Roman name was typical of Paul&#x27;s missionary style. His method was to put people at ease and approach them with his message in a language and style that was relatable to them, as he did in 1 Corinthians 9.

== Available sources ==
The main source for information about Paul&#x27;s life is the material found in his epistles and in the Acts of the Apostles. However, the epistles contain little information about Paul&#x27;s pre-conversion past. The Acts of the Apostles recounts more information but leaves several parts of Paul&#x27;s life out of its narrative, such as his probable but undocumented execution in Rome. The Acts of the Apostles also appear to contradict Paul&#x27;s epistles on multiple matters, in particular concerning the frequency of Paul&#x27;s visits to the church in Jerusalem.

Sources outside the New Testament that mention Paul include:
* Clement of Rome&#x27;s epistle to the Corinthians (late 1st/early 2nd century);
* Ignatius of Antioch&#x27;s epistles to the Romans and to the Ephesians (early 2nd century);
* Polycarp&#x27;s epistle to the Philippians (early 2nd century);
* Eusebius&#x27;s (early 4th century);
* The apocryphal Acts narrating the life of Paul (Acts of Paul, Acts of Paul and Thecla, Acts of Peter and Paul), the apocryphal epistles attributed to him (the Latin Epistle to the Laodiceans, the Third Epistle to the Corinthians, and the Correspondence of Paul and Seneca) and some apocalyptic texts attributed to him (Apocalypse of Paul and Coptic Apocalypse of Paul). These writings are all later, usually dated from the 2nd to the 4th century.

==Biography==
=== Early life ===

The two main sources of information that give access to the earliest segments of Paul&#x27;s career are the Acts of the Apostles and the autobiographical elements of Paul&#x27;s letters to the early Christian communities. Paul was likely born between the years of 5 BC and 5 AD. The Acts of the Apostles indicates that Paul was a Roman citizen by birth, but Helmut Koester took issue with the evidence presented by the text. Some have suggested that Paul&#x27;s ancestors may have been freedmen from among the thousands of Jews whom Pompey took as slaves in 63 BC, which would explain how he was born into Roman citizenship, as slaves of Roman citizens gained citizenship upon emancipation.

He was from a devout Jewish family based in the city of Tarsus, which had been made part of the Roman Province of Syria by the time of Paul&#x27;s adulthood. Tarsus was of the larger centers of trade on the Mediterranean coast and renowned for its academy, it had been among the most influential cities in Asia Minor since the time of Alexander the Great, who died in 323 BC.

Paul referred to himself as being &quot;of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of the Hebrews; as touching the law, a Pharisee&quot;. The Bible reveals very little about Paul&#x27;s family. Acts quotes Paul referring to his family by saying he was &quot;a Pharisee, born of Pharisees&quot;. Paul&#x27;s nephew, his sister&#x27;s son, is mentioned in Acts 23:16. In Romans 16:7, he states that his relatives, Andronicus and Junia, were Christians before he was and were prominent among the Apostles.

The family had a history of religious piety. Apparently, the family lineage had been very attached to Pharisaic traditions and observances for generations. Acts says that he was an artisan involved in the leather crafting or tent-making profession. This was to become an initial connection with Priscilla and Aquila, with whom he would partner in tentmaking and later become very important teammates as fellow missionaries.

While he was still fairly young, he was sent to Jerusalem to receive his education at the school of Gamaliel, one of the most noted teachers of Jewish law in history. Although modern scholarship accepts that Paul was educated under the supervision of Gamaliel in Jerusalem, he was not preparing to become a scholar of Jewish law, and probably never had any contact with the Hillelite school. Some of his family may have resided in Jerusalem since later the son of one of his sisters saved his life there. Nothing more is known of his biography until he takes an active part in the martyrdom of Stephen, a Hellenised diaspora Jew.

Some modern scholarship argues that while Paul was fluent in Koine Greek, the language he used to write his letters, his first language was probably Aramaic. In his letters, Paul drew heavily on his knowledge of Stoic philosophy, using Stoic terms and metaphors to assist his new Gentile converts in their understanding of the Gospel and to explain his Christology.

===Persecutor of early Christians===

Paul says that before his conversion, he persecuted early Christians &quot;beyond measure&quot;, more specifically Hellenised diaspora Jewish members who had returned to the area of Jerusalem. According to James Dunn, the Jerusalem community consisted of &quot;Hebrews&quot;, Jews speaking both Aramaic and Greek, and &quot;Hellenists&quot;, Jews speaking only Greek, possibly diaspora Jews who had resettled in Jerusalem. Paul&#x27;s initial persecution of Christians probably was directed against these Greek-speaking &quot;Hellenists&quot; due to their anti-Temple attitude. Within the early Jewish Christian community, this also set them apart from the &quot;Hebrews&quot; and their continuing participation in the Temple cult.

===Conversion===
Paul&#x27;s conversion to the movement of followers of Jesus can be dated to 31–36 AD by his reference to it in one of his letters. In Galatians 1:16, Paul writes that God &quot;was pleased to reveal his son to me.&quot; In 1 Corinthians 15:8, as he lists the order in which Jesus appeared to his disciples after his resurrection, Paul writes, &quot;last of all, as to one untimely born, He appeared to me also.&quot;

According to the account in the Acts of the Apostles, it took place on the road to Damascus, where he reported having experienced a vision of the ascended Jesus. The account says that &quot;He fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to him, &#x27;Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me?&#x27; He asked, &#x27;Who are you, Lord?&#x27; The reply came, &#x27;I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting&#x27;.&quot;

According to the account in Acts 9:1–22, he was blinded for three days and had to be led into Damascus by the hand. During these three days, Saul took no food or water and spent his time in prayer to God. When Ananias of Damascus arrived, he laid his hands on him and said: &quot;Brother Saul, the Lord, &quot;[even]&quot; Jesus, that appeared unto thee in the way as thou camest, hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost.&quot; His sight was restored, he got up and was baptized. This story occurs only in Acts, not in the Pauline epistles.

The author of the Acts of the Apostles may have learned of Paul&#x27;s conversion from the church in Jerusalem, or from the church in Antioch, or possibly from Paul himself.

According to Timo Eskola, early Christian theology and discourse was influenced by the Jewish Merkabah tradition. John Bowker, Alan Segal and Daniel Boyarin have variously argued that Paul&#x27;s accounts of his conversion experience and his ascent to the heavens (in 2 Corinthians 12) are the earliest first-person accounts that are extant of a Merkabah mystic in Jewish or Christian literature. Conversely, Timothy Churchill has argued that Paul&#x27;s Damascus road encounter does not fit the pattern of Merkabah.

=== Post-conversion ===
According to Acts:
=== Early ministry ===
After his conversion, Paul went to Damascus, where Acts 9 states he was healed of his blindness and baptized by Ananias of Damascus. Paul says that it was in Damascus that he barely escaped death. Paul also says that he then went first to Arabia, and then came back to Damascus. Paul&#x27;s trip to Arabia is not mentioned anywhere else in the Bible, although it has been theorized that he traveled to Mount Sinai for meditations in the desert. He describes in Galatians how three years after his conversion he went to Jerusalem. There he met James and stayed with Simon Peter for 15 days. Paul located Mount Sinai in Arabia in Galatians 4:24–25.

Paul asserted that he received the Gospel not from man, but directly by &quot;the revelation of Jesus Christ&quot;. He claimed almost total independence from the Jerusalem community (possibly in the Cenacle), but agreed with it on the nature and content of the gospel. He appeared eager to bring material support to Jerusalem from the various growing Gentile churches that he started. In his writings, Paul used the persecutions he endured to avow proximity and union with Jesus and as a validation of his teaching.

Paul&#x27;s narrative in Galatians states that 14 years after his conversion he went again to Jerusalem. It is not known what happened during this time, but both Acts and Galatians provide some details. At the end of this time, Barnabas went to find Paul and brought him to Antioch. The Christian community at Antioch had been established by Hellenised diaspora Jews living in Jerusalem, who played an important role in reaching a Gentile, Greek audience, notably at Antioch, which had a large Jewish community and significant numbers of Gentile &quot;God-fearers.&quot; From Antioch the mission to the Gentiles started, which would fundamentally change the character of the early Christian movement, eventually turning it into a new, Gentile religion.

When a famine occurred in Judea, around 45–46, Paul and Barnabas journeyed to Jerusalem to deliver financial support from the Antioch community. According to Acts, Antioch had become an alternative center for Christians following the dispersion of the believers after the death of Stephen. It was in Antioch that the followers of Jesus were first called &quot;Christians&quot;.

=== First missionary journey ===

The author of Acts arranges Paul&#x27;s travels into three separate journeys. The first journey, for which Paul and Barnabas were commissioned by the Antioch community, and led initially by Barnabas, took Barnabas and Paul from Antioch to Cyprus then into southern Asia Minor, and finally returning to Antioch. In Cyprus, Paul rebukes and blinds Elymas the magician who was criticizing their teachings.

They sailed to Perga in Pamphylia. John Mark left them and returned to Jerusalem. Paul and Barnabas went on to Pisidian Antioch. On Sabbath they went to the synagogue. The leaders invited them to speak. Paul reviewed Israelite history from life in Egypt to King David. He introduced Jesus as a descendant of David brought to Israel by God. He said that his group had come to bring the message of salvation. He recounted the story of Jesus&#x27; death and resurrection. He quoted from the Septuagint to assert that Jesus was the promised Christos who brought them forgiveness for their sins. Both the Jews and the &quot;God-fearing&quot; Gentiles invited them to talk more next Sabbath. At that time almost the whole city gathered. This upset some influential Jews who spoke against them. Paul used the occasion to announce a change in his mission which from then on would be to the Gentiles.

Antioch served as a major Christian home base for Paul&#x27;s early missionary activities, and he remained there for &quot;a long time with the disciples&quot; at the conclusion of his first journey. The exact duration of Paul&#x27;s stay in Antioch is unknown, with estimates ranging from nine months to as long as eight years.

In Raymond E. Brown&#x27;s &quot;An Introduction to the New Testament&quot;, published in 1997, a chronology of events in Paul&#x27;s life is presented, illustrated from later 20th-century writings of biblical scholars. The first missionary journey of Paul is assigned a &quot;traditional&quot; (and majority) dating of 46–49 AD, compared to a &quot;revisionist&quot; (and minority) dating of after 37 AD.

=== Council of Jerusalem ===
A vital meeting between Paul and the Jerusalem church took place in the year 49 AD by traditional (and majority) dating, compared to a revisionist (and minority) dating of 47/51 AD. The meeting is described in Acts 15:2 and usually seen as the same event mentioned by Paul in Galatians The key question raised was whether Gentile converts needed to be circumcised. At this meeting, Paul states in his letter to the Galatians, Peter, James, and John accepted Paul&#x27;s mission to the Gentiles.

The Jerusalem meetings are mentioned in Acts, and also in Paul&#x27;s letters. For example, the Jerusalem visit for famine relief apparently corresponds to the &quot;first visit&quot; (to Peter and James only). F. F. Bruce suggested that the &quot;fourteen years&quot; could be from Paul&#x27;s conversion rather than from his first visit to Jerusalem.

=== Incident at Antioch ===

Despite the agreement achieved at the Council of Jerusalem, Paul recounts how he later publicly confronted Peter in a dispute sometimes called the &quot;Incident at Antioch&quot;, over Peter&#x27;s reluctance to share a meal with Gentile Christians in Antioch because they did not strictly adhere to Jewish customs.

Writing later of the incident, Paul recounts, &quot;I opposed [Peter] to his face, because he was clearly in the wrong&quot;, and says he told Peter, &quot;You are a Jew, yet you live like a Gentile and not like a Jew. How is it, then, that you force Gentiles to follow Jewish customs?&quot; Paul also mentions that even Barnabas, his traveling companion and fellow apostle until that time, sided with Peter.

The outcome of the incident remains uncertain. The &quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot; suggests that Paul won the argument, because &quot;Paul&#x27;s account of the incident leaves no doubt that Peter saw the justice of the rebuke&quot;. However, Paul himself never mentions a victory, and L. Michael White&#x27;s &quot;From Jesus to Christianity&quot; draws the opposite conclusion: &quot;The blowup with Peter was a total failure of political bravado, and Paul soon left Antioch as &quot;persona non grata&quot;, never again to return&quot;.

The primary source account of the incident at Antioch is Paul&#x27;s letter to the Galatians.

=== Second missionary journey ===

Paul left for his second missionary journey from Jerusalem, in late Autumn 49 AD, after the meeting of the Council of Jerusalem where the circumcision question was debated. On their trip around the Mediterranean Sea, Paul and his companion Barnabas stopped in Antioch where they had a sharp argument about taking John Mark with them on their trips. The Acts of the Apostles said that John Mark had left them in a previous trip and gone home. Unable to resolve the dispute, Paul and Barnabas decided to separate; Barnabas took John Mark with him, while Silas joined Paul.

Paul and Silas initially visited Tarsus (Paul&#x27;s birthplace), Derbe and Lystra. In Lystra, they met Timothy, a disciple who was spoken well of, and decided to take him with them. Paul and his companions, Silas and Timothy, had plans to journey to the southwest portion of Asia Minor to preach the gospel but during the night, Paul had a vision of a man of Macedonia standing and begging him to go to Macedonia to help them. After seeing the vision, Paul and his companions left for Macedonia to preach the gospel to them. The Church kept growing, adding believers, and strengthening in faith daily.

In Philippi, Paul cast a spirit of divination out of a servant girl, whose masters were then unhappy about the loss of income her soothsaying provided. They seized Paul and Silas and dragged them into the marketplace before the authorities and Paul and Silas were put in jail. After a miraculous earthquake, the gates of the prison fell apart and Paul and Silas could have escaped but remained; this event led to the conversion of the jailor. They continued traveling, going by Berea and then to Athens, where Paul preached to the Jews and God-fearing Greeks in the synagogue and to the Greek intellectuals in the Areopagus. Paul continued from Athens to Corinth.

===Interval in Corinth===
Around 50–52 AD, Paul spent 18 months in Corinth. The reference in Acts to Proconsul Gallio helps ascertain this date (cf. Gallio Inscription). In Corinth, Paul met Priscilla and Aquila, who became faithful believers and helped Paul through his other missionary journeys. The couple followed Paul and his companions to Ephesus and stayed there to start one of the strongest and most faithful churches at that time.

In 52, departing from Corinth, Paul stopped at the nearby village of Cenchreae to have his hair cut off, because of a vow he had earlier taken. It is possible this was to be a final haircut before fulfilling his vow to become a Nazirite for a defined period of time. With Priscilla and Aquila, the missionaries then sailed to Ephesus and then Paul alone went on to Caesarea to greet the Church there. He then traveled north to Antioch, where he stayed for some time (). Some New Testament texts suggest that he also visited Jerusalem during this period for one of the Jewish feasts, possibly Pentecost. Textual critic Henry Alford and others consider the reference to a Jerusalem visit to be genuine and it accords with Acts 21:29, according to which Paul and Trophimus the Ephesian had previously been seen in Jerusalem.

=== Third missionary journey ===

According to Acts, Paul began his third missionary journey by traveling all around the region of Galatia and Phrygia to strengthen, teach and rebuke the believers. Paul then traveled to Ephesus, an important center of early Christianity, and stayed there for almost three years, probably working there as a tentmaker, as he had done when he stayed in Corinth. He is said to have performed numerous miracles, healing people and casting out demons, and he apparently organized missionary activity in other regions. Paul left Ephesus after an attack from a local silversmith resulted in a pro-Artemis riot involving most of the city. During his stay in Ephesus, Paul wrote four letters to the church in Corinth. The letter to the church in Philippi is generally thought to have been written from Ephesus, though a minority view considers it may have been penned while he was imprisoned in Rome.

Paul went through Macedonia into Achaea and stayed in Greece, probably Corinth, for three months during 56–57 AD. Commentators generally agree that Paul dictated his Epistle to the Romans during this period. He then made ready to continue on to Syria, but he changed his plans and traveled back through Macedonia, putatively because certain Jews had made a plot against him. In Romans 15:19, Paul wrote that he visited Illyricum, but he may have meant what would now be called Illyria Graeca, which was at that time a division of the Roman province of Macedonia. On their way back to Jerusalem, Paul and his companions visited other cities such as Philippi, Troas, Miletus, Rhodes, and Tyre. Paul finished his trip with a stop in Caesarea, where he and his companions stayed with Philip the Evangelist before finally arriving in Jerusalem.

===Conjectured journey from Rome to Spain===
Among the writings of the early Christians, Pope Clement I said that Paul was &quot;Herald (of the Gospel of Christ) in the West&quot;, and that &quot;he had gone to the extremity of the west&quot;.

Where Lightfoot&#x27;s translation has &quot;had preached&quot; below (in the &quot;Church tradition&quot; section), the Hoole translation has &quot;having become a herald&quot;. John Chrysostom indicated that Paul preached in Spain: &quot;For after he had been in Rome, he returned to Spain, but whether he came thence again into these parts, we know not&quot;. Cyril of Jerusalem said that Paul, &quot;fully preached the Gospel, and instructed even imperial Rome, and carried the earnestness of his preaching as far as Spain, undergoing conflicts innumerable, and performing Signs and wonders&quot;. The Muratorian fragment mentions &quot;the departure of Paul from the city [of Rome] [5a] (39) when he journeyed to Spain&quot;.

=== Visits to Jerusalem in Acts and the epistles ===
The following table is adapted from the book &quot;From Jesus to Christianity&quot; by Biblical scholar L. Michael White, matching Paul&#x27;s travels as documented in the Acts and the travels in his Epistles but not agreed upon fully by all Biblical scholars.

===Last visit to Jerusalem and arrest===
In 57 AD, upon completion of his third missionary journey, Paul arrived in Jerusalem for his fifth and final visit with a collection of money for the local community. The Acts of the Apostles reports that initially he was warmly received. However, Acts goes on to recount how Paul was warned by James and the elders that he was gaining a reputation for being against the Law, saying, &quot;they have been told about you that you teach all the Jews living among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, and that you tell them not to circumcise their children or observe the customs.&quot; Paul underwent a purification ritual so that &quot;all will know that there is nothing in what they have been told about you, but that you yourself observe and guard the law.&quot;

When the seven days of the purification ritual were almost completed, some &quot;Jews from Asia&quot; (most likely from Roman Asia) accused Paul of defiling the temple by bringing gentiles into it. He was seized and dragged out of the temple by an angry mob. When the tribune heard of the uproar, he and some centurions and soldiers rushed to the area. Unable to determine his identity and the cause of the uproar, they placed him in chains. He was about to be taken into the barracks when he asked to speak to the people. He was given permission by the Romans and proceeded to tell his story. After a while, the crowd responded. &quot;Up to this point they listened to him, but then they shouted, &#x27;Away with such a fellow from the earth! For he should not be allowed to live.&#x27;&quot; The tribune ordered that Paul be brought into the barracks and interrogated under flogging. Paul asserted his Roman citizenship, which would prevent his flogging. The tribune &quot;wanted to find out what Paul was being accused of by the angry Jerusalemites, the next day he released him and ordered the chief priests and the entire council to meet&quot;. Paul spoke before the council and caused a disagreement between the Pharisees and the Sadducees. When this threatened to turn violent, the tribune ordered his soldiers to take Paul by force and return him to the barracks.

The next morning, 40 Jews &quot;bound themselves by an oath neither to eat nor drink until they had killed Paul&quot;, but the son of Paul&#x27;s sister heard of the plot and notified Paul, who notified the tribune that the conspiracists were going to ambush him. The tribune ordered two centurions to &quot;Get ready to leave by nine o&#x27;clock tonight for Caesarea with two hundred soldiers, seventy horsemen, and two hundred spearmen. Also provide mounts for Paul to ride, and take him safely to Felix the governor.&quot;

Paul was taken to Caesarea, where the governor ordered that he be kept under guard in Herod&#x27;s headquarters. &quot;Five days later the high priest Ananias came down with some elders and an attorney, a certain Tertullus, and they reported their case against Paul to the governor.&quot; Both Paul and the Jewish authorities gave a statement &quot;But Felix, who was rather well informed about the Way, adjourned the hearing with the comment, &quot;When Lysias the tribune comes down, I will decide your case.&quot;

Marcus Antonius Felix then ordered the centurion to keep Paul in custody, but to &quot;let him have some liberty and not to prevent any of his friends from taking care of his needs.&quot; He was held there for two years by Felix, until a new governor, Porcius Festus, was appointed. The &quot;chief priests and the leaders of the Jews&quot; requested that Festus return Paul to Jerusalem. After Festus had stayed in Jerusalem &quot;not more than eight or ten days, he went down to Caesarea; the next day he took his seat on the tribunal and ordered Paul to be brought.&quot; When Festus suggested that he be sent back to Jerusalem for further trial, Paul exercised his right as a Roman citizen to &quot;appeal unto Caesar&quot;. Finally, Paul and his companions sailed for Rome where Paul was to stand trial for his alleged crimes.

Acts recounts that on the way to Rome for his appeal as a Roman citizen to Caesar, Paul was shipwrecked on Melita, which is present-day Malta, where the islanders showed him &quot;unusual kindness&quot; and where he was met by Publius. From Malta, he travelled to Rome via Syracuse, Rhegium, and Puteoli.

===Two years in Rome===

Paul finally arrived in Rome , where he spent another two years under house arrest, according to the traditional account. The narrative of Acts ends with Paul preaching in Rome for two years from his rented home while awaiting trial.

Irenaeus wrote in the 2nd century that Peter and Paul had been the founders of the church in Rome and had appointed Linus as succeeding bishop. However, Paul was not a bishop of Rome, nor did he bring Christianity to Rome since there were already Christians in Rome when he arrived there; Paul also wrote his letter to the church at Rome before he had visited Rome. Paul only played a supporting part in the life of the church in Rome.

=== Death ===

Paul&#x27;s death is believed to have occurred after the Great Fire of Rome in July 64 AD, but before the last year of Nero&#x27;s reign, in 68 AD. Pope Clement I writes in his Epistle to the Corinthians that after Paul &quot;had borne his testimony before the rulers&quot;, he &quot;departed from the world and went unto the holy place, having been found a notable pattern of patient endurance.&quot; Ignatius of Antioch writes in his Epistle to the Ephesians that Paul was &quot;martyred&quot;, without giving any further information. Tertullian writes that Paul was &#x27;crowned with an exit like John&#x27; (&quot;Paulus Ioannis exitu coronatur&quot;), although it is unclear which John he meant.

Eusebius states that Paul was killed during the Neronian Persecution and, quoting from Dionysius of Corinth, argues that Peter and Paul were martyred &quot;at the same time&quot;. This is also reported by Sulpicius Severus, who claimed Peter was crucified while Paul was beheaded. John Chrysostom provides an account of Nero imprisoning Paul, but not of his execution, and no mention of Peter. Lactantius only mentioned &#x27;[It was Nero] who first persecuted the servants of God; he crucified Peter, and slew Paul&#x27; (&quot;Paulum interfecit&quot;).

Based on the letters attributed to Paul, Jerome claims Paul was imprisoned by Nero in &#x27;the twenty-fifth year after our Lord&#x27;s passion&#x27; (&quot;post passionem Domini vicesimo quinto anno&quot;), &#x27;that is the second of Nero&#x27; (&quot;id est, secundo Neronis&quot;), &#x27;at the time when Festus Procurator of Judea succeeded Felix, he was sent bound to Rome, (...) remaining for two years in free custody&#x27;. Jerome interpreted the Second Epistle to Timothy to indicate that &#x27;Paul was dismissed by Nero&#x27; (&quot;Paulum a Nerone dimissum&quot;) &#x27;that the gospel of Christ might be preached also in the West&#x27;; but &#x27;in the fourteenth year of Nero&#x27; (&quot;quarto decimo Neronis anno&quot;) &#x27;on the same day with Peter, [Paul] was beheaded at Rome for Christ&#x27;s sake and was buried in the Ostian way, the thirty-seventh year after our Lord&#x27;s passion&#x27; (&quot;anno post passionem Domini tricesimo septimo&quot;).

A legend later developed that his martyrdom occurred at the Aquae Salviae, on the Via Laurentina. According to this legend, after Paul was decapitated, his severed head bounced three times, giving rise to a source of water each time that it touched the ground, which is how the place earned the name &quot;San Paolo alle Tre Fontane&quot; (&quot;St Paul at the Three Fountains&quot;). The apocryphal Acts of Paul also describe the martyrdom and the burial of Paul, but their narrative is highly fanciful and largely unhistorical.

== Remains ==
According to the , Paul&#x27;s body was buried outside the walls of Rome, at the second mile on the Via Ostiensis, on the estate owned by a Christian woman named Lucina. It was here, in the fourth century, that the Emperor Constantine the Great built a first church. Then, between the fourth and fifth centuries, it was considerably enlarged by the Emperors Valentinian I, Valentinian II, Theodosius I, and Arcadius. The present-day Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls was built there in the early 19th century.

Caius in his &quot;Disputation Against Proclus&quot; (198 AD) mentions this of the places in which the remains of the apostles Peter and Paul were deposited: &quot;I can point out the trophies of the apostles. For if you are willing to go to the Vatican or to the Ostian Way, you will find the trophies of those who founded this Church&quot;.

Writing on Paul&#x27;s biography, Jerome in his in 392 AD mentions that &quot;Paul was buried in the Ostian Way at Rome&quot;.

In 2002, an -long marble sarcophagus, inscribed with the words , which translates as &quot;Paul apostle martyr&quot;, was discovered during excavations around the Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls on the Via Ostiensis. Vatican archaeologists declared this to be the tomb of Paul the Apostle in December 2006, the excavation having been completed in November. In the early 2000s, Vatican archaeologists conducted excavations to make the tomb more accessible to pilgrims. These excavations confirmed the presence of a white marble sarcophagus beneath the altar. The sarcophagus was not removed, but a window was created to allow visitors to view it.

In 2009, Pope Benedict XVI announced that radiocarbon dating of bone fragments found in the sarcophagus indicated they were from the 1st or 2nd century, aligning with the traditional timeline of Paul&#x27;s life. The Pope argued that this discovery, along with other artifacts such as a piece of purple linen laminated with pure gold, grains of incense, and blue textiles with linen filaments, all support the hypothesis that the remains are indeed those of Saint Paul. However, Ulderico Santamaria, the head of the Vatican Museums&#x27; diagnostics laboratory and a Professor with expertise in Analytical Chemistry and Materials Engineering at Tuscia University, urged caution, noting that the dating neither confirms nor invalidates the relics&#x27; traditional assignment to St. Paul. 

The Vatican also confirmed that it had discovered and restored the earliest known image of Saint Paul, dating to the early 4th century AD, in the Catacomb of Saint Thekla, close to the Basilica of St Paul Outside the Walls in Rome. In 2010 it was revealed that this icon, painted on the ceiling of a catacomb, was adjacent to the oldest known depictions of Saint Peter, Saint John, and Saint Andrew, surrounding an image of Christ as the Good Shepherd.

== Church tradition ==

Various Christian writers have suggested more details about Paul&#x27;s life:

1 Clement, a letter written by the Roman bishop Clement of Rome around the year 90, reports this about Paul:
Commenting on this passage, Raymond Brown writes that while it &quot;does not explicitly say&quot; that Paul was martyred in Rome, &quot;such a martyrdom is the most reasonable interpretation&quot;. Eusebius of Caesarea, who wrote in the 4th century, states that Paul was beheaded in the reign of the Roman Emperor Nero. This event has been dated either to the year 64 AD, when Rome was devastated by a fire, or a few years later, to 67 AD. According to one tradition, the church of San Paolo alle Tre Fontane marks the place of Paul&#x27;s execution. A Roman Catholic liturgical solemnity of Peter and Paul, celebrated on 29 June, commemorates his martyrdom, and reflects a tradition (preserved by Eusebius) that Peter and Paul were martyred at the same time. The Roman liturgical calendar for the following day now remembers all Christians martyred in these early persecutions; formerly, 30 June was the feast day for St. Paul. Persons or religious orders with a special affinity for St. Paul can still celebrate their patron on 30 June.

The apocryphal Acts of Paul and the apocryphal Acts of Peter suggest that Paul survived Rome and traveled further west. Some think that Paul could have revisited Greece and Asia Minor after his trip to Spain, and might then have been arrested in Troas, and taken to Rome and executed. A tradition holds that Paul was interred with Saint Peter by the via Appia until moved to what is now the Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls in Rome. Bede, in his &quot;Ecclesiastical History&quot;, writes that Pope Vitalian in 665 gave Paul&#x27;s relics (including a cross made from his prison chains) from the crypts of Lucina to King Oswy of Northumbria, northern Britain. The skull of Saint Paul is claimed to reside in the Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran since at least the ninth century, alongside the skull of Saint Peter.

The Feast of the Conversion of Saint Paul is celebrated on 25 January.

== Feast days ==
=== Roman Catholicism ===
The Roman Martyrology commemorates Paul with a feast celebrating his conversion on 25 January. The Roman Martyrology also commemorates Paul and Peter with a solemnity on 29 June.

=== Eastern Orthodoxy ===
The Eastern Orthodox Church has several fixed days for the commemoration of Paul:

* 7 March – The Synaxis of the Saints of the Dodecanese Islands.
* 29 June – The Apostles Peter and Paul. 
* 30 June – The Twelve Apostles.
* 12 October – The Synaxis of the Saints of Athens.

The Eastern Orthodox Church also has numerous non-fixed days for the veneration of Paul:

* 21 Days before Pascha – Synaxis of the Saints of Rhodes.
* 21 Days after Pascha – Synaxis of the Saints of Euboea.
* First Sunday of May – Synaxis of the Saints of Gortyna and Arkadia in the island of Crete.
* The Sunday between 16 and 22 August – Synaxis of the Saints of Lefkada.

=== The Church of England ===
The Church of England celebrates the Conversion of Saint Paul on 25 January as a Festival. Furthermore, along with Saint Peter, Paul is remembered by the Church of England with a Festival on 29 June.

=== Lutheran Church Missouri Synod ===
The Lutheran Church Missouri Synod has two festivals for Saint Paul, the first being his conversion on 25 January, and the second being for Saints Peter and Paul on 29 June.

=== Patronage ===
Paul is the Patron Saint of several locations. He is the Patron Saint of the island of Malta, which celebrates Paul&#x27;s arrival to the island via shipwreck on 10 February. This day is a public holiday on the island. Paul is also considered to be the Patron Saint of the city of London.

== Physical appearance ==

The New Testament offers little if any information about the physical appearance of Paul, but several descriptions can be found in apocryphal texts. In the Acts of Paul he is described as &quot;A man of small stature, with a bald head and crooked legs, in a good state of body, with eyebrows meeting and nose somewhat hooked&quot;. In the Latin version of the Acts of Paul and Thecla it is added that he had a red, florid face.

In &quot;The History of the Contending of Saint Paul&quot;, his countenance is described as &quot;ruddy with the ruddiness of the skin of the pomegranate&quot;. The Acts of Saint Peter confirms that Paul had a bald and shining head, with red hair.
As summarised by Barnes, Chrysostom records that Paul&#x27;s stature was low, his body crooked and his head bald. Lucian, in his &quot;Philopatris&quot;, describes Paul as (&quot;he was small, contracted, crooked, of three cubits, or four feet six&quot;).

Nicephorus claims that Paul was a little man, crooked, and almost bent like a bow, with a pale countenance, long and wrinkled, and a bald head. Pseudo-Chrysostom echoes Lucian&#x27;s height of Paul, referring to him as &quot;the man of three cubits&quot;.

== Writings ==


Of the 27 books in the New Testament, 13 identify Paul as the author; seven of these are widely considered authentic and Paul&#x27;s own, while the authorship of the other six is disputed. The undisputed letters are considered the most important sources since they contain what is widely agreed to be Paul&#x27;s own statements about his life and thoughts. Theologian Mark Powell writes that Paul directed these seven letters to specific occasions at particular churches. As an example, if the Corinthian church had not experienced problems concerning its celebration of the Lord&#x27;s Supper, today it would not be known that Paul even believed in that observance or had any opinions about it one way or the other. Powell comments that there may be other matters in the early church that have since gone unnoticed simply because no crises arose that prompted Paul to comment on them.

In Paul&#x27;s writings, he provides the first written account of what it is to be a Christian and thus a description of Christian spirituality. His letters have been characterized as being the most influential books of the New Testament after the Gospels of Matthew and John.

=== Date ===
Paul&#x27;s authentic letters are roughly dated to the years surrounding the mid-1st century. Placing Paul in this time period is done on the basis of his reported conflicts with other early contemporary figures in the Jesus movement including James and Peter, the references to Paul and his letters by Clement of Rome writing in the late 1st century, his reported issues in Damascus from 2 Corinthians 11:32 which he says took place while King Aretas IV was in power, a possible reference to Erastus of Corinth in Romans 16:23, his reference to preaching in the province of Illyricum (which dissolved in 80 AD), the lack of any references to the Gospels indicating a pre-war time period, the chronology in the Acts of the Apostles placing Paul in this time, and the dependence on Paul&#x27;s letters by other 1st-century pseudo-Pauline epistles.

=== Authorship ===

Seven of the 13 letters that bear Paul&#x27;s name, Romans, 1 Corinthians, 2 Corinthians, Galatians, Philippians, 1 Thessalonians and Philemon, are almost universally accepted as being entirely authentic and dictated by Paul himself. They are considered the best source of information on Paul&#x27;s life and especially his thought.

Four of the letters (Ephesians, 1 and 2 Timothy and Titus) are widely considered pseudepigraphical, while the authorship of the other two is subject to debate. Colossians and 2 Thessalonians are possibly &quot;Deutero-Pauline&quot; meaning they may have been written by Paul&#x27;s followers after his death. Similarly, 1 Timothy, 2 Timothy, and Titus may be &quot;Trito-Pauline&quot; meaning they may have been written by members of the Pauline school a generation after his death. According to their theories, these disputed letters may have come from followers writing in Paul&#x27;s name, often using material from his surviving letters. These scribes also may have had access to letters written by Paul that no longer survive.

The authenticity of Colossians has been questioned on the grounds that it contains an otherwise unparalleled description (among his writings) of Jesus as &quot;the image of the invisible God&quot;, a Christology found elsewhere only in the Gospel of John. However, the personal notes in the letter connect it to Philemon, unquestionably the work of Paul. Internal evidence shows close connection with Philippians.

Ephesians is a letter that is very similar to Colossians but is almost entirely lacking in personal reminiscences. Its style is unique. It lacks the emphasis on the cross to be found in other Pauline writings, reference to the Second Coming is missing, and Christian marriage is exalted in a way that contrasts with the reference in 1 Corinthians. Finally, according to R. E. Brown, it exalts the Church in a way suggestive of the second generation of Christians, &quot;built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets&quot; now past.

The defenders of its Pauline authorship argue that it was intended to be read by a number of different churches and that it marks the final stage of the development of Paul&#x27;s thinking. It has been said, too, that the moral portion of the Epistle, consisting of the last two chapters, has the closest affinity with similar portions of other Epistles, while the whole admirably fits in with the known details of Paul&#x27;s life, and throws considerable light upon them.

Three main reasons have been advanced by those who question Paul&#x27;s authorship of 1 Timothy, 2 Timothy, and Titus, also known as the Pastoral Epistles:
# They have found a difference in these letters&#x27; vocabulary, style, and theology from Paul&#x27;s acknowledged writings. Defenders of the authenticity say that they were probably written in the name and with the authority of the Apostle by one of his companions, to whom he distinctly explained what had to be written, or to whom he gave a written summary of the points to be developed, and that when the letters were finished, Paul read them through, approved them, and signed them.
# There is a difficulty in fitting them into Paul&#x27;s biography as it is known. They, like Colossians and Ephesians, were written from prison but suppose Paul&#x27;s release and travel thereafter.
# 2 Thessalonians, like Colossians, is questioned on stylistic grounds with, among other peculiarities, a dependence on 1 Thessalonians—yet a distinctiveness in language from the Pauline corpus. This, again, is explainable by the possibility that Paul requested one of his companions to write the letter for him under his dictation.

===Acts===
Although approximately half of the Acts of the Apostles deals with Paul&#x27;s life and works, Acts does not refer to Paul writing letters. Charles Williams believes that the author of Acts did not have access to any of Paul&#x27;s letters. He claims that one piece of evidence suggesting this is that Acts never directly quotes from the Pauline epistles. Further, discrepancies between the Pauline epistles and Acts could also support this conclusion. The scholarly consensus was indeed that the author of Acts did not know the Pauline epistles, but such consensus got superseded.

British Jewish scholar Hyam Maccoby contended that Paul, as described in the Acts of the Apostles, is quite different from the view of Paul gleaned from his own writings. Some difficulties have been noted in the account of his life. Paul as described in the Acts of the Apostles is much more interested in factual history, less in theology; ideas such as justification by faith are absent as are references to the Spirit, according to Maccoby. He also pointed out that there are no references to John the Baptist in the Pauline Epistles, although Paul mentions him several times in the Acts of the Apostles.

Others have objected that the language of the speeches is too Lukan in style to reflect anyone else&#x27;s words. Moreover, George Shillington writes that the author of Acts most likely created the speeches accordingly and they bear his literary and theological marks. Conversely, Howard Marshall writes that the speeches were not entirely the inventions of the author and while they may not be accurate word-for-word, the author nevertheless records the general idea of them.

F. C. Baur (1792–1860), professor of theology at Tübingen in Germany, the first scholar to critique Acts and the Pauline Epistles, and founder of the Tübingen School of theology, argued that Paul, as the &quot;Apostle to the Gentiles&quot;, was in violent opposition to the original 12 Apostles. Baur considers the Acts of the Apostles were late and unreliable. This debate has continued ever since, with Adolf Deissmann (1866–1937) and Richard Reitzenstein (1861–1931) emphasising Paul&#x27;s Greek inheritance and Albert Schweitzer stressing his dependence on Judaism.

==Views==
===Self-view===
In the opening verses of Romans 1, Paul provides a litany of his own apostolic appointment to preach among the Gentiles and his post-conversion convictions about the risen Christ. Paul described himself as set apart for the gospel of God and called to be an apostle and a servant of Jesus Christ. Jesus had revealed himself to Paul, just as he had appeared to Peter, to James, and to the twelve disciples after his resurrection. Paul experienced this as an unforeseen, sudden, startling change, due to all-powerful grace, not as the fruit of his reasoning or thoughts.

Paul also describes himself as afflicted with &quot;a thorn in the flesh&quot;; the nature of this &quot;thorn&quot; is unknown.

There are debates as to whether Paul understood himself as commissioned to take the gospel to the gentiles at the moment of his conversion. Before his conversion he believed his persecution of the church to be an indication of his zeal for his religion; after his conversion he believed Jewish hostility toward the church was sinful opposition, that would incur God&#x27;s wrath. Paul believed he was halted by Christ, when his fury was at its height. It was &quot;through zeal&quot; that he persecuted the Church, and he obtained mercy because he had &quot;acted ignorantly in unbelief&quot;.

=== Understanding of Jesus Christ ===
Paul&#x27;s writings emphasized the crucifixion, Christ&#x27;s resurrection and the Parousia or second coming of Christ. Paul saw Jesus as Lord (), the true messiah and the Son of God, who was promised by God beforehand, through his prophets in the Holy Scriptures. While being a biological descendant from David (&quot;according to the flesh&quot;), he was declared to be the Son of God by his resurrection from the dead.

According to E. P. Sanders, Paul &quot;preached the death, resurrection, and lordship of Jesus Christ, and he proclaimed that faith in Jesus guarantees a share in his life.&quot; In Paul&#x27;s view, &quot;Jesus&#x27; death was not a defeat but was for the believers&#x27; benefit&quot;, a sacrifice which substitutes for the lives of others, and frees them from the bondage of sin. Believers participate in Christ&#x27;s death and resurrection by their baptism. The resurrection of Jesus was of primary importance to Paul, bringing the promise of salvation to believers. Paul taught that, when Christ returned, &quot;those who died in Christ would be raised when he returned&quot;, while those still alive would be &quot;caught up in the clouds together with them to meet the Lord in the air&quot;.

Sanders concludes that Paul&#x27;s writings reveal what he calls the essence of the Christian message: &quot;(1) God sent his Son; (2) the Son was crucified and resurrected for the benefit of humanity; (3) the Son would soon return; and (4) those who belonged to the Son would live with him forever. Paul&#x27;s gospel, like those of others, also included (5) the admonition to live by the highest moral standard: &quot;May your spirit and soul and body be kept sound and blameless at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ&quot;.&quot;

In Paul&#x27;s writings, the public, corporate devotional patterns towards Jesus in the early Christian community are reflective of Paul&#x27;s perspective on the divine status of Jesus in what scholars have termed a &quot;binitarian&quot; pattern of devotion. For Paul, Jesus receives prayer, the presence of Jesus is confessionally invoked by believers, people are baptized in Jesus&#x27; name, Jesus is the reference in Christian fellowship for a religious ritual meal (the Lord&#x27;s Supper; in pagan cults, the reference for ritual meals is always to a deity), and Jesus is the source of continuing prophetic oracles to believers.

=== Atonement ===

Paul taught that Christians are redeemed from sin by Jesus&#x27; death and resurrection. His death was an expiation as well as a propitiation, and by Christ&#x27;s blood peace is made between God and man. By grace, through faith, a Christian shares in Jesus&#x27; death and in his victory over death, gaining as a free gift a new, justified status of sonship.

According to Krister Stendahl, the main concern of Paul&#x27;s writings on Jesus&#x27; role, and salvation by faith, is not the individual conscience of human sinners, and their doubts about being chosen by God or not, but the problem of the inclusion of gentile (Greek) Torah observers into God&#x27;s covenant. &quot;Dying for our sins&quot; refers to the problem of gentile Torah-observers, who, despite their faithfulness, cannot fully observe commandments, including circumcision, and are therefore &#x27;sinners&#x27;, excluded from God&#x27;s covenant. Jesus&#x27; death and resurrection solved this problem of the exclusion of the gentiles from God&#x27;s covenant, as indicated by Romans 3:21–26.

Paul&#x27;s conversion fundamentally changed his basic beliefs regarding God&#x27;s covenant and the inclusion of Gentiles into this covenant. Paul believed Jesus&#x27; death was a voluntary sacrifice, that reconciled sinners with God. The law only reveals the extent of people&#x27;s enslavement to the power of sin—a power that must be broken by Christ. Before his conversion Paul believed Gentiles were outside the covenant that God made with Israel; after his conversion, he believed Gentiles and Jews were united as the people of God in Christ. Before his conversion he believed circumcision was the rite through which males became part of Israel, an exclusive community of God&#x27;s chosen people; after his conversion he believed that neither circumcision nor uncircumcision means anything, but that the new creation is what counts in the sight of God, and that this new creation is a work of Christ in the life of believers, making them part of the church, an inclusive community of Jews and Gentiles reconciled with God through faith.

According to E. P. Sanders, who initiated the New Perspective on Paul with his 1977 publication &quot;Paul and Palestinian Judaism&quot;, Paul saw the faithful redeemed by participation in Jesus&#x27; death and rising. Though &quot;Jesus&#x27; death substituted for that of others and thereby freed believers from sin and guilt&quot;, a metaphor derived from &quot;ancient sacrificial theology,&quot; the essence of Paul&#x27;s writing is not in the &quot;legal terms&quot; regarding the expiation of sin, but the act of &quot;participation in Christ through dying and rising with him.&quot; According to Sanders, &quot;those who are baptized into Christ are baptized into his death, and thus they escape the power of sin[...] he died so that the believers may die with him and consequently live with him.&quot; By this participation in Christ&#x27;s death and rising, &quot;one receives forgiveness for past offences, is liberated from the powers of sin, and receives the Spirit.&quot;

=== Relationship with Judaism ===

Some scholars see Paul as completely in line with 1st-century Judaism (a Pharisee and student of Gamaliel as presented by Acts), others see him as opposed to 1st-century Judaism (see Marcionism), while the majority see him as somewhere in between these two extremes, opposed to insistence on keeping the &quot;Ritual Laws&quot; (for example the circumcision controversy in early Christianity) as necessary for entrance into God&#x27;s New Covenant, but in full agreement on &quot;Divine Law&quot;. These views of Paul are paralleled by the views of Biblical law in Christianity.

Paul is critical both theologically and empirically of claims of moral or lineal superiority of Jews while conversely strongly sustaining the notion of a special place for the Children of Israel. Paul&#x27;s theology of the gospel accelerated the separation of the messianic sect of Christians from Judaism, a development contrary to Paul&#x27;s own intent. He wrote that faith in Christ was alone decisive in salvation for Jews and Gentiles alike, making the schism between the followers of Christ and mainstream Jews inevitable and permanent. He argued that Gentile converts did not need to become Jews, get circumcised, follow Jewish dietary restrictions, or otherwise observe Mosaic laws to be saved.
According to Paula Fredriksen, Paul&#x27;s opposition to male circumcision for Gentiles is in line with Old Testament predictions that &quot;in the last days the gentile nations would come to the God of Israel, as gentiles (e.g., Zechariah 8:20–23), not as proselytes to Israel.&quot; For Paul, Gentile male circumcision was therefore an affront to God&#x27;s intentions. According to Hurtado, &quot;Paul saw himself as what Munck called a salvation-historical figure in his own right,&quot; who was &quot;personally and singularly deputized by God to bring about the predicted ingathering (the &quot;fullness&quot;) of the nations.&quot;

According to Sanders, Paul insists that salvation is received by the grace of God; according to Sanders, this insistence is in line with Judaism of until 200 AD, which saw God&#x27;s covenant with Israel as an act of grace of God. Observance of the Law is needed to maintain the covenant, but the covenant is not earned by observing the Law, but by the grace of God.

Sanders&#x27; publications have since been taken up by Professor James Dunn who coined the phrase &quot;The New Perspective on Paul&quot;. N.T. Wright, the Anglican Bishop of Durham, notes a difference in emphasis between Galatians and Romans, the latter being much more positive about the continuing covenant between God and his ancient people than the former. Wright also contends that performing Christian works is not insignificant but rather proof of having attained the redemption of Jesus Christ by grace (free gift received by faith). He concludes that Paul distinguishes between performing Christian works which are signs of ethnic identity and others which are a sign of obedience to Christ.

=== World to come ===

According to Bart Ehrman, Paul believed that Jesus would return within his lifetime. N.T. Wright argues that Paul&#x27;s eschatology did not remain static however, developing in his later epistles the idea that he would probably not see the Second Coming in his lifetime. Wright also argues that this shift was due to perspective and not belief. Paul expected that Christians who had died in the meantime would be resurrected to share in God&#x27;s kingdom, and he believed that the saved would be transformed, assuming heavenly, imperishable bodies.

Paul&#x27;s teaching about the end of the world is expressed most clearly in his first and second letters to the Christian community of Thessalonica. He assures them that the dead will rise first and be followed by those left alive. This suggests an imminent end but he is unspecific about times and seasons and encourages his hearers to expect a delay. The form of the end will be a battle between Jesus and the man of lawlessness whose conclusion is the triumph of Christ.

Before his conversion he believed God&#x27;s messiah would put an end to the old age of evil, and initiate a new age of righteousness; after his conversion, he believed this would happen in stages that had begun with the resurrection of Jesus, but the old age would continue until Jesus returns.

=== Role of women ===

The second chapter of the first letter to Timothy—one of the six disputed letters—is used by many churches to deny women a vote in church affairs, reject women from serving as teachers of adult Bible classes, prevent them from serving as missionaries, and generally disenfranchise women from the duties and privileges of church leadership.

The King James Bible (Authorised Version) translation of this passage taken literally says that women in the churches are to have no leadership roles vis-à-vis men.

Fuller Seminary theologian J. R. Daniel Kirk finds evidence in Paul&#x27;s letters of a much more inclusive view of women. He writes that Romans 16 is a tremendously important witness to the important role of women in the early church. Paul praises Phoebe for her work as a deaconess and Junia who is described by Paul in Scripture as being respected among the Apostles. It is Kirk&#x27;s observation that recent studies suggest that the passage in 1 Corinthians 14 ordering women to &quot;be silent&quot; during worship was a later addition, apparently by a different author, and not part of Paul&#x27;s original letter to the Corinthians.

Other scholars, such as Giancarlo Biguzzi, believe that Paul&#x27;s restriction on women speaking in 1 Corinthians 14 is genuine to Paul but applies to a particular case where there were local problems of women, who were not allowed in that culture to become educated, asking questions or chatting during worship services. He does not believe it to be a general prohibition on any woman speaking in worship settings since in 1 Corinthians Paul affirms the right (responsibility) of women to prophesy.

There were women prophets in the highly patriarchal times throughout the Old Testament. The most common term for &quot;prophet&quot; in the Old Testament is in the masculine form, and in the Hebrew feminine form, is used six times of women who performed the same task of receiving and proclaiming the message given by God. These women include Miriam, Aaron and Moses&#x27; sister, Deborah, the prophet Isaiah&#x27;s wife, and Huldah, the one who interpreted the Book of the Law discovered in the temple during the days of Josiah. There were false prophetesses just as there were false prophets. The prophetess Noadiah was among those who tried to intimidate Nehemiah. Apparently, they held equal rank in prophesying right along with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Elisha, Aaron, and Samuel.

Kirk&#x27;s third example of a more inclusive view is Galatians 3:28:
In pronouncing an end within the church to the divisions which are common in the world around it, he concludes by highlighting the fact that &quot;there were New Testament women who taught and had authority in the early churches, that this teaching and authority was sanctioned by Paul, and that Paul himself offers a theological paradigm within which overcoming the subjugation of women is an anticipated outcome&quot;.

Classicist Evelyn Stagg and theologian Frank Stagg believe that Paul was attempting to &quot;Christianize&quot; the societal household or domestic codes that significantly oppressed women and empowered men as the head of the household. The Staggs present a serious study of what has been termed the New Testament domestic code, also known as the &quot;Haustafel&quot;. The two main passages that explain these &quot;household duties&quot; are Paul&#x27;s letters to the Ephesians and to the Colossians. An underlying Household Code is also reflected in four additional Pauline letters and 1 Peter: 1 Timothy 2:1ff, 8ff; 3:1ff, 8ff; 5:17ff; 6:1f; Titus 2:1–10 and 1 Peter. Biblical scholars have typically treated the &quot;Haustafel&quot; in Ephesians as a resource in the debate over the role of women in ministry and in the home. Margaret MacDonald argues that the &quot;Haustafel&quot;, particularly as it appears in Ephesians, was aimed at &quot;reducing the tension between community members and outsiders&quot;.

E. P. Sanders has labeled Paul&#x27;s remark in 1 Corinthians about women not making any sound during worship as &quot;Paul&#x27;s intemperate outburst that women should be silent in the churches&quot;. Women, in fact, played a very significant part in Paul&#x27;s missionary endeavors:
* He became a partner in ministry with the couple Priscilla and Aquila who are specifically named seven times in the New Testament—always by their couple name and never individually. Of the seven times they are named in the New Testament, Priscilla&#x27;s name appears first in five of those instances, suggesting to some scholars that she was the head of the family unit. They lived, worked, and traveled with the Apostle Paul, becoming his honored, much-loved friends and coworkers in Jesus. In Romans 16:3–4, thought to have been written in 56 or 57, Paul sends his greetings to Priscilla and Aquila and proclaims that both of them &quot;risked their necks&quot; to save Paul&#x27;s life.
* Chloe was an important member of the church in Corinth.
* Phoebe was a &quot;deacon&quot; and a &quot;benefactor&quot; of Paul and others.
* Romans 16 names eight other women active in the Christian movement, including Junia (&quot;prominent among the apostles&quot;), Mary (&quot;who has worked very hard among you&quot;), and Julia.
* Women were frequently among the major supporters of the new Christian movement.

Beth Allison Barr believes that Paul&#x27;s beliefs on women were progressive for the time period. Barr notes that medieval theologians rarely quoted him to support their patriarchal views and that Pope John Paul II believed that using these passages to support the inferiority of women would be akin to justifying slavery, due to the historical context of the household codes. Wives, like slaves, were considered to be under male authority in Roman law. Barr believes that Paul&#x27;s intended message was to counter these ideals: he addresses women first and places Jesus as the ultimate authority that everyone was meant to submit to. She also notes that Paul did not believe that women were &quot;deformed men&quot; like his Roman contemporaries and used maternal language most frequently, often using such metaphors to describe himself as a woman. Barr believes that Roman authorities thought that early Christians were &quot;gender deviants&quot; precisely because they did not enforce the household codes as intended. She also believes that Paul was quoting Cicero when saying that women should be silent, before going on to counter this reasoning, and that this is more obvious when the verses are read aloud.

=== Views on homosexuality ===

Most Christian traditions say Paul clearly portrays homosexuality as sinful in two specific locations: Romans 1:26–27, and 1 Corinthians 6:9-10. Another passage, 1 Timothy 1:8–11, addresses the topic more obliquely. Since the 19th century, however, most scholars have concluded that 1 Timothy (along with 2 Timothy and Titus) is not original to Paul, but rather an unknown Christian writing in Paul&#x27;s name some time in the late-1st to mid-2nd century.

== Influence ==

Paul&#x27;s influence on Christian thinking arguably has been more significant than any other New Testament author. Paul declared that &quot;Christ is the end of the law&quot;, exalted the Christian church as the body of Christ, and depicted the world outside the Church as under judgment. Paul&#x27;s writings include the earliest reference to the &quot;Lord&#x27;s Supper&quot;, a rite traditionally identified as the Christian communion or Eucharist. In the East, church fathers attributed the element of election in Romans 9 to divine foreknowledge. The themes of predestination found in Western Christianity do not appear in Eastern theology.

===Pauline Christianity===

Paul had a strong influence on early Christianity. Hurtado notes that Paul regarded his own Christological views and those of his predecessors and that of the Jerusalem Church as essentially similar. According to Hurtado, this &quot;work[s] against the claims by some scholars that Pauline Christianity represents a sharp departure from the religiousness of Judean &#x27;Jesus movements&#x27;.&quot;

===Marcion===

Marcionism, regarded as heresy by contemporary mainstream Christianity, was an Early Christian dualist belief system that originated in the teachings of Marcion of Sinope at Rome around the year 144. Marcion asserted that Paul was the only apostle who had rightly understood the new message of salvation as delivered by Christ.

Marcion believed Jesus was the savior sent by God, and Paul the Apostle was his chief apostle, but he rejected the Hebrew Bible and the God of Israel. Marcionists believed that the wrathful Hebrew God was a separate and lower entity than the all-forgiving God of the New Testament.

===Augustine===
In his account of his conversion experience, Augustine of Hippo gave his life to Christ after reading Romans 13. Augustine&#x27;s foundational work on the gospel as a gift (grace), on morality as life in the Spirit, on predestination, and on original sin all derives from Paul, especially Romans.

===Reformation===
In his account of his conversion Martin Luther wrote about righteousness in Romans 1 praising Romans as the perfect gospel, in which the Reformation was birthed. Martin Luther&#x27;s interpretation of Paul&#x27;s writings influenced Luther&#x27;s doctrine of &quot;sola fide&quot;.

=== John Calvin ===
John Calvin said the Book of Romans opens to anyone an understanding of the whole Scripture.

=== Modern theology ===

In his commentary &quot;The Epistle to the Romans&quot; (; particularly in the thoroughly re-written second edition of 1922), Karl Barth argued that the God who is revealed in the cross of Jesus challenges and overthrows any attempt to ally God with human cultures, achievements, or possessions.

In addition to the many questions about the true origins of some of Paul&#x27;s teachings posed by historical figures as noted above, some modern theologians also hold that the teachings of Paul differ markedly from those of Jesus as found in the Gospels. Barrie Wilson states that Paul differs from Jesus in terms of the origin of his message, his teachings and his practices. Some have even gone so far as to claim that, due to these apparent differences in teachings, that Paul was no less than the &quot;second founder&quot; of Christianity (Jesus being its first).

As in the Eastern tradition in general, Western humanists interpret the reference to election in Romans 9 as reflecting divine foreknowledge.

==Views on Paul==
===In Judaism===

Jewish interest in Paul is a recent phenomenon. Before the positive historical reevaluations of Jesus by some Jewish thinkers in the 18th and 19th centuries, he had hardly featured in the popular Jewish imagination, and little had been written about him by the religious leaders and scholars. Arguably, he is absent from the Talmud and rabbinical literature, although he makes an appearance in some variants of the medieval polemic Toledot Yeshu (as a particularly effective spy for the rabbis). The Karaite scholar Jacob Qirqisani also believed that Paul created Christianity by introducing the doctrine of Trinitarianism.

However, with Jesus no longer regarded as the paradigm of gentile Christianity, Paul&#x27;s position became more important in Jewish historical reconstructions of their religion&#x27;s relationship with Christianity. He has featured as the key to building barriers (e.g. Heinrich Graetz and Martin Buber) or bridges (e.g. Isaac Mayer Wise and Claude G. Montefiore) in interfaith relations, as part of an intra-Jewish debate about what constitutes Jewish authenticity (e.g. Joseph Klausner and Hans Joachim Schoeps), and on occasion as a dialogical partner (e.g. Richard L. Rubenstein and Daniel Boyarin). Boyarin in particular reads Paul as a &#x27;Jewish thinker&#x27;, one who &#x27;lived and died convinced he was a Jew living out Judaism.&#x27;

He features in an oratorio (by Felix Mendelssohn), a painting (by Ludwig Meidner) and a play (by Franz Werfel), and there have been several novels about Paul (by Shalom Asch and Samuel Sandmel). Jewish philosophers (including Baruch Spinoza, Leo Shestov, and Jacob Taubes) and Jewish psychoanalysts (including Sigmund Freud and Hanns Sachs) have engaged with the apostle as one of the most influential figures in Western thought. Scholarly surveys of Jewish interest in Paul include those by , , , and .

===In Gnosticism===

In the 2nd (and possibly late 1st) century, Gnosticism was a competing religious tradition to Christianity which shared some elements of theology.

Elaine Pagels concentrated on how the Gnostics interpreted Paul&#x27;s letters and how evidence from gnostic sources may challenge the assumption that Paul wrote his letters to combat &quot;gnostic opponents&quot; and to repudiate their statement that they possess secret wisdom. In her reading, the Gnostics considered Paul as one of their own.

===In Islam===
Muslims have long believed that Paul purposefully corrupted the original revealed teachings of Jesus, through the introduction of such elements as paganism, the making of Christianity into a theology of the cross, and introducing original sin and the need for redemption.

Sayf ibn Umar claimed that certain rabbis persuaded Paul to deliberately misguide early Christians by introducing what Ibn Hazm viewed as objectionable doctrines into Christianity. Ibn Hazm repeated Sayf&#x27;s claims. Paul has been criticized by some modern Muslim thinkers. Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas wrote that Paul misrepresented the message of Jesus, and Rashid Rida accused Paul of introducing (polytheism) into Christianity. Mohammad Ali Jouhar quoted Adolf von Harnack&#x27;s critical writings of Paul.

In Sunni Muslim polemics, Paul plays the same role (of deliberately corrupting the early teachings of Jesus) as a later Jew, Abdullah ibn Saba&#x27;, would play in seeking to destroy the message of Islam from within. Among those who supported this view were scholars Ibn Taymiyyah (who believed while Paul ultimately succeeded, Ibn Saba failed) and Ibn Hazm (who claimed that the Jews even admitted to Paul&#x27;s sinister purpose).

===Other views===
Other critics of Paul the Apostle include United States president Thomas Jefferson, a Deist who wrote that Paul was the &quot;first corrupter of the doctrines of Jesus.&quot; Christian anarchists, Leo Tolstoy and Ammon Hennacy, as well as German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche held similar views.

Discussions in Bahá&#x27;í scholarship have focused on whether Paul changed the original message of Christ or delivered the true gospel, there being proponents of both positions.

== See also ==

* Achaicus of Corinth
* Collegiate Parish Church of St Paul&#x27;s Shipwreck
* List of biblical figures identified in extra-biblical sources
* New Perspective on Paul
* Old Testament: Christian views of the Law
* &quot;Paul, Apostle of Christ&quot;, 2018 film
* Pauline mysticism
* Pauline privilege
* Persecution of Christians in the New Testament
* Persecution of religion in ancient Rome
* &quot;Peter and Paul&quot;, 1981 miniseries
* Psychagogy
* St. Paul&#x27;s Cathedral
== References ==
===Notes===
Language notes
General notes
=== Citations ===
=== Bibliography ===
*
*
*
*
* Aulén, Gustaf. &quot;Christus Victor&quot; (SPCK 1931)

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* Bruce, F. F. &quot;Is the Paul of Acts the Real Paul?&quot; &quot;Bulletin John Rylands Library&quot; 58 (1976) 283–305
*
*
*
*
*Conzelmann, Hans, &quot;The Acts of the Apostles – A Commentary on the Acts of the Apostles&quot; (Augsburg Fortress 1987)
*
*
*
*
* 
* 
*
* Dunn, James D. G., &quot;Jesus, Paul, and the Gospels&quot; (Grand Rapids, MI), Wm. B. Eerdmans, 2011
*
*
*
*
*
* Hanson, Anthony T. &quot;Studies in Paul&#x27;s Technique and Theology.&quot; Eerdmans, 1974. 
*
*
*
* 

* Irenaeus, &quot;Against Heresies&quot;
*
*
* Kim, Yung Suk. &quot;A Theological Introduction to Paul&#x27;s Letters&quot;. Eugene, Oregon: Cascade Books, 2011. 
*
*

*
*
* 
*
* MacDonald, Dennis Ronald, 1983. &quot;The Legend and the Apostle: The Battle for Paul in Story and Canon&quot; Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1983. 
*
* 
*
*
* 
*
*



*
*
*

*

* 
*
*
* Spong, John Shelby, &quot;The Man From Tarsus&quot;, in &quot;Rescuing the Bible From Fundamentalism,&quot; reprint ed. (New York: HarperCollins, 1992).
* 

*

*
*
*
*
*



=== Further reading ===
* Bradford, Ernle. &quot;Paul the Traveller: Saint Paul and his World&quot;. Allen Lane, 1974. 
* Davies, W. D. &quot;Paul and Rabbinic Judaism: Some Rabbinic Elements in Pauline Theology&quot;. S.P.C.K., 3rd ed., 1970. .
* Davies, W. D. &quot;The Apostolic Age and the Life of Paul&quot; in Matthew Black (ed.), &quot;Peake&#x27;s Commentary on the Bible&quot;. London: T. Nelson, 1962. .
* Hans-Joachim Schoeps. &quot;Paul: The Theology of the Apostle in the Light of Jewish Religious History (Library of Theological Translations)&quot;; 34 pages, Lutterworth Press (July 2002); .
* Holzbach, Mathis Christian, Die textpragmat. Bedeutung d. Kündereinsetzungen d. Simon Petrus u.d. Saulus Paulus im lukan. Doppelwerk, in: Jesus als Bote d. Heils. Stuttgart 2008, 166–72.
* Murphy-O&#x27;Connor, Jerome. &quot;Jesus and Paul: Parallel Lives&quot; (Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 2007) .
* Murphy-O&#x27;Connor, Jerome. &quot;Paul the Letter-Writer: His World, His Options, His Skills&quot; (Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 1995) .
* Murphy-O&#x27;Connor, Jerome. &quot;Paul: A Critical Life&quot; (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1996) .
* Pinchas Lapide; Peter Stuhlmacher. &quot;Paul: Rabbi and Apostle&quot;; 77 pages, Augsburg Publishing House; (December 1984).
* Pinchas Lapide, Leonard Swidler, Jürgen Moltmann. &quot;Jewish Monotheism and Christian Trinitarian Doctrine&quot;; 94 pages, Wipf &amp; Stock Publishers (2002).
* Reece, Steve. &quot;Paul&#x27;s Large Letters: Pauline Subscriptions in the Light of Ancient Epistolary Conventions&quot;. London: T&amp;T Clark, 2016.
* Rashdall, Hastings (1919), &quot;The Idea of Atonement in Christian Theology&quot;.
* Ruef, John, &quot;Paul&#x27;s First Letter to Corinth&quot; (Penguin 1971)
* Segal, Alan F. &quot;Paul, the Convert&quot;, (New Haven/London, Yale University Press, 1990) .
* Segal, Alan F., &quot;Paul, the Convert and Apostle&quot; in &quot;Rebecca&#x27;s Children: Judaism and Christianity in the Roman World&quot; (Harvard University Press, 1986) .
== External links ==

* 
* Lecture on Paul of Tarsus s by Dr. Henry Abramson
* &quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot;: Paul of Tarsus
* Documentary film on Apostle Paul
* Novena to Saint Paul Apostle
* Paul&#x27;s mission and letters From PBS &quot;Frontline&quot; series on the earliest Christians.
* Representations of Saint Paul 
* &quot;Saint Paul, the Apostle&quot;. &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; Online. 2009.
* The Apostle and the Poet: Paul and Aratus Dr. Riemer Faber
* The Apostle Paul&#x27;s Shipwreck: An Historical Examination of Acts 27 and 28
* Why Paul Went West: The Differences Between the Jewish Diaspora &quot;Biblical Archaeology Review&quot;
* Santiebeati: Saint Paul
* Catholic Online: Saint Paul
* Footsteps of St. Paul by Christian Tours
* Old maps showing the travels of Paul from the Eran Laor Cartographic Collection, National Library of Israel</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="0" end="4" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="17" end="31" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Saul of Tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="51" end="67" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="72" end="82" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Saint Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="90" end="107" title="Apostles in the New Testament" label="Christian apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q749771" start="129" end="138" title="Ministry of Jesus" label="teachings"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="142" end="147" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302871" start="155" end="174" title="Christianity in the 1st century" label="first-century world"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="210" end="223" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302871" start="294" end="307" title="Apostolic Age" label="Apostolic Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="329" end="383" title="Early centers of Christianity" label="several Christian communities in Asia Minor and Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q40309" start="489" end="509" title="Acts of the Apostles" label="Acts of the Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="517" end="530" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q170774" start="603" end="610" title="miracle" label="miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="637" end="652" title="Twelve Apostles" label="Twelve Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q26403" start="737" end="745" title="Pharisees" label="Pharisee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078506" start="770" end="781" title="Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire" label="persecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11241519" start="791" end="800" title="Disciple (Christianity)" label="disciples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602777" start="820" end="830" title="Hellenistic Judaism" label="Hellenised"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="887" end="896" title="Early centers of Christianity#Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q901397" start="905" end="919" title="Conversion of Paul the Apostle" label="his conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q161775" start="973" end="980" title="Saint Stephen" label="Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1016" end="1024" title="Early centers of Christianity#Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686605" start="1242" end="1254" title="Ascension of Jesus" label="risen Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q382898" start="1432" end="1451" title="Ananias of Damascus" label="Ananias of Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421977" start="1557" end="1571" title="Messiah in Judaism" label="Jewish messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352429" start="1580" end="1590" title="Son of God (Christianity)" label="Son of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="1687" end="1697" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q204772" start="1722" end="1728" title="Achaia (Roman province)" label="Achaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207497" start="1730" end="1739" title="Macedonia (Roman province)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967757" start="1745" end="1751" title="Roman Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003997" start="1764" end="1769" title="Judaea (Roman province)" label="Judea"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="1774" end="1779" title="Roman Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q265283" start="1910" end="1926" title="Pauline epistles" label="Pauline epistles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825988" start="1963" end="1972" title="Authorship of the Pauline epistles" label="authentic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825979" start="2036" end="2076" title="authorship of the Epistle to the Hebrews" label="authorship of the Epistle to the Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081988" start="2729" end="2737" title="pastoral care" label="pastoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="2750" end="2755" title="Latin Church" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q842798" start="2782" end="2793" title="Western Christianity" label="of the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="2851" end="2862" title="Eastern Christianity" label="of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q51647" start="3034" end="3046" title="Christian mission" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="3122" end="3130" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="3344" end="3356" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q760793" start="3474" end="3511" title="Paul the Apostle and Jewish Christianity" label="Paul as a fundamentally Jewish figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="3551" end="3560" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q28730" start="3748" end="3757" title="Saul" label="King Saul"/>
<link wikidata="Q882685" start="3769" end="3783" title="Kings of Israel and Judah" label="king of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812965" start="3816" end="3833" title="Tribe of Benjamin" label="Tribe of Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40309" start="4022" end="4042" title="Acts of the Apostles" label="Acts of the Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q213810" start="4053" end="4066" title="Roman citizenship" label="Roman citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q272851" start="4089" end="4099" title="Roman naming conventions" label="Latin name"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="4122" end="4136" title="Koine Greek" label="biblical Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q901397" start="4381" end="4395" title="Conversion of Paul the Apostle" label="his conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q382898" start="4443" end="4462" title="Ananias of Damascus" label="Ananias of Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4617" end="4626" title="Acts 13:9" label="Acts 13:9"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4696" end="4702" title="Early centers of Christianity#Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825980" start="4752" end="4771" title="Authorship of Luke–Acts" label="author of Luke–Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q265283" start="5043" end="5065" title="Pauline epistles" label="those that he authored"/>
<link wikidata="Q80355" start="5273" end="5288" title="1 Corinthians 9" label="1 Corinthians 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q265283" start="5395" end="5407" title="Pauline epistles" label="his epistles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5865" end="5884" title="Early centers of Christianity#Jerusalem" label="church in Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q42887" start="5950" end="5965" title="Pope Clement I" label="Clement of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993949" start="5973" end="5999" title="First Epistle of Clement" label="epistle to the Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q44170" start="6032" end="6051" title="Ignatius of Antioch" label="Ignatius of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811305" start="6071" end="6081" title="Epistle of Ignatius to the Romans" label="the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q65051525" start="6089" end="6102" title="Epistle of Ignatius to the Ephesians" label="the Ephesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q192371" start="6126" end="6134" title="Polycarp" label="Polycarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q914111" start="6153" end="6168" title="Epistle of Polycarp to the Philippians" label="the Philippians"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="6192" end="6200" title="Eusebius" label="Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677805" start="6235" end="6250" title="apocryphal Acts" label="apocryphal Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q764765" start="6279" end="6291" title="Acts of Paul" label="Acts of Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282652" start="6293" end="6316" title="Acts of Paul and Thecla" label="Acts of Paul and Thecla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151139" start="6318" end="6340" title="Acts of Peter and Paul" label="Acts of Peter and Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231095" start="6396" end="6421" title="Epistle to the Laodiceans" label="Epistle to the Laodiceans"/>
<link wikidata="Q223342" start="6427" end="6459" title="Third Epistle to the Corinthians" label="Third Epistle to the Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q767799" start="6469" end="6502" title="Correspondence of Paul and Seneca" label="Correspondence of Paul and Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199667" start="6513" end="6530" title="Apocalyptic literature" label="apocalyptic texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q634680" start="6550" end="6568" title="Apocalypse of Paul" label="Apocalypse of Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7468697" start="6573" end="6598" title="Coptic Apocalypse of Paul" label="Coptic Apocalypse of Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q96837" start="7071" end="7085" title="Helmut Koester" label="Helmut Koester"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="7246" end="7252" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566991" start="7268" end="7276" title="Siege of Jerusalem (63 BC)" label="in 63 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q213810" start="7319" end="7336" title="Roman citizenship" label="Roman citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q134287" start="7461" end="7467" title="Tarsus, Mersin" label="Tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="7501" end="7524" title="Roman province of Syria" label="Roman Province of Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="7653" end="7660" title="academy" label="academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="7711" end="7721" title="Anatolia" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="7740" end="7759" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812965" start="7853" end="7870" title="tribe of Benjamin" label="tribe of Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26403" start="7920" end="7928" title="Pharisees" label="Pharisee"/>
<link wikidata="Q513430" start="8210" end="8220" title="Andronicus of Pannonia" label="Andronicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q262766" start="8225" end="8230" title="Junia (New Testament person)" label="Junia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8404" end="8424" title="Pharisees#Practices" label="Pharisaic traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085604" start="8597" end="8617" title="Priscilla and Aquila" label="Priscilla and Aquila"/>
<link wikidata="Q310584" start="8827" end="8835" title="Gamaliel" label="Gamaliel"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="8871" end="8881" title="Halakha" label="Jewish law"/>
<link wikidata="Q319219" start="9101" end="9110" title="Hillel the Elder" label="Hillelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q161775" start="9321" end="9328" title="Saint Stephen" label="Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="9419" end="9430" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="9507" end="9514" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="9570" end="9586" title="Stoicism" label="Stoic philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q901397" start="9785" end="9799" title="Conversion of Paul the Apostle" label="his conversion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9945" end="9954" title="Early centers of Christianity#Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928179" start="9969" end="9979" title="James Dunn (theologian)" label="James Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q901397" start="10513" end="10535" title="Conversion of Paul the Apostle" label="Paul&amp;#x27;s conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q265283" start="10636" end="10643" title="Pauline epistles" label="letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="11015" end="11023" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682108" start="11064" end="11070" title="Vision (spirituality)" label="vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q382898" start="11550" end="11569" title="Ananias of Damascus" label="Ananias of Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12019" end="12038" title="Apostolic Age#Apostolic Church in Jerusalem" label="church in Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12052" end="12069" title="Early centers of Christianity#Antioch" label="church in Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573644" start="12197" end="12205" title="Merkabah mysticism" label="Merkabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6222683" start="12217" end="12228" title="John Bowker (theologian)" label="John Bowker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706595" start="12230" end="12240" title="Alan F. Segal" label="Alan Segal"/>
<link wikidata="Q729145" start="12245" end="12259" title="Daniel Boyarin" label="Daniel Boyarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12470263" start="12371" end="12387" title="2 Corinthians 12" label="2 Corinthians 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q12491767" start="12658" end="12662" title="Acts 9" label="Acts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12722" end="12730" title="Early centers of Christianity#Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12491767" start="12738" end="12744" title="Acts 9" label="Acts 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="12787" end="12795" title="Baptism" label="baptized"/>
<link wikidata="Q377485" start="13089" end="13100" title="Mount Sinai" label="Mount Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q128620" start="13148" end="13157" title="Epistle to the Galatians" label="Galatians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13206" end="13215" title="Early centers of Christianity#Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q26925" start="13230" end="13235" title="James, brother of Jesus" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="13252" end="13263" title="Saint Peter" label="Simon Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="13370" end="13376" title="Gospel" label="Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q318972" start="13534" end="13541" title="Cenacle" label="Cenacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q252837" start="13686" end="13693" title="Gentile" label="Gentile"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13751" end="13763" title="Persecution of Christians in the New Testament#Examples of persecution in the Acts of the Apostles" label="persecutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q185856" start="14080" end="14088" title="Barnabas" label="Barnabas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14126" end="14133" title="Early centers of Christianity#Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q104028" start="14632" end="14637" title="Judea" label="Judea"/>
<link wikidata="Q161775" start="14887" end="14894" title="Saint Stephen" label="Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q982942" start="15365" end="15371" title="Elymas" label="Elymas"/>
<link wikidata="Q719815" start="15438" end="15443" title="Perga" label="Perga"/>
<link wikidata="Q585250" start="15447" end="15456" title="Pamphylia" label="Pamphylia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992340" start="15458" end="15467" title="John Mark" label="John Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q579468" start="15534" end="15550" title="Antioch of Pisidia" label="Pisidian Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q102477" start="15555" end="15562" title="Shabbat" label="Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="15911" end="15921" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575788" start="16042" end="16053" title="God-fearer" label="God-fearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285436" start="16649" end="16665" title="Raymond E. Brown" label="Raymond E. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q794605" start="16847" end="16863" title="biblical scholar" label="biblical scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q252837" start="17404" end="17411" title="Gentile" label="Gentile"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="17508" end="17513" title="Saint Peter" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q26925" start="17515" end="17520" title="James (brother of Jesus)" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q44015" start="17526" end="17530" title="John the Apostle" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q181778" start="17789" end="17800" title="F. F. Bruce" label="F. F. Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014567" start="18114" end="18133" title="Incident at Antioch" label="Incident at Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602777" start="18457" end="18495" title="Hellenistic Judaism" label="live like a Gentile and not like a Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710868" start="18523" end="18562" title="Judaizers" label="force Gentiles to follow Jewish customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q302556" start="18745" end="18766" title="Catholic Encyclopedia" label="Catholic Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456568" start="18976" end="18992" title="L. Michael White" label="L. Michael White"/>
<link wikidata="Q128620" start="19300" end="19323" title="Epistle to the Galatians" label="letter to the Galatians"/>
<link wikidata="Q619950" start="19468" end="19488" title="Council of Jerusalem" label="Council of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992340" start="19674" end="19683" title="John Mark" label="John Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q312376" start="19913" end="19918" title="Silas" label="Silas"/>
<link wikidata="Q134287" start="19966" end="19972" title="Tarsus, Mersin" label="Tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q20717624" start="19999" end="20004" title="Derbe" label="Derbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q535982" start="20009" end="20015" title="Lystra" label="Lystra"/>
<link wikidata="Q212647" start="20037" end="20044" title="Saint Timothy" label="Timothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q379652" start="20540" end="20548" title="Philippi" label="Philippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15712213" start="21015" end="21020" title="Berea (Bible)" label="Berea"/>
<link wikidata="Q202487" start="21151" end="21160" title="Areopagus" label="Areopagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363688" start="21192" end="21199" title="Ancient Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q103011" start="21269" end="21276" title="Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q452194" start="21313" end="21319" title="Lucius Junius Gallio Annaeanus" label="Gallio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254406" start="21351" end="21369" title="Delphi Inscription" label="Gallio Inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085604" start="21393" end="21413" title="Priscilla and Aquila" label="Priscilla and Aquila"/>
<link wikidata="Q47611" start="21547" end="21554" title="Ephesus" label="Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738703" start="21713" end="21722" title="Kechries" label="Cenchreae"/>
<link wikidata="Q834316" start="21872" end="21880" title="Nazirite" label="Nazirite"/>
<link wikidata="Q319242" start="22009" end="22017" title="Caesarea Maritima" label="Caesarea"/>
<link wikidata="Q201196" start="22236" end="22245" title="Shavuot" label="Pentecost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698623" start="22262" end="22274" title="Henry Alford (theologian)" label="Henry Alford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207124" start="22404" end="22426" title="Trophimus" label="Trophimus the Ephesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26847" start="22598" end="22605" title="Galatia" label="Galatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q32579" start="22610" end="22617" title="Phrygia" label="Phrygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47611" start="22687" end="22694" title="Ephesus" label="Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="22709" end="22737" title="Early centers of Christianity" label="center of early Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363688" start="22852" end="22859" title="Ancient Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="23091" end="23098" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q51613" start="23238" end="23246" title="Philippians" label="Philippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q207497" start="23412" end="23421" title="Macedonia (Roman province)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q204772" start="23427" end="23433" title="Achaea (Roman province)" label="Achaea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23560" end="23581" title="Epistle to the Romans#Dating" label="Epistle to the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="23639" end="23644" title="Roman Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q753824" start="23813" end="23822" title="Illyricum (Roman province)" label="Illyricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q565751" start="23871" end="23885" title="Illyria Graeca" label="Illyria Graeca"/>
<link wikidata="Q379652" start="24042" end="24050" title="Philippi" label="Philippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454671" start="24052" end="24057" title="Troad" label="Troas"/>
<link wikidata="Q169460" start="24059" end="24066" title="Miletus" label="Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="24068" end="24074" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="24080" end="24084" title="Tyre, Lebanon" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q319242" start="24124" end="24132" title="Caesarea Maritima" label="Caesarea"/>
<link wikidata="Q508571" start="24174" end="24195" title="Philip the Evangelist" label="Philip the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42887" start="24324" end="24338" title="Pope Clement I" label="Pope Clement I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706574" start="24486" end="24495" title="Joseph Lightfoot" label="Lightfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q43706" start="24659" end="24674" title="John Chrysostom" label="John Chrysostom"/>
<link wikidata="Q298654" start="24843" end="24861" title="Cyril of Jerusalem" label="Cyril of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q692665" start="25086" end="25105" title="Muratorian fragment" label="Muratorian fragment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456568" start="25369" end="25385" title="L. Michael White" label="L. Michael White"/>
<link wikidata="Q48203" start="25465" end="25473" title="Epistle to the Romans" label="Epistles"/>
<link wikidata="Q26925" start="25863" end="25868" title="James, brother of Jesus" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q578905" start="25927" end="25942" title="antinomianism" label="against the Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978681" start="26163" end="26182" title="Ritual washing in Judaism" label="purification ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q210718" start="26448" end="26458" title="Asia (Roman province)" label="Roman Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190401" start="26596" end="26603" title="tribune" label="tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q26409" start="26637" end="26646" title="centurion" label="centurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q96400323" start="26789" end="26812" title="Protective custody" label="taken into the barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q779753" start="27204" end="27212" title="Flagellation" label="flogging"/>
<link wikidata="Q213810" start="27232" end="27249" title="Roman citizenship" label="Roman citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27263" end="27283" title="Valerian and Porcian laws#Porcian laws" label="prevent his flogging"/>
<link wikidata="Q26403" start="27546" end="27555" title="Pharisees" label="Pharisees"/>
<link wikidata="Q182682" start="27564" end="27573" title="Sadducees" label="Sadducees"/>
<link wikidata="Q316915" start="28202" end="28220" title="Antonius Felix" label="Felix the governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q319242" start="28247" end="28255" title="Caesarea Maritima" label="Caesarea"/>
<link wikidata="Q316915" start="28747" end="28768" title="Antonius Felix" label="Marcus Antonius Felix"/>
<link wikidata="Q464307" start="28999" end="29013" title="Porcius Festus" label="Porcius Festus"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="29716" end="29721" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q468622" start="29807" end="29814" title="Saint Publius" label="Publius"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="29853" end="29861" title="Syracuse, Sicily" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="29863" end="29870" title="Reggio Calabria" label="Rhegium"/>
<link wikidata="Q72425" start="29876" end="29883" title="Pozzuoli" label="Puteoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="30146" end="30154" title="Irenaeus" label="Irenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30168" end="30179" title="Christianity in the 2nd century#Irenaeus" label="2nd century"/>
<link wikidata="Q47144" start="30262" end="30267" title="Pope Linus" label="Linus"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="30347" end="30367" title="Christianity to Rome" label="Christianity to Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q215231" start="30655" end="30673" title="Great Fire of Rome" label="Great Fire of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="30717" end="30721" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q42887" start="30746" end="30760" title="Pope Clement I" label="Pope Clement I"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993949" start="30775" end="30801" title="First Epistle of Clement" label="Epistle to the Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q44170" start="31000" end="31019" title="Ignatius of Antioch" label="Ignatius of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q65051525" start="31034" end="31058" title="Epistle of Ignatius to the Ephesians" label="Epistle to the Ephesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q174929" start="31135" end="31145" title="Tertullian" label="Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933092" start="31279" end="31289" title="New Testament people named John" label="which John"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="31301" end="31309" title="Eusebius" label="Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078506" start="31349" end="31369" title="Neronian persecution" label="Neronian Persecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q679837" start="31388" end="31408" title="Dionysius of Corinth" label="Dionysius of Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="31422" end="31427" title="Saint Peter" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q336704" start="31506" end="31523" title="Sulpicius Severus" label="Sulpicius Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43706" start="31582" end="31597" title="John Chrysostom" label="John Chrysostom"/>
<link wikidata="Q209102" start="31695" end="31705" title="Lactantius" label="Lactantius"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="31898" end="31904" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q464307" start="32166" end="32172" title="Porcius Festus" label="Festus"/>
<link wikidata="Q316915" start="32203" end="32208" title="Antonius Felix" label="Felix"/>
<link wikidata="Q131489" start="32313" end="32338" title="Second Epistle to Timothy" label="Second Epistle to Timothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010652" start="32918" end="32932" title="Via Laurentina" label="Via Laurentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q13403611" start="33142" end="33168" title="San Paolo alle Tre Fontane" label="San Paolo alle Tre Fontane"/>
<link wikidata="Q764765" start="33236" end="33248" title="Acts of Paul" label="Acts of Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232418" start="33481" end="33494" title="Via Ostiensis" label="Via Ostiensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="33604" end="33625" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q46720" start="33739" end="33752" title="Valentinian I" label="Valentinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q46846" start="33754" end="33768" title="Valentinian II" label="Valentinian II"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="33770" end="33782" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q159369" start="33788" end="33796" title="Arcadius" label="Arcadius"/>
<link wikidata="Q231699" start="33814" end="33854" title="Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls" label="Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441699" start="33899" end="33904" title="Caius (presbyter)" label="Caius"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="34277" end="34283" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q231699" start="34534" end="34574" title="Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls" label="Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232418" start="34582" end="34595" title="Via Ostiensis" label="Via Ostiensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="35036" end="35053" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="35069" end="35087" title="radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q273131" start="35372" end="35379" title="incense" label="incense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426327" start="35404" end="35409" title="linen" label="linen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182955" start="35543" end="35557" title="Vatican Museum" label="Vatican Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3663189" start="35963" end="35987" title="Catacomb of Saint Thecla" label="Catacomb of Saint Thekla"/>
<link wikidata="Q132137" start="36083" end="36087" title="icon" label="icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="36174" end="36185" title="Saint Peter" label="Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q44015" start="36187" end="36197" title="John the Apostle" label="Saint John"/>
<link wikidata="Q43399" start="36203" end="36215" title="Andrew the Apostle" label="Saint Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q950667" start="36255" end="36268" title="Good Shepherd" label="Good Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993949" start="36374" end="36383" title="1 Clement" label="1 Clement"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="36682" end="36702" title="Eusebius of Caesarea" label="Eusebius of Caesarea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="36798" end="36802" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q13403611" start="36966" end="36992" title="San Paolo alle Tre Fontane" label="San Paolo alle Tre Fontane"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="37037" end="37051" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574384" start="37052" end="37062" title="Catholic liturgy" label="liturgical"/>
<link wikidata="Q153043" start="37063" end="37090" title="Feast of Saints Peter and Paul" label="solemnity of Peter and Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="37132" end="37141" title="martyrdom" label="martyrdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q764765" start="37539" end="37551" title="Acts of Paul" label="Acts of Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231858" start="37571" end="37584" title="Acts of Peter" label="Acts of Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q189417" start="37874" end="37883" title="Appian Way" label="via Appia"/>
<link wikidata="Q231699" start="37915" end="37955" title="Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls" label="Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q154938" start="37965" end="37969" title="Bede" label="Bede"/>
<link wikidata="Q661541" start="37984" end="38006" title="Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum" label="Ecclesiastical History"/>
<link wikidata="Q199612" start="38026" end="38039" title="Pope Vitalian" label="Pope Vitalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027069" start="38128" end="38144" title="Crypt of Lucina" label="crypts of Lucina"/>
<link wikidata="Q468847" start="38153" end="38172" title="Oswy of Northumbria" label="Oswy of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q84090" start="38244" end="38278" title="Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran" label="Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="38336" end="38347" title="Saint Peter" label="Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q901397" start="38354" end="38391" title="Feast of the Conversion of Saint Paul" label="Feast of the Conversion of Saint Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621783" start="38622" end="38631" title="solemnity" label="solemnity"/>
<link wikidata="Q131555" start="38799" end="38817" title="Dodecanese" label="Dodecanese Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="38844" end="38849" title="Saint Peter" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="38877" end="38892" title="Twelve Apostles" label="Twelve Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="38938" end="38944" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="39054" end="39060" title="Easter" label="Pascha"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="39088" end="39094" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="39112" end="39118" title="Easter" label="Pascha"/>
<link wikidata="Q173096" start="39146" end="39152" title="Euboea" label="Euboea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136193" start="39203" end="39210" title="Gortyna" label="Gortyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q20013164" start="39215" end="39222" title="Arcades (Crete)" label="Arkadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="39240" end="39245" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q190138" start="39312" end="39319" title="Lefkada" label="Lefkada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445693" start="39433" end="39441" title="Festival (Anglicanism)" label="Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="39467" end="39478" title="Saint Peter" label="Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019506" start="39488" end="39498" title="Calendar of saints (Church of England)" label="remembered"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="39506" end="39523" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445693" start="39531" end="39539" title="Festival (Anglicanism)" label="Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q693844" start="39596" end="39626" title="Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod" label="Lutheran Church Missouri Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="39797" end="39809" title="Patron saint" label="Patron Saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="39872" end="39877" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="40066" end="40072" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092752" start="40233" end="40242" title="apocrypha" label="apocrypha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282652" start="40462" end="40485" title="Acts of Paul and Thecla" label="Acts of Paul and Thecla"/>
<link wikidata="Q43706" start="40804" end="40814" title="Chrysostom" label="Chrysostom"/>
<link wikidata="Q177847" start="40893" end="40899" title="Lucian" label="Lucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186136" start="40914" end="40925" title="Philopatris" label="Philopatris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502030" start="41002" end="41008" title="cubits" label="cubits"/>
<link wikidata="Q939953" start="41036" end="41046" title="Nikephoros Kallistos Xanthopoulos" label="Nicephorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q85794850" start="41180" end="41197" title="Pseudo-Chrysostom" label="Pseudo-Chrysostom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670127" start="41885" end="41903" title="Agape feast" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q42887" start="42791" end="42806" title="Clement of Rome" label="Clement of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q302986" start="42928" end="42942" title="Aretas IV Philopatris" label="King Aretas IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348146" start="42981" end="42999" title="Erastus of Corinth" label="Erastus of Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q753824" start="43063" end="43072" title="Illyricum (Roman province)" label="Illyricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q48203" start="43408" end="43414" title="Epistle to the Romans" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q80355" start="43416" end="43429" title="1 Corinthians" label="1 Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q123808" start="43431" end="43444" title="2 Corinthians" label="2 Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q128620" start="43446" end="43455" title="Epistle to the Galatians" label="Galatians"/>
<link wikidata="Q51613" start="43457" end="43468" title="Philippians" label="Philippians"/>
<link wikidata="Q131115" start="43470" end="43485" title="1 Thessalonians" label="1 Thessalonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q131104" start="43490" end="43498" title="Epistle to Philemon" label="Philemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q827597" start="43771" end="43788" title="pseudepigraphical" label="pseudepigraphical"/>
<link wikidata="Q51639" start="45065" end="45078" title="Second Coming" label="Second Coming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043387" start="45095" end="45113" title="Christian views of marriage" label="Christian marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285436" start="45208" end="45219" title="Raymond E. Brown" label="R. E. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q369042" start="45992" end="46009" title="Pastoral Epistles" label="Pastoral Epistles"/>
<link wikidata="Q216545" start="46088" end="46096" title="Christian theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q265283" start="47265" end="47284" title="Pauline epistles" label="Paul&amp;#x27;s letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263250" start="47651" end="47663" title="Hyam Maccoby" label="Hyam Maccoby"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="48124" end="48140" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q265283" start="48148" end="48164" title="Pauline Epistles" label="Pauline Epistles"/>
<link wikidata="Q60749" start="48715" end="48725" title="Ferdinand Christian Baur" label="F. C. Baur"/>
<link wikidata="Q573749" start="48865" end="48880" title="Tübingen School" label="Tübingen School"/>
<link wikidata="Q73108" start="49120" end="49135" title="Adolf Deissmann" label="Adolf Deissmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q66614" start="49152" end="49172" title="Richard Reitzenstein" label="Richard Reitzenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q49325" start="49231" end="49248" title="Albert Schweitzer" label="Albert Schweitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032955" start="49937" end="49955" title="thorn in the flesh" label="thorn in the flesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="50682" end="50693" title="Crucifixion of Jesus" label="crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="50709" end="50721" title="Resurrection of Jesus" label="resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q51639" start="50730" end="50738" title="Parousia" label="Parousia"/>
<link wikidata="Q601009" start="51083" end="51096" title="E. P. Sanders" label="E. P. Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155107" start="51463" end="51474" title="Participation in Christ" label="participate"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="52883" end="52901" title="Eucharist" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4203961" start="53192" end="53204" title="propitiation" label="propitiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q542381" start="53437" end="53453" title="Krister Stendahl" label="Krister Stendahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q601009" start="55190" end="55203" title="E. P. Sanders" label="E. P. Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q118208" start="55223" end="55246" title="New Perspective on Paul" label="New Perspective on Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q928023" start="55550" end="55561" title="Korban" label="sacrificial"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="55736" end="55761" title="Eucharist" label="dying and rising with him"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774383" start="56309" end="56326" title="Historical reliability of the Acts of the Apostles" label="presented by Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q754941" start="56383" end="56393" title="Marcionism" label="Marcionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121728" start="56545" end="56591" title="circumcision controversy in early Christianity" label="circumcision controversy in early Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559849" start="56680" end="56690" title="Divine Law" label="Divine Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903283" start="56749" end="56777" title="Biblical law in Christianity" label="Biblical law in Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="56956" end="56974" title="Israelites" label="Children of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710868" start="57373" end="57384" title="Judaize" label="become Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372555" start="57498" end="57514" title="Paula Fredriksen" label="Paula Fredriksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928179" start="58558" end="58568" title="James Dunn (theologian)" label="James Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q335125" start="58632" end="58643" title="N.T. Wright" label="N.T. Wright"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58783" end="58837" title="Covenant (biblical)#Mosaic covenant" label="continuing covenant between God and his ancient people"/>
<link wikidata="Q127876" start="59232" end="59243" title="Bart Ehrman" label="Bart Ehrman"/>
<link wikidata="Q335125" start="59304" end="59315" title="N.T. Wright" label="N.T. Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894158" start="59633" end="59644" title="Resurrection of the Dead" label="resurrected"/>
<link wikidata="Q126363589" start="59657" end="59675" title="Kingdom of God" label="God&amp;#x27;s kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q131115" start="59852" end="59857" title="First Epistle to the Thessalonians" label="first"/>
<link wikidata="Q131107" start="59862" end="59868" title="Second Epistle to the Thessalonians" label="second"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="59907" end="59919" title="Thessalonica" label="Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894158" start="59942" end="59966" title="Resurrection of the dead" label="the dead will rise first"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746406" start="60184" end="60202" title="Man of Sin" label="man of lawlessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="60912" end="60928" title="King James Bible" label="King James Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q262617" start="61074" end="61089" title="Fuller Theological Seminary" label="Fuller Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q291547" start="61323" end="61329" title="Phoebe (Bible)" label="Phoebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298145" start="61348" end="61357" title="deaconess" label="deaconess"/>
<link wikidata="Q262766" start="61362" end="61367" title="Junia (New Testament person)" label="Junia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62207" end="62215" title="Prophesy#Christianity" label="prophesy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416449" start="63512" end="63524" title="Evelyn Stagg" label="Evelyn Stagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489733" start="63540" end="63551" title="Frank Stagg (theologian)" label="Frank Stagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591319" start="63800" end="63827" title="New Testament domestic code" label="New Testament domestic code"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085604" start="64857" end="64877" title="Priscilla and Aquila" label="Priscilla and Aquila"/>
<link wikidata="Q113788235" start="65919" end="65936" title="Beth Allison Barr" label="Beth Allison Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="66117" end="66134" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="66984" end="66990" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q131180" start="67453" end="67462" title="First Epistle to Timothy" label="1 Timothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131489" start="67475" end="67484" title="2 Timothy" label="2 Timothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131493" start="67489" end="67494" title="Epistle to Titus" label="Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669560" start="67786" end="67814" title="Abrogation of Old Covenant laws" label="Christ is the end of the law"/>
<link wikidata="Q378097" start="68065" end="68084" title="Christian communion" label="Christian communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="68088" end="68097" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q193203" start="68213" end="68227" title="predestination" label="predestination"/>
<link wikidata="Q187900" start="68414" end="68434" title="Christology" label="Christological views"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="68817" end="68832" title="Early Christian" label="Early Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310255" start="68833" end="68840" title="Dualistic cosmology" label="dualist"/>
<link wikidata="Q34394" start="68841" end="68854" title="belief system" label="belief system"/>
<link wikidata="Q201346" start="68891" end="68908" title="Marcion of Sinope" label="Marcion of Sinope"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="68978" end="68985" title="Apostles in the New Testament" label="apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q192054" start="69032" end="69041" title="salvation" label="salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q825" start="69113" end="69116" title="God in Christianity" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="69182" end="69194" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q766677" start="69203" end="69216" title="Yahweh" label="God of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q226765" start="69248" end="69267" title="Divine retribution" label="wrathful Hebrew God"/>
<link wikidata="Q967441" start="69309" end="69326" title="Love of God" label="all-forgiving God"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="69411" end="69429" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12508843" start="69468" end="69477" title="Romans 13" label="Romans 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="69715" end="69728" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144825" start="69741" end="69754" title="righteousness" label="righteousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q16158613" start="69758" end="69766" title="Romans 1" label="Romans 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q265283" start="69883" end="69903" title="Pauline epistles" label="Paul&amp;#x27;s writings"/>
<link wikidata="Q310355" start="69947" end="69956" title="sola fide" label="sola fide"/>
<link wikidata="Q37577" start="69985" end="69996" title="John Calvin" label="John Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16835521" start="70128" end="70153" title="The Epistle to the Romans (Barth)" label="The Epistle to the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q107473" start="70230" end="70240" title="Karl Barth" label="Karl Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863574" start="70657" end="70670" title="Barrie Wilson" label="Barrie Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71210" end="71252" title="Judaism&amp;#x27;s view of Jesus#Positive historical re-evaluations" label="positive historical reevaluations of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="71476" end="71482" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q279556" start="71583" end="71596" title="Toledot Yeshu" label="Toledot Yeshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q208398" start="71651" end="71658" title="Karaite Judaism" label="Karaite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910908" start="71667" end="71682" title="Jacob Qirqisani" label="Jacob Qirqisani"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="71759" end="71773" title="Trinity" label="Trinitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q63762" start="72047" end="72062" title="Heinrich Graetz" label="Heinrich Graetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q84423" start="72067" end="72079" title="Martin Buber" label="Martin Buber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673434" start="72098" end="72114" title="Isaac Mayer Wise" label="Isaac Mayer Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977854" start="72119" end="72139" title="Claude G. Montefiore" label="Claude G. Montefiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q964668" start="72249" end="72264" title="Joseph Klausner" label="Joseph Klausner"/>
<link wikidata="Q982976" start="72338" end="72359" title="Richard L. Rubenstein" label="Richard L. Rubenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q729145" start="72364" end="72378" title="Daniel Boyarin" label="Daniel Boyarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="72557" end="72574" title="Felix Mendelssohn" label="Felix Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q213727" start="72592" end="72606" title="Ludwig Meidner" label="Ludwig Meidner"/>
<link wikidata="Q78514" start="72623" end="72635" title="Franz Werfel" label="Franz Werfel"/>
<link wikidata="Q380439" start="72688" end="72699" title="Shalom Asch" label="Shalom Asch"/>
<link wikidata="Q35802" start="72752" end="72766" title="Baruch Spinoza" label="Baruch Spinoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q314189" start="72768" end="72779" title="Leo Shestov" label="Leo Shestov"/>
<link wikidata="Q650151" start="72785" end="72797" title="Jacob Taubes" label="Jacob Taubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="72836" end="72849" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q79062" start="72854" end="72865" title="Hanns Sachs" label="Hanns Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="73096" end="73106" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnosticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q263099" start="73200" end="73213" title="Elaine Pagels" label="Elaine Pagels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762323" start="73626" end="73653" title="Injil" label="original revealed teachings"/>
<link wikidata="Q51664" start="73657" end="73662" title="Isa ibn Maryam" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="73709" end="73714" title="pagan" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8451511" start="73765" end="73774" title="atonement in Christianity" label="the cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q184186" start="73792" end="73804" title="original sin" label="original sin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73822" end="73832" title="Redemption (theology)#Christianity" label="redemption"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122255" start="73835" end="73848" title="Sayf ibn Umar" label="Sayf ibn Umar"/>
<link wikidata="Q317787" start="74016" end="74024" title="Ibn Hazm" label="Ibn Hazm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115175" start="74111" end="74140" title="Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas" label="Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas"/>
<link wikidata="Q471046" start="74198" end="74209" title="Rashid Rida" label="Rashid Rida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241714" start="74270" end="74289" title="Mohammad Ali Jouhar" label="Mohammad Ali Jouhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q164699" start="74297" end="74314" title="Adolf von Harnack" label="Adolf von Harnack"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="74353" end="74358" title="Sunni" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477222" start="74475" end="74498" title="Abdullah ibn Saba&amp;#x27;" label="Abdullah ibn Saba&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q491558" start="74617" end="74630" title="Ibn Taymiyyah" label="Ibn Taymiyyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q317787" start="74699" end="74707" title="Ibn Hazm" label="Ibn Hazm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="74868" end="74884" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="74888" end="74893" title="Deism" label="Deist"/>
<link wikidata="Q329659" start="74977" end="74997" title="Christian anarchism" label="Christian anarchists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="74999" end="75010" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747270" start="75015" end="75028" title="Ammon Hennacy" label="Ammon Hennacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="75060" end="75079" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="75116" end="75127" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Bahá&amp;#x27;í"/>
<link wikidata="Q982939" start="75299" end="75318" title="Achaicus of Corinth" label="Achaicus of Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146972" start="75321" end="75373" title="Collegiate Parish Church of St Paul&amp;#x27;s Shipwreck" label="Collegiate Parish Church of St Paul&amp;#x27;s Shipwreck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607516" start="75376" end="75437" title="List of biblical figures identified in extra-biblical sources" label="List of biblical figures identified in extra-biblical sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q118208" start="75440" end="75463" title="New Perspective on Paul" label="New Perspective on Paul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75466" end="75507" title="Old Testament#Christian views on Mosaic Law" label="Old Testament: Christian views of the Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q48671585" start="75516" end="75539" title="Paul, Apostle of Christ" label="Paul, Apostle of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155107" start="75559" end="75576" title="Pauline mysticism" label="Pauline mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q490296" start="75579" end="75596" title="Pauline privilege" label="Pauline privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170057" start="75599" end="75645" title="Persecution of Christians in the New Testament" label="Persecution of Christians in the New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153525" start="75648" end="75687" title="Persecution of religion in ancient Rome" label="Persecution of religion in ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q217585" start="75696" end="75710" title="Peter and Paul (film)" label="Peter and Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115850" start="75736" end="75746" title="Psychagogy" label="Psychagogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="75749" end="75774" title="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q669711" start="75882" end="75895" title="Gustaf Aulén" label="Aulén, Gustaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q181778" start="75954" end="75966" title="F. F. Bruce" label="Bruce, F. F."/>
<link wikidata="Q72196" start="76083" end="76099" title="Hans Conzelmann" label="Conzelmann, Hans"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="76445" end="76453" title="Irenaeus" label="Irenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281900" start="76461" end="76477" title="On the Detection and Overthrow of the So-Called Gnosis" label="Against Heresies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8061265" start="76490" end="76503" title="Yung Suk Kim" label="Kim, Yung Suk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258681" start="76622" end="76646" title="Dennis Ronald MacDonald" label="MacDonald, Dennis Ronald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196186" start="76811" end="76829" title="John Shelby Spong" label="Spong, John Shelby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356953" start="77010" end="77025" title="Ernle Bradford" label="Bradford, Ernle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15438714" start="77106" end="77119" title="W. D. Davies" label="Davies, W. D."/>
<link wikidata="Q3299669" start="77300" end="77313" title="Matthew Black" label="Matthew Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577472" start="77400" end="77420" title="Hans-Joachim Schoeps" label="Hans-Joachim Schoeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6182854" start="77782" end="77810" title="Jerome Murphy-O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Murphy-O&amp;#x27;Connor, Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q78579" start="78150" end="78164" title="Pinchas Lapide" label="Pinchas Lapide"/>
<link wikidata="Q78307" start="78166" end="78183" title="Peter Stuhlmacher" label="Peter Stuhlmacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525772" start="78294" end="78309" title="Leonard Swidler" label="Leonard Swidler"/>
<link wikidata="Q60278" start="78311" end="78326" title="Jürgen Moltmann" label="Jürgen Moltmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q4209439" start="78596" end="78614" title="Hastings Rashdall" label="Rashdall, Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706595" start="78759" end="78773" title="Alan F. Segal" label="Segal, Alan F."/>
<link wikidata="Q608773" start="79092" end="79110" title="Henry Abramson" label="Dr. Henry Abramson"/>
<link wikidata="Q188915" start="79881" end="79907" title="National Library of Israel" label="National Library of Israel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24143" wikidata="Q167634" url="?curid=24143" title="Perestroika">
<text>Perestroika ( ; ) was a political reform movement within the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) during the late 1980s, widely associated with CPSU general secretary Mikhail Gorbachev and his &quot;glasnost&quot; (meaning &quot;transparency&quot;) policy reform. The literal meaning of &quot;perestroika&quot; is &quot;restructuring&quot;, referring to the restructuring of the political economy of the Soviet Union, in an attempt to end the Era of Stagnation.

&quot;Perestroika&quot; allowed more independent actions from various ministries and introduced many market-like reforms. The purported goal of &quot;perestroika&quot; was not to end the planned economy but rather to make socialism work more efficiently to better meet the needs of Soviet citizens by adopting elements of liberal economics. The process of implementing &quot;perestroika&quot; added to existing shortages, and created political, social, and economic tensions within the Soviet Union. Furthermore, it is often blamed for the political ascent of nationalism and nationalist political parties in the constituent republics.

Gorbachev first used the term in a speech during his visit to Tolyatti in 1986. &quot;Perestroika&quot; lasted from 1985 until 1991, and is often argued to be a significant cause of the collapse of the Eastern Bloc and the dissolution of the Soviet Union. 

With respect to the foreign policy Gorbachev promoted &quot;new political thinking&quot;: de-ideologization of international politics, abandoning the concept of class struggle, priority of universal human interests over the interests of any class, increasing interdependence of the world, and mutual security based on political rather than military instruments. The doctrine constituted a significant shift from the previous principles of the Soviet foreign politics. This marked the end of the Cold War.

==Political reforms==

Gorbachev had concluded that implementing his reforms outlined at the Twenty-Seventh Party Congress in February 1986 required more than discrediting the &quot;&quot;, those with a Marxist-Leninist political orientation. He changed his strategy from trying to work through the CPSU as it existed and instead embraced a degree of political liberalization. In January 1987, he appealed over the heads of the party to the people and called for democratization. Earlier members of local soviets were appointed by local Communist Party branches, now they were to be elected by the people from among various candidates. 

The March 1989 election of the Congress of People&#x27;s Deputies of the Soviet Union marked the first time that voters of the Soviet Union ever chose the membership of a national legislative body. The results of the election stunned the ruling elite. Throughout the country, voters crossed unopposed Communist candidates off the ballot, many of them prominent party officials, taking advantage of the nominal privilege of withholding approval of the listed candidates.

By the time of the Twenty-Eighth Party Congress in July 1990, it was clear that Gorbachev&#x27;s reforms came with sweeping, unintended consequences, as nationalities of the constituent republics of the Soviet Union pulled harder than ever to break away from the Union and ultimately dismantle the Communist Party.

==Economic reforms==
In May 1985, Mikhail Gorbachev gave a speech in Leningrad in which he admitted the slowing of economic development, and inadequate living standards.

The program was furthered at the 27th Congress of the Communist Party in Gorbachev&#x27;s report to the congress, in which he spoke about &quot;&quot;perestroika&quot;, &quot;uskoreniye&quot;&quot; (acceleration), &quot;human factor&quot;, &quot;glasnost&quot; (transparency), and &quot;expansion of the &quot;khozraschyot&quot;&quot; (accounting).

During the initial period (1985–87) of Mikhail Gorbachev&#x27;s time in power, he talked about modifying central planning but did not make any truly fundamental changes (&quot;uskoreniye&quot;; &quot;acceleration&quot;). Gorbachev and his team of economic advisors then introduced more fundamental reforms, which became known as &quot;perestroika&quot; (restructuring).

At the June 1987 plenary session of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Gorbachev presented his &quot;basic theses&quot;, which laid the political foundation of economic reform for the remainder of the existence of the Soviet Union.

In July 1987, the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union passed the Law on State Enterprise. The law stipulated that state enterprises were free to determine output levels based on demand from consumers and other enterprises. Enterprises had to fulfil state orders, but they could dispose of the remaining output as they saw fit. However, at the same time the state still held control over the means of production for these enterprises, thus limiting their ability to enact full-cost accountability. Enterprises bought input from suppliers at negotiated contract prices. Under the law, enterprises became self-financing; that is, they had to cover expenses (wages, taxes, supplies, and debt service) through revenues. Finally, the law shifted control over the enterprise operations from ministries to elected workers&#x27; collectives. Gosplan&#x27;s responsibilities were to supply general guidelines and national investment priorities.

The Law on Cooperatives, enacted in May 1988, was perhaps the most radical of the economic reforms during the early part of the Gorbachev era. For the first time since Vladimir Lenin&#x27;s New Economic Policy was abolished in 1928, the law permitted private ownership of businesses in the services, manufacturing, and foreign-trade sectors. The law initially imposed high taxes and employment restrictions, but it later revised these to avoid discouraging private-sector activity. Under this provision, cooperative restaurants, shops, and manufacturers became part of the Soviet scene.

Gorbachev brought &quot;perestroika&quot; to the Soviet Union&#x27;s foreign economic sector with measures that Soviet economists considered bold at that time. His program virtually eliminated the monopoly that the Ministry of Foreign Trade had once held on most trade operations. It permitted the ministries of the various industrial and agricultural branches to conduct foreign trade in sectors under their responsibility, rather than having to operate indirectly through the bureaucracy of trade ministry organizations. In addition, regional and local organizations and individual state enterprises were permitted to conduct foreign trade. This change was an attempt to redress a major imperfection in the Soviet foreign trade regime: the lack of contact between Soviet end users and suppliers and their foreign partners.

Alexander Yakovlev was considered to be the intellectual force behind Gorbachev&#x27;s reform program of &quot;glasnost&quot; and &quot;perestroika&quot;. In the summer of 1985, Yakovlev became head of the propaganda department of the CPSU Central Committee. He argued in favor of the reform programs and played a key role in executing those policies.

The most significant of Gorbachev&#x27;s reforms in the foreign economic sector allowed foreigners to invest in the Soviet Union in the form of joint ventures with Soviet ministries, state enterprises, and cooperatives. The original version of the Soviet Joint Venture Law, which went into effect in June 1987, limited foreign shares of a Soviet venture to 49 percent and required that Soviet citizens occupy the positions of chairman and general manager. After potential Western partners complained, the government revised the regulations to allow majority foreign ownership and control. Under the terms of the Joint Venture Law, the Soviet partner supplied labor, infrastructure, and a potentially large domestic market. The foreign partner supplied capital, technology, entrepreneurial expertise, and in many cases, products and services of world competitive quality.

Gorbachev&#x27;s economic changes did not do much to improve the country&#x27;s sluggish economy in the late 1980s. The reforms decentralized things to some extent, although price controls remained, as did the ruble&#x27;s inconvertibility and most government controls over the means of production.

==Comparison with China==
&quot;Perestroika&quot; and Deng Xiaoping&#x27;s economic reforms have similar origins but very different effects on their respective countries&#x27; economies. Both efforts occurred in large socialist countries attempting to liberalize their economies, but while China&#x27;s GDP has grown consistently since the late 1980s (albeit from a much lower level), national GDP in the USSR and in many of its successor states fell precipitously throughout the 1990s. Gorbachev&#x27;s reforms were gradualist and maintained many of the macroeconomic aspects of the planned economy (including price controls, inconvertibility of the ruble, exclusion of private property ownership, and the government monopoly over most means of production).

Reform was largely focused on industry and on cooperatives, and a limited role was given to the development of foreign investment and international trade. Factory managers were expected to meet state demands for goods, but to find their own funding. &quot;Perestroika&quot; reforms went far enough to create new bottlenecks in the Soviet economy but arguably did not go far enough to effectively streamline it.

Chinese economic reform was, by contrast, a bottom-up attempt at reform, focusing on light industry and agriculture (namely allowing peasants to sell produce grown on private holdings at market prices). Economic reforms were fostered through the development of &quot;Special Economic Zones&quot;, designed for export and to attract foreign investment, municipally managed Township and Village Enterprises and a &quot;dual pricing&quot; system leading to the steady phasing out of state-dictated prices. Greater latitude was given to managers of state-owned factories, while capital was made available to them through a reformed banking system and through fiscal policies (in contrast to the fiscal anarchy and fall in revenue experienced by the Soviet government during &quot;perestroika&quot;). &quot;Perestroika&quot; was expected to lead to results such as market pricing and privately sold produce, but the Union dissolved before advanced stages were reached.

Another fundamental difference is that where &quot;perestroika&quot; was accompanied by greater political freedoms under Gorbachev&#x27;s &quot;glasnost&quot; policies, Chinese economic reform has been accompanied by continued authoritarian rule and a suppression of political dissidents, most notably at Tiananmen Square. Gorbachev acknowledged this difference but maintained that it was unavoidable and that &quot;perestroika&quot; would have been doomed to defeat and revanchism by the &quot;nomenklatura&quot; without &quot;glasnost&quot;, because conditions in the Soviet Union were not identical to those in China. Gorbachev cited a line from a 1986 newspaper article that he felt encapsulated this reality: &quot;The apparatus broke Khrushchev&#x27;s neck and the same thing will happen now.&quot;

Another difference is that Soviet Union faced strong secession threats from its ethnic regions and a primacy challenge by the RSFSR. Gorbachev&#x27;s extension of regional autonomy removed the suppression from existing ethnic-regional tension, while Deng&#x27;s reforms did not alter the tight grip of the central government on any of their autonomous regions. The Soviet Union&#x27;s dual nature, part supranational union of republics and part unitary state, played a part in the difficulty of controlling the pace of restructuring, especially once the new Russian Communist Party was formed and posed a challenge to the primacy of the CPSU. Gorbachev described this process as a &quot;parade of sovereignties&quot; and identified it as the factor that most undermined the gradualism of restructuring and the preservation of the Soviet Union.

==&quot;Perestroika&quot; and &quot;glasnost&quot;==

One of the final important measures taken on the continuation of the movement was a report from the central committee meeting of the CPSU titled &quot;On Reorganization and the Party&#x27;s Personnel Policy&quot;. Gorbachev emphasized the need of a faster political personnel turnover and of a policy of democratization that opened the political elections to multiple candidates and to non-party members.

This report was in such high demand in Prague and Berlin that many people could not get a copy. One effect was the abrupt demand for Russian dictionaries in order to understand the content of Gorbachev&#x27;s report. 

In an interview with Mieczyslaw Rakowski he states the success of &quot;perestroika&quot; was impossible without &quot;glasnost&quot;.

== The role of the West in &quot;Perestroika&quot; ==

During the 1980s and 1990s the United States President George H. W. Bush pledged solidarity with Gorbachev, but never brought his administration into supporting Gorbachev&#x27;s reform. In fact, &quot;no bailout for Gorbachev&quot; was a consistent policy line of the Bush administration, further demonstrating the lack of true support from the West. President Bush had a financial policy to aid &quot;perestroika&quot; that was shaped by a minimalist approach, foreign-policy convictions that set Bush up against other U.S. internal affairs, and a frugal attitude, all influencing his unwillingness to aid Gorbachev. Other factors influenced the West&#x27;s lack of aid, for example; the &quot;in-house Gorbi-skeptics&quot; advocacy, the expert community&#x27;s consensus about the undesirability of rushing U.S. aid to Gorbachev, strong opposition to any bailout at many levels including foreign-policy conservatives, the U.S. Congress, and the American public at large. The West seemed to miss an opportunity to gain significant influence over the Soviet government. The Soviets aided in the expansion of Western capitalism to allow for an inflow of Western investments, but the &quot;perestroika&quot; managers failed. President Bush had the opportunity to aid the Soviet Union in a way to bring closer ties between the governments, like Harry S. Truman did for many nations in Western Europe. Early on, as &quot;perestroika&quot; was getting under way, I felt like the West might come along and find it a sensible thing to do—easing Russia&#x27;s difficult transition from totalitarianism to democracy. What I had in mind in the first place, was the participation [of the West] in conversion of defense industries, the modernization of light and food industries, and Russia&#x27;s inclusion on an equal-member footing in the frameworks of the international economic relations... [U]nlike some democrats, I did not expect &quot;manna from Heaven,&quot; but counted on the Western statesmen to use their common sense.President George H.W. Bush continued to dodge helping the Russians and the President of Czechoslovakia, Václav Havel, laid bare the linkage for the Americans in his address to a joint session of Congress on 21 February 1990: ... I often hear the question: How can the United States of America help us today? My reply is as paradoxical as the whole of my life has been: You can help us most of all if you help the Soviet Union on its irreversible, but immensely complicated road to democracy...[T]he sooner, the more quickly, and the more peacefully the Soviet Union begins to move along the road toward genuine political pluralism, respect for the rights of nations to their own integrity and to a working—that is a market—economy, the better it will be, not just for Czechs and Slovaks, but for the whole world.

When the United States needed help with Germany&#x27;s reunification, Gorbachev proved to be instrumental in bringing solutions to the &quot;German problem&quot; and Bush acknowledged that &quot;Gorbachev was moving the USSR in the right direction&quot;. Bush, in his own words, even gave praise to Gorbachev &quot;to salute the man&quot; in acknowledgment of the Soviet leader&#x27;s role as &quot;the architect of &quot;perestroika&quot;... [who had] conducted the affairs of the Soviet Union with great restraint as Poland and Czechoslovakia and GDR... and other countries [that had] achieved their independence&quot;, and who was &quot;under extraordinary pressure at home, particularly on the economy.&quot;

==See also==
*History of the Soviet Union (1982–1991)
*Infitah

==References==
==Further reading==
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* Mikhail Gorbachev on perestroika
* Chris Harman &amp; Andy Zebrowski. Glasnost – before the storm (Summer 1988)
* Yakovlev on perestroika 
* The Economic Collapse of the Soviet Union
* Perestroika – TM in Ukraine
*The Decline of the Soviet Union: A Hypothesis on Industrial Paradigms, Technological Revolutions and the Roots of Perestroika by Angelo Segrillo
* Key Dates and Events of Perestroika</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="61" end="96" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="150" end="172" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="CPSU general secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="173" end="190" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q173100" start="205" end="213" title="glasnost" label="glasnost"/>
<link wikidata="Q47555" start="385" end="402" title="political economy" label="political economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416215" start="449" end="466" title="Era of Stagnation" label="Era of Stagnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="570" end="576" title="Market economy" label="market"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="656" end="671" title="planned economy" label="planned economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="691" end="700" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341" start="1168" end="1176" title="Tolyatti" label="Tolyatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="1292" end="1320" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="collapse of the Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="1329" end="1360" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4323903" start="1424" end="1446" title="new political thinking" label="new political thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744607" start="1525" end="1539" title="class struggle" label="class struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074172" start="1807" end="1830" title="Foreign relations of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet foreign politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="1859" end="1867" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384097" start="1963" end="1992" title="27th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Twenty-Seventh Party Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="2073" end="2089" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxist-Leninist"/>
<link wikidata="Q211201" start="2375" end="2382" title="Soviet (council)" label="soviets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4128701" start="2512" end="2531" title="1989 Soviet Union legislative election" label="March 1989 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888941" start="2539" end="2593" title="Congress of People&amp;#x27;s Deputies of the Soviet Union" label="Congress of People&amp;#x27;s Deputies of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368892" start="2998" end="3026" title="28th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Twenty-Eighth Party Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135789" start="3104" end="3126" title="unintended consequence" label="unintended consequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q236036" start="3153" end="3194" title="Republics of the Soviet Union" label="constituent republics of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="3222" end="3247" title="Breakup of the Soviet Union" label="break away from the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="3329" end="3346" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="3364" end="3373" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384097" start="3499" end="3535" title="27th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="27th Congress of the Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423489" start="3641" end="3651" title="uskoreniye" label="uskoreniye"/>
<link wikidata="Q173100" start="3712" end="3720" title="glasnost" label="glasnost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663010" start="3776" end="3788" title="khozraschyot" label="khozraschyot"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="3921" end="3937" title="central planning" label="central planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423489" start="3992" end="4002" title="uskoreniye" label="uskoreniye"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147896" start="4204" end="4219" title="plenary session" label="plenary session"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971373" start="4227" end="4287" title="Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q326465" start="4469" end="4503" title="Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union" label="Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986015" start="5234" end="5244" title="Ministries of the Soviet Union" label="ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q497757" start="5283" end="5290" title="Gosplan" label="Gosplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232148" start="5390" end="5409" title="Law on Cooperatives" label="Law on Cooperatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="5554" end="5568" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45745" start="5576" end="5595" title="New Economic Policy" label="New Economic Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q555911" start="5637" end="5654" title="private ownership" label="private ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q312469" start="6800" end="6818" title="Alexander Yakovlev" label="Alexander Yakovlev"/>
<link wikidata="Q173100" start="6911" end="6919" title="glasnost" label="glasnost"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="7297" end="7310" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="8379" end="8392" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="8400" end="8416" title="Chinese economic reform" label="economic reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q948814" start="8842" end="8852" title="gradualism" label="gradualist"/>
<link wikidata="Q494978" start="9764" end="9785" title="Special Economic Zone" label="Special Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830259" start="9869" end="9901" title="Township and Village Enterprises" label="Township and Village Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q173100" start="10606" end="10614" title="glasnost" label="glasnost"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="10689" end="10707" title="authoritarianism" label="authoritarian rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251588" start="10714" end="10749" title="Protest and dissent in China" label="suppression of political dissidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="10767" end="10783" title="1989 Tiananmen Square protests" label="Tiananmen Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136718" start="10933" end="10943" title="revanchism" label="revanchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q156728" start="10957" end="10969" title="nomenklatura" label="nomenklatura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="11394" end="11399" title="Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic" label="RSFSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q192187" start="11826" end="11849" title="Communist Party of the Russian Federation" label="Russian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="11905" end="11909" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="CPSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q4344831" start="11955" end="11978" title="parade of sovereignties" label="parade of sovereignties"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="13038" end="13055" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="14325" end="14340" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q213514" start="15078" end="15105" title="List of presidents of Czechoslovakia" label="President of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36233" start="15107" end="15119" title="Václav Havel" label="Václav Havel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="15826" end="15839" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="15857" end="15885" title="German reunification" label="Germany&amp;#x27;s reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5409928" start="16545" end="16584" title="History of the Soviet Union (1982–1991)" label="History of the Soviet Union (1982–1991)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514367" start="16586" end="16593" title="Infitah" label="Infitah"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24144" wikidata="Q179465" url="?curid=24144" title="Polyphony">
<text>Polyphony ( ) is a type of musical texture consisting of two or more simultaneous lines of independent melody, as opposed to a musical texture with just one voice (monophony) or a texture with one dominant melodic voice accompanied by chords (homophony).

Within the context of the Western musical tradition, the term &quot;polyphony&quot; is usually used to refer to music of the late Middle Ages and Renaissance. Baroque forms such as fugue, which might be called polyphonic, are usually described instead as contrapuntal. Also, as opposed to the &quot;species&quot; terminology of counterpoint, polyphony was generally either &quot;pitch-against-pitch&quot; / &quot;point-against-point&quot; or &quot;sustained-pitch&quot; in one part with melismas of varying lengths in another. In all cases the conception was probably what Margaret Bent (1999) calls &quot;dyadic counterpoint&quot;, with each part being written generally against one other part, with all parts modified if needed in the end. This point-against-point conception is opposed to &quot;successive composition&quot;, where voices were written in an order with each new voice fitting into the whole so far constructed, which was previously assumed.

The term &quot;polyphony&quot; is also sometimes used more broadly, to describe any musical texture that is not monophonic. Such a perspective considers homophony as a sub-type of polyphony.

==Origins==
Traditional (non-professional) polyphony has a wide, if uneven, distribution among the peoples of the world. Most polyphonic regions of the world are in sub-Saharan Africa, Europe and Oceania. It is believed that the origins of polyphony in traditional music vastly predate the emergence of polyphony in European professional music. Currently there are two contradictory approaches to the problem of the origins of vocal polyphony: the Cultural Model, and the Evolutionary Model. According to the Cultural Model, the origins of polyphony are connected to the development of human musical culture; polyphony came as the natural development of the primordial monophonic singing; therefore polyphonic traditions are bound to gradually replace monophonic traditions. According to the Evolutionary Model, the origins of polyphonic singing are much deeper, and are connected to the earlier stages of human evolution; polyphony was an important part of a defence system of the hominids, and traditions of polyphony are gradually disappearing all over the world.

Although the exact origins of polyphony in the Western church traditions are unknown, the treatises &quot;Musica enchiriadis&quot; and &quot;Scolica enchiriadis&quot;, both dating from , are usually considered the oldest extant written examples of polyphony. These treatises provided examples of two-voice note-against-note embellishments of chants using parallel octaves, fifths, and fourths. Rather than being fixed works, they indicated ways of improvising polyphony during performance. The &quot;Winchester Troper&quot;, from , is generally considered to be the oldest extant example of notated polyphony for chant performance, although the notation does not indicate precise pitch levels or durations. However, a two-part antiphon to Saint Boniface recently discovered in the British Library, is thought to have originated in a monastery in north-west Germany and has been dated to the early tenth century.

==European polyphony==

===Historical context===
European polyphony rose out of melismatic &quot;organum&quot;, the earliest harmonization of the chant. During the 12th century, composers such as Léonin and Pérotin developed the that had been introduced centuries earlier, and also added a third and fourth voice to the now homophonic chant. In the 13th century, the chant-based tenor was becoming altered, fragmented, and hidden beneath secular tunes, obscuring the sacred texts as composers continued to develop polyphonic techniques. The lyrics of love poems might be sung above sacred texts in the form of a trope, or the sacred text might be placed within a familiar secular melody. The oldest surviving piece of six-part music is the English rota &quot;Sumer is icumen in&quot; ().

===Western Europe and Roman Catholicism===
European polyphony rose prior to, and during the period of the Western Schism. Avignon, the seat of popes and then antipopes, was a vigorous center of secular music-making, much of which influenced sacred polyphony. 

The notion of secular and sacred music merging in the papal court also offended some medieval ears. It gave church music more of a jocular performance quality supplanting the solemnity of worship they were accustomed to. The use of and attitude toward polyphony varied widely in the Avignon court from the beginning to the end of its religious importance in the fourteenth century.

Harmony was considered frivolous, impious, lascivious, and an obstruction to the audibility of the words. Instruments, as well as certain modes, were actually forbidden in the church because of their association with secular music and pagan rites. After banishing polyphony from the Liturgy in 1322, Pope John XXII warned against the unbecoming elements of this musical innovation in his 1324 bull &quot;Docta Sanctorum Patrum&quot;. In contrast Pope Clement VI indulged in it.

The oldest extant polyphonic setting of the mass attributable to one composer is Guillaume de Machaut&#x27;s Messe de Nostre Dame, dated to 1364, during the pontificate of Pope Urban V. The Second Vatican Council said Gregorian chant should be the focus of liturgical services, without excluding other forms of sacred music, including polyphony.

====Notable works and artists====
*Tomás Luis de Victoria
*William Byrd, &quot;Mass for Five Voices&quot;
*Thomas Tallis, &quot;Spem in alium&quot;
*Orlandus Lassus, Missa super Bella&#x27;Amfitrit&#x27;altera
*Guillaume de Machaut, &quot;Messe de Nostre Dame&quot;
*Geoffrey Chaucer
*Jacob Obrecht
*Palestrina, &quot;Missa Papae Marcelli&quot;
*Josquin des Prez, &quot;Missa Pange Lingua&quot;
*Gregorio Allegri, &quot;Miserere&quot;

===Protestant Britain and the United States===
English Protestant west gallery music included polyphonic multi-melodic harmony, including fuguing tunes, by the mid-18th century. This tradition passed with emigrants to North America, where it was proliferated in tunebooks, including shape-note books like &quot;The Southern Harmony&quot; and &quot;The Sacred Harp&quot;. While this style of singing has largely disappeared from British and North American sacred music, it survived in the rural Southern United States, until it again began to grow a following throughout the United States and even in places such as the United Kingdom, Germany, Poland, and Australia, among others.

===Balkan region===
Polyphonic singing is traditional folk singing of this part of southern Europe. It is also called &quot;ancient&quot;, &quot;archaic&quot; or &quot;old-style&quot; singing.

*Byzantine chant
*Ojkanje singing, in Croatia, Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina
*Ganga singing, in Croatia, Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina
*Bosnian root music in the Podrinje region of Bosnia and Herzegovina
*Epirote singing, in northern Greece and southern Albania (see below)
*Iso-polyphony, in southern Albania (see below)
*Gusle singing, in Serbia, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Albania
*Izvika singing, in Serbia
* &quot;Dvuglas&quot; singing in Southern Bulgaria: woman choirs in Shopluk (Bistritsa Babi) and in Rhodopes (Nedelino), as well as men choirs in Bansko, Pirin Macedonia

Incipient polyphony (previously primitive polyphony) includes antiphony and call and response, drones, and parallel intervals.

Balkan drone music is described as polyphonic due to Balkan musicians using a literal translation of the Greek (&#x27;many voices&#x27;). In terms of Western classical music, it is not strictly polyphonic, due to the drone parts having no melodic role, and can better be described as &quot;multipart&quot;.

The polyphonic singing tradition of Epirus is a form of traditional folk polyphony practiced among Aromanians, Albanians, Greeks, and ethnic Macedonians in southern Albania and northwestern Greece. This type of folk vocal tradition is also found in North Macedonia and Bulgaria.

Albanian polyphonic singing can be divided into two major stylistic groups as performed by the Tosks and Labs of southern Albania. The drone is performed in two ways: among the Tosks, it is always continuous and sung on the syllable &#x27;e&#x27;, using staggered breathing; while among the Labs, the drone is sometimes sung as a rhythmic tone, performed to the text of the song. It can be differentiated between two-, three- and four-voice polyphony.

In Aromanian music, polyphony is common, and polyphonic music follows a set of common rules.

The phenomenon of Albanian folk iso-polyphony (Albanian iso-polyphony) has been proclaimed by UNESCO a &quot;Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity&quot;. The term &quot;iso&quot; refers to the drone, which accompanies the iso-polyphonic singing and is related to the ison of Byzantine church music, where the drone group accompanies the song.

===Corsica===

The French island of Corsica has a unique style of music called Paghjella that is known for its polyphony. Traditionally, Paghjella contains a staggered entrance and continues with the three singers carrying independent melodies. This music tends to contain much melisma and is sung in a nasal temperament. Additionally, many paghjella songs contain a picardy third. After paghjella&#x27;s revival in the 1970s, it mutated. In the 1980s it had moved away from some of its more traditional features as it became much more heavily produced and tailored towards western tastes. There were now four singers, significantly less melisma, it was much more structured, and it exemplified more homophony. To the people of Corsica, the polyphony of paghjella represented freedom; it had been a source of cultural pride in Corsica and many felt that this movement away from the polyphonic style meant a movement away from paghjella&#x27;s cultural ties. This resulted in a transition in the 1990s. Paghjella again had a strong polyphonic style and a less structured meter.

===Sardinia===
Cantu a tenore is a traditional style of polyphonic singing in Sardinia.

==Caucasus region==

===Georgia===

Polyphony in the Republic of Georgia is arguably the oldest polyphony in the Christian world. Georgian polyphony is traditionally sung in three parts with strong dissonances, parallel fifths, and a unique tuning system based on perfect fifths. Georgian polyphonic singing has been proclaimed by UNESCO an Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity. Popular singing has a highly valued place in Georgian culture. There are three types of polyphony in Georgia: complex polyphony, which is common in Svaneti; polyphonic dialogue over a bass background, prevalent in the Kakheti region in Eastern Georgia; and contrasted polyphony with three partially improvised sung parts, characteristic of western Georgia. The Chakrulo song, which is sung at ceremonies and festivals and belongs to the first category, is distinguished by its use of metaphor and its yodel, the krimanchuli and a &quot;cockerel’s crow&quot;, performed by a male falsetto singer. Some of these songs are linked to the cult of the grapevine and many date back to the eighth century. The songs traditionally pervaded all areas of everyday life, ranging from work in the fields (the Naduri, which incorporates the sounds of physical effort into the music) to songs to curing of illnesses and to Christmas Carols (Alilo). Byzantine liturgical hymns also incorporated the Georgian polyphonic tradition to such an extent that they became a significant expression of it.

===Chechens and Ingushes===

Chechen and Ingush traditional music can be defined by their tradition of vocal polyphony. Chechen and Ingush polyphony is based on a drone and is mostly three-part, unlike most other north Caucasian traditions&#x27; two-part polyphony. The middle part carries the main melody accompanied by a double drone, holding the interval of a fifth around the melody. Intervals and chords are often dissonances (sevenths, seconds, fourths), and traditional Chechen and Ingush songs use sharper dissonances than other North Caucasian traditions. The specific cadence of a final, dissonant three-part chord, consisting of fourth and the second on top (c-f-g), is almost unique. (Only in western Georgia do a few songs finish on the same dissonant c-f-g chord.)

==Oceania==
Parts of Oceania maintain rich polyphonic traditions. The peoples of New Guinea Highlands including the Moni, Dani, and Yali use vocal polyphony, as do the people of Manus Island. Many of these styles are drone-based or feature close, secondal harmonies dissonant to western ears. Guadalcanal and the Solomon Islands are host to instrumental polyphony, in the form of bamboo panpipe ensembles. Europeans were surprised to find drone-based and dissonant polyphonic singing in Polynesia. Polynesian traditions were then influenced by Western choral church music, which brought counterpoint into Polynesian musical practice.

==Africa==
Numerous Sub-Saharan African music traditions host polyphonic singing, typically moving in parallel motion. While the Maasai people traditionally sing with drone polyphony, other East African groups use more elaborate techniques. The Dorze people, for example, sing with as many as six parts, and the Wagogo use counterpoint. The music of African Pygmies (e.g. that of the Aka people) is typically ostinato and contrapuntal, featuring yodeling. Other Central African peoples tend to sing with parallel lines rather than counterpoint. In Burundi, rural women greet each other with akazehe, a two-part interlocking vocal rhythm. The singing of the San people, like that of the pygmies, features melodic repetition, yodeling, and counterpoint. The singing of neighboring Bantu peoples, like the Zulu, is more typically parallel. The peoples of tropical West Africa traditionally use parallel harmonies rather than counterpoint.

==See also==
*Micropolyphony
*Polyphonic Era
*Venetian polychoral style

== References ==
== External links ==

*Thirteenth-Century Polyphony
*Tuning and Intonation in Fifteenth and Sixteenth Century Polyphony
*World Routes in Albania – Iso-Polyphony in Southern Albania on BBC Radio 3
*World Routes in Georgia – Ancient polyphony from the Caucasus region on BBC Radio 3
*Aka Pygmy Polyphony African Pygmy music, with photos and soundscapes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q179465" start="0" end="9" title="Polyphony" label="Polyphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q325944" start="35" end="42" title="texture (music)" label="texture"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="103" end="109" title="melody" label="melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137211" start="164" end="173" title="monophony" label="monophony"/>
<link wikidata="Q170439" start="235" end="241" title="chord (music)" label="chords"/>
<link wikidata="Q207349" start="243" end="252" title="homophony" label="homophony"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="368" end="373" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q163775" start="386" end="397" title="Medieval music" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q201405" start="402" end="413" title="Renaissance music" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="415" end="422" title="Baroque music" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q181014" start="437" end="442" title="fugue" label="fugue"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="511" end="523" title="counterpoint" label="contrapuntal"/>
<link wikidata="Q248255" start="743" end="750" title="melisma" label="melisma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759182" start="829" end="842" title="Margaret Bent" label="Margaret Bent"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150462" start="1573" end="1591" title="Traditional sub-Saharan African harmony" label="sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370682" start="2582" end="2600" title="Musica enchiriadis" label="Musica enchiriadis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776041" start="2617" end="2636" title="Scolica enchiriadis" label="Scolica enchiriadis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164089" start="2976" end="2993" title="Winchester Troper" label="Winchester Troper"/>
<link wikidata="Q582093" start="3203" end="3211" title="antiphon" label="antiphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q160445" start="3215" end="3229" title="Saint Boniface" label="Saint Boniface"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="3257" end="3272" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q248255" start="3469" end="3479" title="melismatic" label="melismatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q599877" start="3486" end="3493" title="organum" label="organum"/>
<link wikidata="Q297501" start="3585" end="3591" title="Léonin" label="Léonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q206275" start="3596" end="3603" title="Pérotin" label="Pérotin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554097" start="4001" end="4006" title="trope (music)" label="trope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145381" start="4137" end="4141" title="rota (music)" label="rota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190737" start="4148" end="4166" title="Sumer is icumen in" label="Sumer is icumen in"/>
<link wikidata="Q26189" start="4284" end="4298" title="Western Schism" label="Western Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="4300" end="4307" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="4321" end="4325" title="pope" label="pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q172748" start="4336" end="4344" title="antipope" label="antipope"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="5122" end="5136" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="5215" end="5219" title="papal bull" label="bull"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5226" end="5248" title="Docta Sanctorum Patrum" label="Docta Sanctorum Patrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q170863" start="5268" end="5283" title="Pope Clement VI" label="Pope Clement VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="5345" end="5349" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q200580" start="5382" end="5402" title="Guillaume de Machaut" label="Guillaume de Machaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510075" start="5410" end="5430" title="Messe de Nostre Dame" label="Messe de Nostre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q133046" start="5473" end="5485" title="Pope Urban V" label="Pope Urban V"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="5491" end="5513" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q215128" start="5683" end="5705" title="Tomás Luis de Victoria" label="Tomás Luis de Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q208375" start="5707" end="5719" title="William Byrd" label="William Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q116549857" start="5727" end="5747" title="Mass for Five Voices" label="Mass for Five Voices"/>
<link wikidata="Q207789" start="5755" end="5768" title="Thomas Tallis" label="Thomas Tallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583387" start="5776" end="5789" title="Spem in alium" label="Spem in alium"/>
<link wikidata="Q154792" start="5797" end="5812" title="Orlandus Lassus" label="Orlandus Lassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q200580" start="5859" end="5879" title="Guillaume de Machaut" label="Guillaume de Machaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510075" start="5887" end="5907" title="Messe de Nostre Dame" label="Messe de Nostre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="5915" end="5931" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Geoffrey Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q311629" start="5933" end="5946" title="Jacob Obrecht" label="Jacob Obrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q179277" start="5948" end="5958" title="Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina" label="Palestrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717291" start="5966" end="5986" title="Missa Papae Marcelli" label="Missa Papae Marcelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q143100" start="5994" end="6010" title="Josquin des Prez" label="Josquin des Prez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859201" start="6018" end="6036" title="Missa Pange Lingua" label="Missa Pange Lingua"/>
<link wikidata="Q216695" start="6044" end="6060" title="Gregorio Allegri" label="Gregorio Allegri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576091" start="6068" end="6076" title="Miserere (Allegri)" label="Miserere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987058" start="6150" end="6168" title="west gallery music" label="west gallery music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507307" start="6222" end="6234" title="fuguing tune" label="fuguing tune"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489233" start="6367" end="6377" title="shape-note" label="shape-note"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569965" start="6395" end="6415" title="The Southern Harmony" label="The Southern Harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397088" start="6432" end="6447" title="The Sacred Harp" label="The Sacred Harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="6578" end="6600" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204125" start="6961" end="6976" title="Ison (music)" label="Byzantine chant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349990" start="6978" end="6993" title="Ojkanje singing" label="Ojkanje singing"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="6998" end="7005" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="7007" end="7013" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="7018" end="7040" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q834566" start="7042" end="7055" title="Ganga (music)" label="Ganga singing"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="7069" end="7079" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="7084" end="7106" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947422" start="7108" end="7126" title="Bosnian root music" label="Bosnian root music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744391" start="7134" end="7142" title="Podrinje" label="Podrinje"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="7153" end="7175" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674378" start="7177" end="7192" title="Polyphonic song of Epirus" label="Epirote singing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="7206" end="7212" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q47112" start="7247" end="7260" title="Albanian iso-polyphony" label="Iso-polyphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q669370" start="7295" end="7300" title="Gusle" label="Gusle"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="7313" end="7319" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="7321" end="7331" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q61126881" start="7378" end="7384" title="Izvika" label="Izvika"/>
<link wikidata="Q3447801" start="7437" end="7454" title="Southern Bulgaria" label="Southern Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623724" start="7472" end="7479" title="Shopluk" label="Shopluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q29034" start="7481" end="7495" title="Bistritsa Babi" label="Bistritsa Babi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489" start="7504" end="7512" title="Rhodope Mountains" label="Rhodopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q405716" start="7514" end="7522" title="Nedelino" label="Nedelino"/>
<link wikidata="Q391159" start="7550" end="7556" title="Bansko" label="Bansko"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275099" start="7558" end="7573" title="Pirin Macedonia" label="Pirin Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q582093" start="7637" end="7646" title="antiphony" label="antiphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027114" start="7651" end="7668" title="call and response (music)" label="call and response"/>
<link wikidata="Q893474" start="7670" end="7676" title="drone (music)" label="drones"/>
<link wikidata="Q495018" start="7682" end="7699" title="parallel interval" label="parallel interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674378" start="8015" end="8053" title="Polyphonic song of Epirus" label="polyphonic singing tradition of Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q201111" start="8110" end="8120" title="Aromanians" label="Aromanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436423" start="8145" end="8163" title="ethnic Macedonians" label="ethnic Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="8260" end="8275" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="8280" end="8288" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q109332430" start="8747" end="8762" title="Aromanian music" label="Aromanian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q47112" start="8885" end="8907" title="Albanian iso-polyphony" label="Albanian iso-polyphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q877988" start="8947" end="9006" title="Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity" label="Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="9135" end="9144" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="9240" end="9247" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9283" end="9292" title=":fr:Paghjella" label="Paghjella"/>
<link wikidata="Q248255" start="9482" end="9489" title="melisma" label="melisma"/>
<link wikidata="Q938888" start="9571" end="9584" title="picardy third" label="picardy third"/>
<link wikidata="Q774475" start="10297" end="10311" title="Cantu a tenore" label="Cantu a tenore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="10360" end="10368" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="10424" end="10443" title="Georgia (country)" label="Republic of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10651" end="10678" title="Music of Georgia (country)#Traditional vocal polyphony" label="Georgian polyphonic singing"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="12636" end="12643" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961771" start="12696" end="12716" title="New Guinea Highlands" label="New Guinea Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320698" start="12731" end="12735" title="Moni people" label="Moni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159714" start="12737" end="12741" title="Dani people" label="Dani"/>
<link wikidata="Q983108" start="12747" end="12751" title="Yali people" label="Yali"/>
<link wikidata="Q602106" start="12793" end="12805" title="Manus Island" label="Manus Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q893474" start="12832" end="12837" title="Drone (music)" label="drone"/>
<link wikidata="Q192767" start="12908" end="12919" title="Guadalcanal" label="Guadalcanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="12928" end="12943" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q218802" start="13002" end="13009" title="panpipe" label="panpipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029382" start="13070" end="13079" title="Consonance and dissonance" label="dissonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="13202" end="13214" title="counterpoint" label="counterpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q7630590" start="13270" end="13306" title="Sub-Saharan African music traditions" label="Sub-Saharan African music traditions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13352" end="13367" title="contrapuntal motion#parallel motion" label="parallel motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q163022" start="13379" end="13392" title="Maasai people" label="Maasai people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250880" start="13495" end="13507" title="Dorze people" label="Dorze people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575602" start="13562" end="13568" title="Wagogo" label="Wagogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160510" start="13600" end="13615" title="African Pygmies" label="African Pygmies"/>
<link wikidata="Q781814" start="13634" end="13644" title="Aka people" label="Aka people"/>
<link wikidata="Q216745" start="13659" end="13667" title="ostinato" label="ostinato"/>
<link wikidata="Q41923" start="13696" end="13704" title="yodeling" label="yodeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="13798" end="13805" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q123592830" start="13841" end="13848" title="akazehe" label="akazehe"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="13907" end="13917" title="San people" label="San people"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="14029" end="14042" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q129962" start="14053" end="14057" title="Zulus" label="Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="14111" end="14122" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q183083" start="14201" end="14215" title="Micropolyphony" label="Micropolyphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226751" start="14217" end="14231" title="Polyphonic Era" label="Polyphonic Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140842" start="14233" end="14258" title="Venetian polychoral style" label="Venetian polychoral style"/>
<link wikidata="Q749608" start="14461" end="14472" title="BBC Radio 3" label="BBC Radio 3"/>
</links>
</doc>
