<doc id="25458" wikidata="Q220" url="?curid=25458" title="Rome">
<text>Rome (Italian and , ) is the capital city of Italy. It is also the capital of the Lazio region, the centre of the Metropolitan City of Rome Capital, and a special (municipality) named . With 2,860,009 residents in , Rome is the country&#x27;s most populated and the third most populous city in the European Union by population within city limits. The Metropolitan City of Rome, with a population of 4,355,725 residents, is the most populous metropolitan city in Italy. Its metropolitan area is the third-most populous within Italy. Rome is located in the central-western portion of the Italian Peninsula, within Lazio (Latium), along the shores of the Tiber Valley. Vatican City (the smallest country in the world and headquarters of the worldwide Catholic Church under the governance of the Holy See) is an independent country inside the city boundaries of Rome, the only existing example of a country within a city. Rome is often referred to as the City of Seven Hills due to its geographic location, and also as the &quot;Eternal City&quot;. Rome is generally considered to be the cradle of Western civilization and Western Christian culture, and the centre of the Catholic Church.

Rome&#x27;s history spans 28 centuries. While Roman mythology dates the founding of Rome at around 753 BC, the site has been inhabited for much longer, making it a major human settlement for over three millennia and one of the oldest continuously occupied cities in Europe. The city&#x27;s early population originated from a mix of Latins, Etruscans, and Sabines. Eventually, the city successively became the capital of the Roman Kingdom, the Roman Republic and the Roman Empire, and is regarded by many as the first-ever Imperial city and metropolis. It was first called &quot;The Eternal City&quot; (; ) by the Roman poet Tibullus in the 1st century BC, and the expression was also taken up by Ovid, Virgil, and Livy. Rome is also called  (Capital of the World).

After the fall of the Empire in the west, which marked the beginning of the Middle Ages, Rome slowly fell under the political control of the Papacy, and in the 8th century, it became the capital of the Papal States, which lasted until 1870. Beginning with the Renaissance, almost all popes since Nicholas V (1447–1455) pursued a coherent architectural and urban programme over four hundred years, aimed at making the city the artistic and cultural centre of the world. In this way, Rome first became one of the major centres of the Renaissance and then became the birthplace of both the Baroque style and Neoclassicism. Famous artists, painters, sculptors, and architects made Rome the centre of their activity, creating masterpieces throughout the city. In 1871, Rome became the capital of the Kingdom of Italy, which, in 1946, became the Italian Republic.

In 2019, Rome was the 14th most visited city in the world, with 8.6 million tourists, the third most visited city in the European Union, and the most popular tourist destination in Italy. Its historic centre is listed by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site. The host city for the 1960 Summer Olympics, Rome is also the seat of several specialised agencies of the United Nations, such as the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the World Food Programme (WFP), the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the UN System Network on Rural Development and Food Security. The city also hosts the European Union (EU) Delegation to the United Nations (UN) and the Secretariat of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Union for the Mediterranean (UfM) as well as the headquarters of several Italian multinational companies, such as Eni, Enel, TIM, Leonardo, and banks such as BNL. Numerous companies are based within Rome&#x27;s EUR business district, such as the luxury fashion house Fendi located in the Palazzo della Civiltà Italiana. The presence of renowned international brands in the city has made Rome an important centre of fashion and design, and the Cinecittà Studios have been the set of many Academy Award–winning movies.

==Name and symbol==
===Etymology===
According to the Ancient Romans&#x27; founding myth, the name &quot;Roma&quot; came from the city&#x27;s founder and first king, Romulus.

However, it is possible that the name Romulus was actually derived from Rome itself. As early as the 4th century, there have been alternative theories proposed on the origin of the name &quot;Roma&quot;. Several hypotheses have been advanced focusing on its linguistic roots which however remain uncertain:
* From &quot;Rumon&quot; or &quot;Rumen&quot;, archaic name of the Tiber, which in turn is supposedly related to the Greek verb () &#x27;to flow, stream&#x27; and the Latin verb &#x27;to hurry, rush&#x27;;
* From the Etruscan word (), whose root is &quot;*rum-&quot; &quot;teat&quot;, with possible reference either to the totem wolf that adopted and suckled the cognately named twins Romulus and Remus, or to the shape of the Palatine and Aventine Hills;
* From the Greek word (), which means &quot;strength&quot;.

===Other names and symbols===
Rome has also been called in ancient times simply &quot;Urbs&quot; (central city), from &quot;urbs roma&quot;, or identified with its ancient Roman initialism of SPQR, the symbol of Rome&#x27;s constituted republican government. Furthermore, Rome has been called Urbs Aeterna (The Eternal City), Caput Mundi (The Capital of the world), Throne of St. Peter and Roma Capitale.

==History==

===Earliest history===

While there have been discoveries of archaeological evidence of human occupation of the Rome area from approximately 14,000 years ago, the dense layer of much younger debris obscures Palaeolithic and Neolithic sites. Evidence of stone tools, pottery, and stone weapons attest to about 10,000 years of human presence. Several excavations support the view that Rome grew from pastoral settlements on the Palatine Hill built above the area of the future Roman Forum. Between the end of the Bronze Age and the beginning of the Iron Age, each hill between the sea and the Capitoline Hill was topped by a village (on the Capitoline, a village is attested since the end of the 14th century BC). However, none of them yet had an urban quality. Nowadays, there is a wide consensus that the city developed gradually through the aggregation (&quot;synoecism&quot;) of several villages around the largest one, placed above the Palatine. This aggregation was facilitated by the increase of agricultural productivity above the subsistence level, which also allowed the establishment of secondary and tertiary activities. These, in turn, boosted the development of trade with the Greek colonies of southern Italy (mainly Ischia and Cumae). These developments, which according to archaeological evidence took place during the mid-eighth century BC, can be considered as the &quot;birth&quot; of the city. Despite recent excavations at the Palatine hill, the view that Rome was founded deliberately in the middle of the eighth century BC, as the legend of Romulus suggests, remains a fringe hypothesis.

====Legend of the founding of Rome====

Traditional stories handed down by the ancient Romans themselves explain the earliest history of their city in terms of legend and myth. The most familiar of these myths, and perhaps the most famous of all Roman myths, is the story of Romulus and Remus, the twins who were suckled by a she-wolf. They decided to build a city, but after an argument, Romulus killed his brother and the city took his name. According to the Roman annalists, this happened on 21 April 753 BC. This legend had to be reconciled with a dual tradition, set earlier in time, that had the Trojan refugee Aeneas escape to Italy and found the line of Romans through his son Iulus, the namesake of the Julio-Claudian dynasty. This was accomplished by the Roman poet Virgil in the first century BC. In addition, Strabo mentions an older story, that the city was an Arcadian colony founded by Evander. Strabo also writes that Lucius Coelius Antipater believed that Rome was founded by Greeks.

===Monarchy and republic===


After the foundation by Romulus according to a legend, Rome was ruled for a period of 244 years by a monarchical system, initially with sovereigns of Latin and Sabine origin, later by Etruscan kings. The tradition handed down seven kings: Romulus, Numa Pompilius, Tullus Hostilius, Ancus Marcius, Tarquinius Priscus, Servius Tullius and Lucius Tarquinius Superbus.

In 509 BC, the Romans expelled the last king from their city and established an oligarchic republic led by two annually-elected consuls. Rome then began a period characterised by internal struggles between patricians (aristocrats) and plebeians (small landowners), and by constant warfare against the populations of central Italy: Etruscans, Latins, Volsci, Aequi, and Marsi. After becoming master of Latium, Rome led several wars (against the Gauls, Osci-Samnites and the Greek colony of Taranto, allied with Pyrrhus, king of Epirus) whose result was the conquest of the Italian peninsula, from the central area up to Magna Graecia.

The 3rd and 4th century BC saw the establishment of Roman hegemony over the Mediterranean and the Balkans through the three Punic Wars (264–146 BC) fought against Carthage and the three Macedonian Wars (212–168 BC) against Macedonia. The first Roman provinces were established at this time: Sicily, Sardinia and Corsica, Hispania, Macedonia, Achaea and Africa.

From the beginning of the 2nd century BC, power was contested between two groups of aristocrats: the optimates, representing the conservative part of the Senate, and the populares, which relied on the help of the plebs (urban lower class) to gain power. In the same period, the bankruptcy of the small farmers and the establishment of large slave estates caused large-scale migration to the city. The continuous warfare led to the establishment of a professional army, which turned out to be more loyal to its generals than to the republic. Because of this, in the late 2nd and early 1st century BC there were several conflicts both abroad and internally: after the failed attempt of social reform of the populares Tiberius and Gaius Gracchus, and the war against Jugurtha, there was a civil war from which the general Sulla emerged victorious. A major slave revolt under Spartacus followed, and then the establishment of the first Triumvirate with Caesar, Pompey and Crassus.

The conquest of Gaul made Caesar immensely powerful and popular, which led to a civil war against the Senate and Pompey. After his victory, Caesar established himself as dictator for life. His assassination in 44 BC led to a second Triumvirate among Octavian (Caesar&#x27;s grandnephew and heir), Mark Antony and Lepidus, and to a final civil war between Octavian and Antony.

===Empire===

In 27 BC, Octavian was named &quot;Augustus&quot; and &quot;princeps&quot;, founding the principate, a diarchy between the &quot;princeps&quot; and the senate. Over time, the new monarch came to be known as the &quot;imperator&quot; (hence emperor), meaning &quot;commander&quot;. During the reign of Nero, two thirds of the city was ruined after the Great Fire of Rome, and the persecution of Christians commenced. Rome&#x27;s empire reached its greatest expansion in the second century under the Emperor Trajan. Rome was known as the caput Mundi, i.e. the capital of the known world, an expression which had already been used in the Republican period. During its first two centuries, the empire was ruled by emperors of the Julio-Claudian, Flavian (who built an eponymous amphitheatre known as the Colosseum), and Antonine dynasties. This time was also characterised by the spread of the Christian religion, preached by Jesus Christ in Judea in the first half of the first century (under Tiberius) and popularised by his apostles through the empire and beyond. The Antonine age is considered the zenith of the Empire, whose territory ranged from the Atlantic Ocean to the Euphrates and from Britain to Egypt.

After the end of the Severan dynasty in AD 235, the Empire entered into a 50-year period known as the Crisis of the Third Century, during which numerous generals fought for power and the central authority in Rome weakened dramatically. Around the same time, the Plague of Cyprian ( 250–270) afflicted the Mediterranean. Instability caused economic deterioration, and there was a rapid rise in inflation as the government debased the currency in order to meet expenses. The Germanic tribes along the Rhine and north of the Balkans made serious uncoordinated incursions that were more like giant raiding parties rather than attempts to settle. The Persian Empire invaded from the east several times during the 230s to 260s but were eventually defeated. The civil wars ended in 285 with the final victory of Diocletian, who undertook the restoration of the State. He ended the Principate and introduced a new authoritarian model known as the Dominate, derived from his title of &quot;dominus&quot; (&quot;lord&quot;). His most marked feature was the unprecedented intervention of the State down to the city level: whereas the State had submitted a tax demand to a city and allowed it to allocate the charges, from his reign the State did this down to the village level. In a vain attempt to control inflation, he imposed price controls which did not last.

Diocletian divided the empire in 286, ruling over the eastern half from Nicomedia, while his co-emperor Maximian ruled the western half from Mediolanum (when not on the move). The empire was further divided in 293, when Diocletian named two caesar, one for each augustus (emperor). Diocletian tried to turn into a system of non-dynastic succession, similar to the Antonine dynasty. Upon abdication in 305, both caesars succeeded and they, in turn, appointed two colleagues for themselves. However, a series of civil wars between rival claimants to power resulted in the unification of the empire under Constantine the Great in 324. Hereditary succession was restored, but the east–west division was maintained. Constantine undertook a major reform of the bureaucracy, not by changing the structure but by rationalising the competencies of the several ministries. The so-called Edict of Milan of 313, actually a fragment of a letter from his co-emperor Licinius to the governors of the eastern provinces, granted freedom of worship to everyone, including Christians, and ordered the restoration of confiscated church properties upon petition to the newly created vicars of dioceses. He funded the building of several churches and allowed clergy to act as arbitrators in civil suits (a measure that did not outlast him but which was restored in part much later). In 330, he transformed Byzantium into Constantinople, which became his new capital. However, it was not officially anything more than an imperial residence like Milan, Trier or Nicomedia until given a city prefect in 359 by Constantius II.

Constantine, following Diocletian&#x27;s reforms. regionalised the administration, which fundamentally changed the way it was governed by creating regional dioceses. The existence of regional fiscal units from 286 served as the model for this unprecedented innovation. The emperor quickened the process of removing military command from governors. Henceforth, civilian administration and military command would be separate. He gave governors more fiscal duties and placed them in charge of the army logistical support system as an attempt to control it by removing the support system from its control.

Christianity in the form of the Nicene Creed became the official religion of the empire in 380, via the Edict of Thessalonica issued in the name of three emperors – Gratian, Valentinian II, and Theodosius I – with Theodosius clearly the driving force behind it. He was the last emperor of a unified empire: after his death in 395, his young children, Honorius and Arcadius, inherited the western and eastern empires respectively. The seat of government in the Western Roman Empire was transferred to Ravenna in 408, but from 450 the emperors mostly resided in Rome.
Rome, which had lost its central role in the administration of the empire, was sacked in 410 by the Visigoths led by Alaric I, but very little physical damage was done, most of which was repaired. What could not be so easily replaced were portable items such as artwork in precious metals and items for domestic use (loot). The popes embellished the city with large basilicas, such as Santa Maria Maggiore (with the collaboration of the emperors). The population of the city had fallen from 800,000 to 450–500,000 by the time the city was sacked in 455 by Genseric, king of the Vandals. The weak emperors of the fifth century could not stop the decay, leading to the deposition of Romulus Augustus, who resided on Ravenna, on 4 September 476. This marked the end of the Western Roman Empire and, for many historians, the beginning of the Middle Ages.

The decline of the city&#x27;s population was caused by the loss of grain shipments from North Africa, from 440 onward, and the unwillingness of the senatorial class to maintain donations to support a population that was too large for the resources available. Even so, strenuous efforts were made to maintain the monumental centre, the palatine, and the largest baths, which continued to function until the Gothic siege of 537. The large baths of Constantine on the Quirinale were even repaired in 443, and the extent of the damage exaggerated and dramatised.

However, the city gave an appearance overall of shabbiness and decay because of the large abandoned areas due to population decline. The population declined to 500,000 by 452 and 100,000 by 500 AD (perhaps larger, though no certain figure can be known). After the Gothic siege of 537, the population dropped to 30,000 but had risen to 90,000 by the papacy of Gregory the Great. The population decline coincided with the general collapse of urban life in the West in the fifth and sixth centuries, with few exceptions. Subsidized state grain distributions to the poorer members of society continued right through the sixth century and probably prevented the population from falling further. The figure of 450,000–500,000 is based on the amount of pork, 3,629,000 lbs. distributed to poorer Romans during five winter months at the rate of five Roman lbs per person per month, enough for 145,000 persons or 1/4 or 1/3 of the total population. Grain distribution to 80,000 ticket holders at the same time suggests 400,000 (Augustus set the number at 200,000 or one-fifth of the population).

===Middle Ages===

After the fall of the Western Roman Empire in AD 476, Rome was first under the control of Odoacer and then became part of the Ostrogothic Kingdom before returning to East Roman control after the Gothic War, which devastated the city in 546 and 550. Its population declined from more than a million in AD 210 to 500,000 in AD 273 to 35,000 after the Gothic War (535–554), reducing the sprawling city to groups of inhabited buildings interspersed among large areas of ruins, vegetation, vineyards and market gardens. It is generally thought the population of the city until AD 300 was 1 million (estimates range from 2 million to 750,000) declining to 750–800,000 in AD 400, then 450–500,000 in AD 450 and down to 80–100,000 in AD 500 (though it may have been twice this).

The Bishop of Rome, called the Pope, was important since the early days of Christianity because of the martyrdom of both the apostles Peter and Paul there. The Bishops of Rome were also seen (and still are seen by Catholics) as the successors of Peter, who is considered the first Bishop of Rome. The city thus became of increasing importance as the centre of the Catholic Church.

After the Lombard invasion of Italy (569–572), the city remained nominally Byzantine, but in reality, the popes pursued a policy of equilibrium between the Byzantines, the Franks, and the Lombards. In 729, the Lombard king Liutprand donated the north Latium town of Sutri to the Church, starting its temporal power. In 756, Pepin the Short, after having defeated the Lombards, gave the Pope temporal jurisdiction over the Roman Duchy and the Exarchate of Ravenna, thus creating the Papal States. Since this period, three powers tried to rule the city: the pope, the nobility (together with the chiefs of militias, the judges, the Senate and the populace), and the Frankish king, as king of the Lombards, patricius, and Emperor. These three parties (theocratic, republican, and imperial) were a characteristic of Roman life during the entire Middle Ages. On Christmas night of 800, Charlemagne was crowned in Rome as Emperor by Pope Leo III: on that occasion, the city hosted for the first time the two powers whose struggle for control was to be a constant of the Middle Ages. This event marks the beginning of the Carolingian Empire, the first phase of the Holy Roman Empire.
In 846, Muslim Arabs unsuccessfully stormed the city&#x27;s walls, but managed to loot St. Peter&#x27;s and St. Paul&#x27;s basilica, both outside the city wall. After the decay of Carolingian power, Rome fell prey to feudal chaos: several noble families fought against the pope, the emperor, and each other. These were the times of Theodora and her daughter Marozia, concubines and mothers of several popes, and of Crescentius, a powerful feudal lord, who fought against the Emperors Otto II and Otto III. The scandals of this period forced the papacy to reform itself: the election of the pope was reserved to the cardinals, and reform of the clergy was attempted. The driving force behind this renewal was the monk Ildebrando da Soana, who once elected pope under the name of Gregory VII became involved into the Investiture Controversy against Emperor Henry IV. Subsequently, Rome was sacked and burned by the Normans under Robert Guiscard who had entered the city in support of the Pope, then besieged in Castel Sant&#x27;Angelo.

During this period, the city was autonomously ruled by a &quot;senatore&quot; or &quot;patrizio&quot;. In the 12th century, this administration, like other European cities, evolved into the commune, a new form of social organisation controlled by the new wealthy classes. Pope Lucius II fought against the Roman commune, and the struggle was continued by his successor Pope Eugenius III: by this stage, the commune, allied with the aristocracy, was supported by Arnaldo da Brescia, a monk who was a religious and social reformer. After the pope&#x27;s death, Arnaldo was taken prisoner by Adrianus IV, which marked the end of the commune&#x27;s autonomy. Under Pope Innocent III, whose reign marked the apogee of the papacy, the commune liquidated the senate, and replaced it with a &quot;Senatore&quot;, who was subject to the pope.

In this period, the papacy played a role of secular importance in Western Europe, often acting as arbitrators between Christian monarchs and exercising additional political powers.

In 1266, Charles of Anjou, who was heading south to fight the Hohenstaufen on behalf of the pope, was appointed Senator. Charles founded the Sapienza, the university of Rome. In that period the pope died, and the cardinals, summoned in Viterbo, could not agree on his successor. This angered the people of the city, who then unroofed the building where they met and imprisoned them until they had nominated the new pope; this marked the birth of the conclave. In this period the city was also shattered by continuous fights between the aristocratic families: Annibaldi, Caetani, Colonna, Orsini, Conti, nested in their fortresses built above ancient Roman edifices, fought each other to control the papacy.
Pope Boniface VIII, born Caetani, was the last pope to fight for the church&#x27;s universal domain; he proclaimed a crusade against the Colonna family and, in 1300, called for the first Jubilee of Christianity, which brought millions of pilgrims to Rome. However, his hopes were crushed by the French king Philip the Fair, who took him prisoner and held him hostage for three days at Anagni. The Pope was able to return to Rome, but died a month later, it was said of shock and grief. Afterwards, a new pope faithful to the French was elected, and the papacy was briefly relocated to Avignon (1309–1377). During this period Rome was neglected, until a plebeian man, Cola di Rienzo, came to power. An idealist and a lover of ancient Rome, Cola dreamed about a rebirth of the Roman Empire: after assuming power with the title of &quot;Tribuno&quot;, his reforms were rejected by the populace. Forced to flee, Cola returned as part of the entourage of Cardinal Albornoz, who was charged with restoring the Church&#x27;s power in Italy. Back in power for a short time, Cola was soon lynched by the populace, and Albornoz took possession of the city. In 1377, Rome became the seat of the papacy again under Gregory XI. The return of the pope to Rome in that year unleashed the Western Schism (1377–1418), and for the next forty years, the city was affected by the divisions which rocked the Church.

===Early modern history===


In 1418, the Council of Constance settled the Western Schism, and a Roman pope, Martin V, was elected. This brought to Rome a century of internal peace, which marked the beginning of the Renaissance. The ruling popes until the first half of the 16th century, from Nicholas V, founder of the Vatican Library, to Pius II, humanist and literate, from Sixtus IV, a warrior pope, to Alexander VI, immoral and nepotist, from Julius II, soldier and patron, to Leo X, who gave his name to this period (&quot;the century of Leo X&quot;), all devoted their energy to the greatness and the beauty of the Eternal City and to the patronage of the arts.

During those years, the centre of the Italian Renaissance moved to Rome from Florence. Majestic works, as the new Saint Peter&#x27;s Basilica, the Sistine Chapel and &quot;Ponte Sisto&quot; (the first bridge to be built across the Tiber since antiquity, although on Roman foundations) were created. To accomplish that, the Popes engaged the best artists of the time, including Michelangelo, Perugino, Raphael, Ghirlandaio, Luca Signorelli, Botticelli, and Cosimo Rosselli.

The period was also infamous for papal corruption, with many Popes fathering children, and engaging in nepotism and simony. The corruption of the Popes and the huge expenses for their building projects led, in part, to the Reformation and, in turn, the Counter-Reformation. Under extravagant and rich popes, Rome was transformed into a centre of art, poetry, music, literature, education and culture. Rome became able to compete with other major European cities of the time in terms of wealth, grandeur, the arts, learning and architecture.

The Renaissance period changed the face of Rome dramatically, with works like the Pietà by Michelangelo and the frescoes of the Borgia Apartments. Rome reached the highest point of splendour under Pope Julius II (1503–1513) and his successors Leo X and Clement VII, both members of the Medici family.

In this twenty-year period, Rome became one of the greatest centres of art in the world. The old St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica built by Emperor Constantine the Great (which by then was in a dilapidated state) was demolished and a new one begun. The city hosted artists like Ghirlandaio, Perugino, Botticelli and Bramante, who built the temple of San Pietro in Montorio and planned a great project to renovate the Vatican. Raphael, who in Rome became one of the most famous painters of Italy, created frescoes in the Villa Farnesina, the Raphael&#x27;s Rooms, plus many other famous paintings. Michelangelo started the decoration of the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel and executed the famous statue of the Moses for the tomb of Julius II.

Its economy was rich, with the presence of several Tuscan bankers, including Agostino Chigi, who was a friend of Raphael and a patron of arts. Before his early death, Raphael also promoted for the first time the preservation of the ancient ruins. The War of the League of Cognac caused the first plunder of the city in more than five hundred years since the previous sack; in 1527, the Landsknechts of Emperor Charles V sacked the city, bringing an abrupt end to the golden age of the Renaissance in Rome.

Beginning with the Council of Trent in 1545, the Church began the Counter-Reformation in response to the Reformation, a large-scale questioning of the Church&#x27;s authority on spiritual matters and governmental affairs. This loss of confidence led to major shifts of power away from the Church. Under the popes from Pius IV to Sixtus V, Rome became the centre of a reformed Catholicism and saw the building of new monuments which celebrated the papacy. The popes and cardinals of the 17th and early 18th centuries continued the movement by having the city&#x27;s landscape enriched with baroque buildings.

This was another nepotistic age; the new aristocratic families (Barberini, Pamphili, Chigi, Rospigliosi, Altieri, Odescalchi) were protected by their respective popes, who built huge baroque buildings for their relatives. During the Age of Enlightenment, new ideas reached the Eternal City, where the papacy supported archaeological studies and improved the people&#x27;s welfare. But not everything went well for the Church during the Counter-Reformation. There were setbacks in the attempts to assert the Church&#x27;s power, a notable example being in 1773 when Pope Clement XIV was forced by secular powers to have the Jesuit order suppressed.

===Late modern and contemporary===
The rule of the Popes was interrupted by the short-lived Roman Republic (1798–1800), which was established under the influence of the French Revolution. The Papal States were restored in June 1800, but during Napoleon&#x27;s reign Rome was annexed as a &quot;Département&quot; of the French Empire: first as &quot;Département du Tibre&quot; (1808–1810) and then as &quot;Département Rome&quot; (1810–1814). After the fall of Napoleon, the Papal States were reconstituted by a decision of the Congress of Vienna of 1814.

In 1849, a second Roman Republic was proclaimed during a year of revolutions in 1848. Two of the most influential figures of the Italian unification, Giuseppe Mazzini and Giuseppe Garibaldi, fought for the short-lived republic.

Rome then became the focus of hopes of Italian reunification after the rest of Italy was united as the Kingdom of Italy in 1861 with the temporary capital in Florence. That year Rome was declared the capital of Italy even though it was still under the Pope&#x27;s control. During the 1860s, the last vestiges of the Papal States were under French protection thanks to the foreign policy of Napoleon III. French troops were stationed in the region under Papal control. In 1870 the French troops were withdrawn due to the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War. Italian troops were able to capture Rome entering the city through a breach near Porta Pia. Pope Pius IX declared himself a prisoner in the Vatican. In 1871 the capital of Italy was moved from Florence to Rome. In 1870 the population of the city was 212,000, all of whom lived with the area circumscribed by the ancient city, and in 1920, the population was 660,000. A significant portion lived outside the walls in the north and across the Tiber in the Vatican area.

Soon after World War I in late 1922 Rome witnessed the rise of Italian Fascism led by Benito Mussolini, who led a march on the city. He did away with democracy by 1926, eventually declaring a new Italian Empire and allying Italy with Nazi Germany in 1938. Mussolini demolished fairly large parts of the city centre in order to build wide avenues and squares which were supposed to celebrate the fascist regime and the resurgence and glorification of classical Rome. The interwar period saw a rapid growth in the city&#x27;s population which surpassed one million inhabitants soon after 1930. During World War II, due to the art treasuries and the presence of the Vatican, Rome largely escaped the tragic destiny of other European cities. However, on 19 July 1943, the San Lorenzo district was subject to Allied bombing raids, resulting in about 3,000 fatalities and 11,000 injuries, of whom another 1,500 died. Mussolini was arrested on 25 July 1943. On the date of the Italian Armistice 8 September 1943 the city was occupied by the Germans. Allied bombing raids continued throughout 1943 and extended into 1944. Rome was liberated on 4 June 1944.

Rome developed greatly after the war as part of the &quot;Italian economic miracle&quot; of post-war reconstruction and modernisation in the 1950s and early 1960s. During this period, the years of &quot;la dolce vita&quot; (&quot;the sweet life&quot;), Rome became a fashionable city, with popular classic films such as &quot;Ben Hur&quot;, &quot;Quo Vadis&quot;, &quot;Roman Holiday&quot; and &quot;La Dolce Vita&quot; filmed in the city&#x27;s iconic Cinecittà Studios. The rising trend in population growth continued until the mid-1980s when the &quot;comune&quot; had more than 2.8 million residents. After this, the population declined slowly as people began to move to nearby suburbs.

==Geography==
===Location===
Rome is in the Lazio region of central Italy on the Tiber () river. The original settlement developed on hills that faced onto a ford beside the Tiber Island, the only natural ford of the river in this area. The Rome of the Kings was built on seven hills: the Aventine Hill, the Caelian Hill, the Capitoline Hill, the Esquiline Hill, the Palatine Hill, the Quirinal Hill, and the Viminal Hill. Modern Rome is also crossed by another river, the Aniene, which flows into the Tiber north of the historic centre.

Although the city centre is about inland from the Tyrrhenian Sea, the city territory extends to the shore, where the south-western district of Ostia is located. The altitude of the central part of Rome ranges from above sea level (at the base of the Pantheon) to above sea level (the peak of Monte Mario). The &quot;Comune&quot; of Rome covers an overall area of about , including many green areas.

===Parks and gardens===

Public parks and nature reserves cover a large area in Rome, and the city has one of the largest areas of green space among European capitals. The most notable part of this green space is represented by the large number of villas and landscaped gardens created by the Italian aristocracy. While most of the parks surrounding the villas were destroyed during the building boom of the late 19th century, some of them remain. The most notable of these are the Villa Borghese, Villa Ada, and Villa Doria Pamphili. Villa Doria Pamphili is west of the Gianicolo hill, comprising some . The Villa Sciarra is on the hill, with playgrounds for children and shaded walking areas. In the nearby area of Trastevere, the Orto Botanico (Botanical Garden) is a cool and shady green space. The old Roman hippodrome (Circus Maximus) is another large green space: it has few trees but is overlooked by the Palatine and the Rose Garden (&#x27;roseto comunale&#x27;). Nearby is the lush Villa Celimontana, close to the gardens surrounding the Baths of Caracalla. The Villa Borghese garden is the best known large green space in Rome, with famous art galleries among its shaded walks. Overlooking Piazza del Popolo and the Spanish Steps are the gardens of Pincio and Villa Medici. There is also a notable pine wood at Castelfusano, near Ostia. Rome also has a number of regional parks of much more recent origin, including the Pineto Regional Park and the Appian Way Regional Park. There are also nature reserves at Marcigliana and at Tenuta di Castelporziano.

===Climate===

Rome has a Mediterranean climate (Köppen climate classification: &quot;Csa&quot;), with hot, dry summers and mild, humid winters.

Its average annual temperature is above during the day and at night. In the coldest month, January, the average temperature is during the day and at night. In the warmest month, August, the average temperature is during the day and at night.

December, January and February are the coldest months, with a daily mean temperature of approximately . Temperatures during these months generally vary between during the day and between at night, with colder or warmer spells occurring frequently. Snowfall is rare but not unheard of, with light snow or flurries occurring on some winters, generally without accumulation, and major snowfalls on a very rare occurrence (the most recent ones were in 2018, 2012 and 1986).

The average relative humidity is 75%, varying from 72% in July to 77% in November. Sea temperatures vary from a low of in February to a high of in August.

The highest temperature ever recorded in Rome was on 18 July 2023.

==Demographics== 


By 550 BC, Rome was the second largest city in Italy after only Taras (modern Taranto) on the Salento Peninsula. It had an area of about and an estimated population of 35,000. Other sources suggest the population was just under 100,000 from 600 to 500 BC. When the Republic was founded in 509 BC the census recorded a population of 130,000. The republic included the city itself and the immediate surroundings. Other sources suggest a population of 150,000 in 500 BC. It surpassed 300,000 by 150 BC.

The size of the city at the time of the Emperor Augustus is a matter of speculation, with estimates based on grain distribution, grain imports, aqueduct capacity, city limits, population density, census reports, and assumptions about the number of unreported women, children and slaves providing a very wide range. Glenn Storey estimates 450,000 people, Whitney Oates estimates 1.2 million, Neville Morely provides a rough estimate of 800,000 and excludes earlier suggestions of 2 million. Estimates of the city&#x27;s population towards and after the end of the Roman empire also vary. A.H.M. Jones estimated the population at 650,000 in the mid-fifth century. The damage caused by the sackings may have been overestimated. The population had already started to decline from the late fourth century onward, although around the middle of the fifth century it seems that Rome continued to be the most populous city of the two parts of the Empire. According to Krautheimer it was still close to 800,000 in 400 AD; had declined to 500,000 by 452, and dwindled to perhaps 100,000 in 500 AD. After the Gothic Wars, 535–552, the population may have dwindled temporarily to 30,000. During the pontificate of Pope Gregory I (590–604), it may have reached 90,000, augmented by refugees. Lancon estimates 500,000 based on the number of &#x27;incisi&#x27; enrolled as eligible to receive bread, oil and wine rations; the number fell to 120,000 in the reform of 419. Neil Christie, citing free rations for the poorest, estimated 500,000 in the mid-fifth century and still a quarter of a million at the end of the century. Novel 36 of Emperor Valentinian III records 3.629 million pounds of pork to be distributed to the needy at 5 lbs. per month for the five winter months, sufficient for 145,000 recipients. This has been used to suggest a population of just under 500,000. Supplies of grain remained steady until the seizure of the remaining provinces of North Africa in 439 by the Vandals, and may have continued to some degree afterwards for a while. The city&#x27;s population declined to less than 50,000 people in the Early Middle Ages from 700 AD onward. It continued to stagnate or shrink until the Renaissance.

When the Kingdom of Italy annexed Rome in 1870, the city had a population of about 225,000. Less than half the city within the walls was built up in 1881 when the population recorded was 275,000. This increased to 600,000 by the eve of World War I. The Fascist regime of Mussolini tried to block an excessive demographic rise of the city but failed to prevent it from reaching one million people by the early 1930s. Population growth continued after the Second World War, helped by a post-war economic boom. A construction boom also created many suburbs during the 1950s and 1960s.

In mid-2010, there were 2,754,440 residents in the city proper, while some 4.2 million people lived in the greater Rome area (which can be approximately identified with its administrative metropolitan city, with a population density of about 800 inhabitants/km2 stretching over more than ). Minors (children ages 18 and younger) totalled 17.00% of the population compared to pensioners who number 20.76%. This compares with the Italian average of 18.06% (minors) and 19.94% (pensioners). The average age of a Roman resident is 43 compared to the Italian average of 42. In the five years between 2002 and 2007, the population of Rome grew by 6.54%, while Italy as a whole grew by 3.56%. The current birth rate of Rome is 9.10 births per 1,000 inhabitants compared to the Italian average of 9.45 births.

The urban area of Rome extends beyond the administrative city limits with a population of around 3.9 million. Between 3.2 and 4.2 million people live in the Rome metropolitan area.

===Origin groups===

According to the 2011 statistics conducted by ISTAT, approximately 9.5% of the population consists of non-Italians. About half of the immigrant population consists of those of various other European origins (chiefly Romanian, Polish, Ukrainian, and Albanian) numbering a combined total of 131,118 or 4.7% of the population. The remaining 4.8% are those with non-European origins, chiefly Filipinos (26,933), Bangladeshis (12,154), and Chinese (10,283).

The Esquilino &quot;rione&quot;, off Termini Railway Station, has evolved into a largely immigrant neighbourhood. It is perceived as Rome&#x27;s Chinatown. Immigrants from more than a hundred different countries reside there. A commercial district, Esquilino contains restaurants featuring many kinds of international cuisine. There are wholesale clothes shops. Of the 1,300 or so commercial premises operating in the district 800 are Chinese-owned; around 300 are run by immigrants from other countries around the world; 200 are owned by Italians.

Summary table
===Language===

Rome&#x27;s historic contribution to language in a worldwide sense is extensive. Through the process of Romanization, the peoples of Italy, Gallia, the Iberian Peninsula and Dacia developed languages which derive directly from Latin and were adopted in large areas of the world, all through cultural influence, colonisation and migration. Moreover, also modern English, because of the Norman Conquest, borrowed a large percentage of its vocabulary from the Latin language. The Roman or Latin alphabet is the most widely used writing system in the world used by the greatest number of languages.

The medieval Roman dialect belonged to the southern family of Italian dialects, and was thus much closer to the Neapolitan language than to the Florentine. A typical example of Romanesco of that period is &quot;&quot; (&quot;Life of Cola di Rienzo&quot;), written by an anonymous Roman during the 14th century. Starting with the 16th century, the Roman dialect underwent a stronger and stronger influence from the Tuscan dialect (from which modern Italian derives) starting with the reigns of the two Medici popes (Leo X and Clement VII) and with the Sack of Rome in 1527, two events which provoked a large immigration from Tuscany. Therefore, current Romanesco has grammar and roots that are rather different from other dialects in Central Italy.

===Religion===


Much like the rest of Italy, Rome is predominantly Christian, and the city has been an important centre of religion and pilgrimage for centuries, the base of the ancient Roman religion with the pontifex maximus and later the seat of the Vatican and the pope. Before the arrival of the Christians in Rome, the Religio Romana (literally, the &quot;Roman Religion&quot;) was the major religion of the city in classical antiquity. The first gods held sacred by the Romans were Jupiter, the Most High, and Mars, the god of war, and father of Rome&#x27;s twin founders, Romulus and Remus, according to tradition. Other deities such as Vesta and Minerva were honoured. Rome was also the base of several mystery cults, such as Mithraism. Later, after St Peter and St Paul were martyred in the city, and the first Christians began to arrive, Rome became Christian, and the Old St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica was constructed in 313 AD. Despite some interruptions (such as the Avignon papacy), Rome has for centuries been the home of the Roman Catholic Church and the Bishop of Rome, otherwise known as the Pope.

Despite the fact that Rome is home to the Vatican City and St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica, Rome&#x27;s cathedral is the Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran, in the south-east of the city centre. There are around 900 churches in Rome in total. Aside from the cathedral itself, some others of note include the Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore, the Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls, the Basilica di San Clemente, San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane and the Church of the Gesù. There are also the ancient Catacombs of Rome underneath the city. Numerous highly important religious educational institutions are also in Rome, such as the Pontifical Lateran University, Pontifical Biblical Institute, Pontifical Gregorian University, and Pontifical Oriental Institute.

Since the end of the Roman Republic, Rome is also the centre of an important Jewish community, which was once based in Trastevere, and later in the Roman Ghetto. There lies also the major synagogue in Rome, the &quot;Tempio Maggiore&quot;.

The territory of Vatican City is part of the &quot;Mons Vaticanus&quot; (Vatican Hill), and of the adjacent former Vatican Fields, where St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica, the Apostolic Palace, the Sistine Chapel, and museums were built, along with various other buildings. The area was part of the Roman rione of Borgo until 1929. Being separated from the city on the west bank of the Tiber, the area was a suburb that was protected by being included within the walls of Leo IV, later expanded by the current fortification walls of Paul III, Pius IV, and Urban VIII. When the Lateran Treaty of 1929 that created the Vatican state was being prepared, the boundaries of the proposed territory were influenced by the fact that much of it was all but enclosed by this loop.

Rome has been a major Christian pilgrimage site since the Middle Ages. People from all over the Christian world visit Vatican City, within the city of Rome, the seat of the papacy. The city became a major pilgrimage site during the Middle Ages. Apart from brief periods as an independent city during the Middle Ages, Rome kept its status as Papal capital and holy city for centuries, even when the Papacy briefly relocated to Avignon (1309–1377). Catholics believe that the Vatican is the last resting place of St. Peter. Pilgrimages to Rome can involve visits to many sites, both within Vatican City and in Italian territory. A popular stopping point is the Pilate&#x27;s stairs: these are, according to the Christian tradition, the steps that led up to the praetorium of Pontius Pilate in Jerusalem, which Jesus Christ stood on during his Passion on his way to trial.

In addition, Rome hosts multiple Buddhist temples, a Taoist temple , and a variety of Roman modern pagan temples held by the Associazione Tradizionale Pietas which every year takes part in the religious festivities of the Natale di Roma, historically known as &quot;Dies Romana&quot; and also referred to as Romaia, the festival linked to the foundation of Rome, celebrated on 21 April. According to legend, Romulus is said to have founded the city of Rome on 21 April, 753 BC. From this date, the Roman chronology derived its system, known by the Latin phrase &quot;Ab Urbe condita&quot;, meaning &quot;from the founding of the City&quot;, which counted the years from this presumed foundation.

==Government==


Rome constitutes a comune &quot;speciale&quot;, named &quot;Roma Capitale&quot;, and is the largest both in terms of land area and population among the 8,101 &quot;comuni&quot; of Italy. It is governed by a mayor and a city council. The seat of the &quot;comune&quot; is the &quot;Palazzo Senatorio&quot; on the Capitoline Hill, the historic seat of the city government. The local administration in Rome is commonly referred to as &quot;Campidoglio&quot;, the Italian name of the hill. &quot;Palazzo Senatorio&quot;, seat of the municipality of Rome, has been a town hall since AD 1144, making it the oldest town hall in the world.

Since 1972, the city has been divided into administrative areas, called &quot;municipi&quot; (sing. &quot;municipio&quot;) (until 2001 named &quot;circoscrizioni&quot;). They were created for administrative reasons to increase decentralisation in the city. Each &quot;municipio&quot; is governed by a president and a council of twenty-five members who are elected by its residents every five years. The &quot;municipi&quot; frequently cross the boundaries of the traditional, non-administrative divisions of the city. The municipi were originally 20, then 19, and in 2013, their number was reduced to 15.

Rome is also divided into differing types of non-administrative units. The historic centre is divided into 22 &quot;rioni&quot;, all of which are located within the Aurelian Walls except Prati and Borgo. These originate from the 14 regions of Augustan Rome, which evolved in the Middle Ages into the medieval rioni. In the Renaissance, under Pope Sixtus V, they again reached fourteen, and their boundaries were finally defined under Pope Benedict XIV in 1743.

Rome is the principal town of the Metropolitan City of Rome, operative since 1 January 2015. The Metropolitan City replaced the old provincia di Roma, which included the city&#x27;s metropolitan area and extends further north until Civitavecchia. The Metropolitan City of Rome is the largest by area in Italy. At , its dimensions are comparable to the region of Liguria. Moreover, the city is also the capital of the Lazio region.

Rome is the national capital of Italy and is the seat of the Italian Government. The official residences of the President of the Italian Republic and the Italian Prime Minister, the seats of both houses of the Italian Parliament and that of the Italian Constitutional Court are located in the historic centre. The state ministries are spread out around the city; these include the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which is located in Palazzo della Farnesina near the Olympic stadium.

===International relations===
Among the global cities, Rome is unique in having two sovereign entities located entirely within its city limits, the Holy See, represented by the Vatican City State, and the territorially smaller Sovereign Military Order of Malta. The Vatican is an enclave of the Italian capital city and a sovereign possession of the Holy See, which is the Diocese of Rome and the supreme government of the Roman Catholic Church. For this reason, Rome has sometimes been described as the capital of two states. Rome is the seat of the so-called &quot;Polo Romano&quot; made up by three main international agencies of the United Nations: the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the World Food Programme (WFP) and the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD).

Rome has traditionally been involved in the process of European political integration. The Treaties of the EU are located in Palazzo della Farnesina. In 1957 the city hosted the signing of the Treaty of Rome, which established the European Economic Community (predecessor to the European Union), and also played host to the official signing of the proposed European Constitution in July 2004. Rome is the seat of the European Olympic Committee and of the NATO Defense College. The city is the place where the Statute of the International Criminal Court and the European Convention on Human Rights were formulated. The city hosts also other important international entities such as the IDLO (International Development Law Organisation), the ICCROM (International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property) and the UNIDROIT (International Institute for the Unification of Private Law).

====Twin towns and sister cities====
Since April 1956, Rome is exclusively and reciprocally twinned with:
* Paris, France
: &quot;Solo Parigi è degna di Roma; solo Roma è degna di Parigi.&quot; 
: &quot;Seule Paris est digne de Rome; seule Rome est digne de Paris.&quot; 
: &quot;Only Paris is worthy of Rome; only Rome is worthy of Paris.&quot;

Rome&#x27;s other partner cities are:
==Economy==

As the capital of Italy, Rome hosts all the principal institutions of the nation, including the Presidency of the Republic, the government (and its single ), the Parliament, the main judicial Courts, and the diplomatic representatives of all the countries for the states of Italy and Vatican City. Many international institutions are located in Rome, notably cultural and scientific ones, such as the American Institute, the British School, the French Academy, the Scandinavian Institutes, and the German Archaeological Institute. There are also specialised agencies of the United Nations, such as the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). Rome also hosts major international and worldwide political and cultural organisations, such as the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), World Food Programme (WFP), the NATO Defence College, and the International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property (ICCROM).

According to the GaWC study of world cities, Rome is a &quot;Beta +&quot; city. The city was ranked in 2014 as 32nd in the Global Cities Index, the highest in Italy. With a 2005 GDP of €94.376 billion (US$121.5 billion), the city produces 6.7% of the national GDP (more than any other single city in Italy), and its unemployment rate, lowered from 11.1% to 6.5% between 2001 and 2005, is now one of the lowest rates of all the European Union capital cities. Rome&#x27;s economy grows at around 4.4% annually and continues to grow at a higher rate in comparison to any other city in the rest of the country. This means that were Rome a country, it would be the world&#x27;s 52nd richest country by GDP, near to the size to that of Egypt. Rome also had a 2003 GDP per capita of €29,153 (US$37,412), which was second in Italy (after Milan), and is more than 134.1% of the EU average GDP per capita. Rome, on the whole, has the highest total earnings in Italy, reaching €47,076,890,463 in 2008, yet, in terms of average workers&#x27; incomes, the city places itself 9th in Italy, with €24,509. On a global level, Rome&#x27;s workers receive the 30th highest wages in 2009, coming three places higher than in 2008, in which the city ranked 33rd. The Rome area had a GDP amounting to $167.8 billion, and $38,765 per capita.

Although the economy of Rome is characterised by the absence of heavy industry, and it is largely dominated by services, high-technology companies (IT, aerospace, defence, telecommunications), research, construction and commercial activities (especially banking), and the huge development of tourism are very dynamic and extremely important to its economy. Rome&#x27;s international airport, Fiumicino, is the largest in Italy, and the city hosts the head offices of the vast majority of the major Italian companies, as well as the headquarters of three of the world&#x27;s 100 largest companies: Enel, Eni, and Telecom Italia.

Universities, national radio and television and the movie industry in Rome are also important parts of the economy: Rome is also the hub of the Italian film industry, thanks to the Cinecittà studios, working since the 1930s. The city is also a centre for banking and insurance as well as electronics, energy, transport, and aerospace industries. Numerous international companies and agencies headquarters, government ministries, conference centres, sports venues, and museums are located in Rome&#x27;s principal business districts: the Esposizione Universale Roma (EUR); the &quot;Torrino&quot; (further south from the EUR); the &quot;Magliana&quot;; the &quot;Parco de&#x27; Medici-Laurentina&quot; and the so-called &quot;Tiburtina-valley&quot; along the ancient Via Tiburtina.

===Tourism===

Rome today is one of the most important tourist destinations of the world, due to the incalculable immensity of its archaeological and artistic treasures, as well as for the charm of its unique traditions, the beauty of its panoramic views, and the majesty of its magnificent &quot;villas&quot; (parks). Among the most significant resources are the many museums – Capitoline Museums, the Vatican Museums and the and others dedicated to modern and contemporary art – aqueducts, fountains, churches, palaces, historical buildings, the monuments and ruins of the Roman Forum, and the Catacombs. Rome is the third most visited city in the EU, after London and Paris, and receives an average of 7–10 million tourists a year, which sometimes doubles on holy years. The Colosseum (4 million tourists) and the Vatican Museums (4.2 million tourists) are the 39th and 37th (respectively) most visited places in the world, according to a recent study.

Rome is a major archaeological hub, and one of the world&#x27;s main centres of archaeological research. There are numerous cultural and research institutes located in the city, such as the American Academy in Rome, and The Swedish Institute at Rome. Rome contains numerous ancient sites, including the Forum Romanum, Trajan&#x27;s Market, Trajan&#x27;s Forum, the Colosseum, and the Pantheon, to name but a few. The Colosseum, arguably one of Rome&#x27;s most iconic archaeological sites, is regarded as a wonder of the world.

Rome contains a vast collection of art, sculpture, fountains, mosaics, frescos, and paintings, from all different periods. Rome first became a major artistic centre during ancient Rome, with forms of important Roman art such as architecture, painting, sculpture and mosaic work. Metal-work, coin die and gem engraving, ivory carvings, figurine glass, pottery, and book illustrations are considered to be &#x27;minor&#x27; forms of Roman artwork. Rome later became a major centre of Renaissance art, since the popes spent vast sums of money for the constructions of grandiose basilicas, palaces, piazzas and public buildings in general. Rome became one of Europe&#x27;s major centres of Renaissance artwork, second only to Florence, and able to compare to other major cities and cultural centres, such as Paris and Venice. The city was affected greatly by the baroque, and Rome became the home of numerous artists and architects, such as Bernini, Caravaggio, Carracci, Borromini and Cortona. In the late 18th century and early 19th century, the city was one of the centres of the Grand Tour, when wealthy, young English and other European aristocrats visited the city to learn about ancient Roman culture, art, philosophy, and architecture. Rome hosted a great number of neoclassical and rococo artists, such as Pannini and Bernardo Bellotto. Today, the city is a major artistic centre, with numerous art institutes and museums.

Rome has a growing stock of contemporary and modern art and architecture. The National Gallery of Modern Art has works by Balla, Morandi, Pirandello, Carrà, De Chirico, De Pisis, Guttuso, Fontana, Burri, Mastroianni, Turcato, Kandisky, and Cézanne on permanent exhibition. 2010 saw the opening of Rome&#x27;s newest arts foundation, a contemporary art and architecture gallery designed by acclaimed Iraqi architect Zaha Hadid. Known as MAXXI – National Museum of the 21st Century Arts it restores a dilapidated area with striking modern architecture. Maxxi features a campus dedicated to culture, experimental research laboratories, international exchange and study and research. It is one of Rome&#x27;s most ambitious modern architecture projects alongside Renzo Piano&#x27;s Auditorium Parco della Musica and Massimiliano Fuksas&#x27; Rome Convention Center, Centro Congressi Italia EUR, in the EUR district, due to open in 2016. The convention centre features a huge translucent container inside which is suspended a steel and teflon structure resembling a cloud and which contains meeting rooms and an auditorium with two piazzas open to the neighbourhood on either side.

==Education==
Rome is a nationwide and major international centre for higher education, containing numerous academies, colleges and universities. It boasts a large variety of academies and colleges, and has always been a major worldwide intellectual and educational centre, especially during Ancient Rome and the Renaissance, along with Florence. According to the City Brands Index, Rome is considered the world&#x27;s second most historically, educationally and culturally interesting and beautiful city.

Rome has many universities and colleges. Its first university, La Sapienza (founded in 1303), is one of the largest in the world, with more than 140,000 students attending; in 2005 it ranked as Europe&#x27;s 33rd best university and in 2013 the Sapienza University of Rome ranked as the 62nd in the world and the top in Italy in its &quot;World University Rankings&quot;. and has been ranked among Europe&#x27;s 50 and the world&#x27;s 150 best colleges. In order to decrease the overcrowding of La Sapienza, two new public universities were founded during the last decades: Tor Vergata in 1982, and Roma Tre in 1992. Rome hosts also the LUISS School of Government, Italy&#x27;s most important graduate university in the areas of international affairs and European studies as well as LUISS Business School, Italy&#x27;s most important business school. Rome ISIA was founded in 1973 by Giulio Carlo Argan and is Italy&#x27;s oldest institution in the field of industrial design.
Rome contains many pontifical universities and other institutes, including the British School at Rome, the French School in Rome, the Pontifical Gregorian University (the oldest Jesuit university in the world, founded in 1551), Istituto Europeo di Design, the Scuola Lorenzo de&#x27; Medici, the Link Campus of Malta, and the Università Campus Bio-Medico. Rome is also the location of two American Universities; The American University of Rome and John Cabot University as well as St. John&#x27;s University branch campus, John Felice Rome Center, a campus of Loyola University Chicago and Temple University Rome, a campus of Temple University. The Roman Colleges are several seminaries for students from foreign countries studying for the priesthood at the Pontifical Universities. Examples include the Venerable English College, the Pontifical North American College, the Scots College, and the Pontifical Croatian College of St. Jerome. Rome&#x27;s major libraries include: the , opened in 1604, making it Italy&#x27;s first public library; the Biblioteca Vallicelliana, established in 1565; the Biblioteca Casanatense, opened in 1701; the National Central Library, one of the two national libraries in Italy, which contains 4,126,002 volumes; The Biblioteca del Ministero degli Affari Esteri, specialised in diplomacy, foreign affairs and modern history; the Biblioteca dell&#x27;Istituto dell&#x27;Enciclopedia Italiana; the Biblioteca Don Bosco, one of the largest and most modern of all Salesian libraries; the Biblioteca e Museo teatrale del Burcardo, a museum-library specialised in history of drama and theatre; the Biblioteca della Società Geografica Italiana, which is based in the Villa Celimontana and is the most important geographical library in Italy, and one of Europe&#x27;s most important; and the Vatican Library, one of the oldest and most important libraries in the world, which was formally established in 1475, though in fact much older and has 75,000 codices, as well as 1.1 million printed books, which include some 8,500 incunabula. There are also many specialist libraries attached to various foreign cultural institutes in Rome, among them that of the American Academy in Rome, the French Academy in Rome and the Bibliotheca Hertziana – Max Planck Institute of Art History, a German library, often noted for excellence in the arts and sciences.

==Culture==
===Architecture===

====Fountains and aqueducts====

Rome is a city known for its numerous fountains, built-in all different styles, from Classical and Medieval, to Baroque and Neoclassical. The city has had fountains for more than two thousand years, and they have provided drinking water and decorated the piazzas of Rome. During the Roman Empire, in 98 AD, according to Sextus Julius Frontinus, the Roman consul who was named &quot;curator aquarum&quot; or guardian of the water of the city, Rome had nine aqueducts which fed 39 monumental fountains and 591 public basins, not counting the water supplied to the Imperial household, baths, and owners of private villas. Each of the major fountains was connected to two different aqueducts, in case one was shut down for service.

During the 17th and 18th century, the Roman popes reconstructed other degraded Roman aqueducts and built new display fountains to mark their termini, launching the golden age of the Roman fountain. The fountains of Rome, like the paintings of Rubens, were expressions of the new style of Baroque art. In these fountains, sculpture became the principal element, and the water was used simply to animate and decorate the sculptures. They, like baroque gardens, were &quot;a visual representation of confidence and power&quot;.

====Statues====

Rome is well known for its statues but, in particular, the talking statues of Rome. These are usually ancient statues which have become popular soapboxes for political and social discussion, and places for people to (often satirically) voice their opinions. There are two main talking statues: the Pasquino and the Marforio, yet there are four other noted ones: il Babuino, Madama Lucrezia, il Facchino and Abbot Luigi. Most of these statues are ancient Roman or classical, and most of them also depict mythical gods, ancient people or legendary figures; il Pasquino represents Menelaus, Abbot Luigi is an unknown Roman magistrate, il Babuino is supposed to be Silenus, Marforio represents Oceanus, Madama Lucrezia is a bust of Isis, and il Facchino is the only non-Roman statue, created in 1580, and not representing anyone in particular. They are often, due to their status, covered with placards or graffiti expressing political ideas and points of view. Other statues in the city, which are not related to the talking statues, include those of the Ponte Sant&#x27;Angelo, or several monuments scattered across the city, such as that to Giordano Bruno in the Campo de&#x27;Fiori.

====Obelisks and columns====

The city hosts eight ancient Egyptian and five ancient Roman obelisks, together with a number of more modern obelisks; there was also formerly (until 2005) an ancient Ethiopian obelisk in Rome. The city contains some of obelisks in piazzas, such as in Piazza Navona, St Peter&#x27;s Square, Piazza Montecitorio, and Piazza del Popolo, and others in villas, thermae parks and gardens, such as in Villa Celimontana, the Baths of Diocletian, and the Pincian Hill. Moreover, the centre of Rome hosts also Trajan&#x27;s and Antonine Column, two ancient Roman columns with spiral relief. The Column of Marcus Aurelius is located in Piazza Colonna and it was built around 180 AD by Commodus in memory of his parents. The Column of Marcus Aurelius was inspired by Trajan&#x27;s Column at Trajan&#x27;s Forum, which is part of the Imperial Fora.

====Bridges====

The city of Rome contains numerous famous bridges which cross the Tiber. The only bridge to remain unaltered until today from the classical age is Ponte dei Quattro Capi, which connects the Isola Tiberina with the left bank. The other surviving – albeit modified – ancient Roman bridges crossing the Tiber are Ponte Cestio, Ponte Sant&#x27;Angelo and Ponte Milvio. Considering Ponte Nomentano, also built during ancient Rome, which crosses the Aniene, currently there are five ancient Roman bridges still remaining in the city. Other noteworthy bridges are Ponte Sisto, the first bridge built in the Renaissance above Roman foundations; Ponte Rotto, actually the only remaining arch of the ancient &quot;Pons Aemilius&quot;, collapsed during the flood of 1598 and demolished at the end of the 19th century; and Ponte Vittorio Emanuele II, a modern bridge connecting Corso Vittorio Emanuele and Borgo. Most of the city&#x27;s public bridges were built in Classical or Renaissance style, but also in Baroque, Neoclassical and Modern styles. According to the Encyclopædia Britannica, the finest ancient bridge remaining in Rome is the Ponte Sant&#x27;Angelo, which was completed in 135 AD, and was decorated with ten statues of the angels, designed by Bernini in 1688.

====Catacombs====

Rome has an extensive amount of ancient catacombs, or underground burial places under or near the city, of which there are at least forty, some discovered only in recent decades. Though most famous for Christian burials, they include pagan and Jewish burials, either in separate catacombs or mixed together. The first large-scale catacombs were excavated from the 2nd century onwards. Originally they were carved through tuff, a soft volcanic rock, outside the boundaries of the city, because Roman law forbade burial places within city limits. Currently, maintenance of the catacombs is in the hands of the Papacy which has invested in the Salesians of Don Bosco the supervision of the Catacombs of St. Callixtus on the outskirts of Rome.

===Entertainment and performing arts===

Rome is an important centre for music, and it has an intense musical scene, including several prestigious music conservatories and theatres. It hosts the Accademia Nazionale di Santa Cecilia (founded in 1585), for which new concert halls have been built in the new Parco della Musica, one of the largest musical venues in the world. Rome also has an opera house, the Teatro dell&#x27;Opera di Roma, as well as several minor musical institutions. The city also played host to the Eurovision Song Contest in 1991 and the MTV Europe Music Awards in 2004.

Rome has also had a major impact on music history. The Roman School was a group of composers of predominantly church music, which were active in the city during the 16th and 17th centuries, therefore spanning the late Renaissance and early Baroque eras. The term also refers to the music they produced. Many of the composers had a direct connection to the Vatican and the papal chapel, though they worked at several churches; stylistically they are often contrasted with the Venetian School of composers, a concurrent movement which was much more progressive. By far the most famous composer of the Roman School is Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina, whose name has been associated for four hundred years with smooth, clear, polyphonic perfection. However, there were other composers working in Rome, and in a variety of styles and forms.

Between 1960 and 1970 Rome was considered to be as a &quot;new Hollywood&quot; because of the many actors and directors who worked there; Via Vittorio Veneto had transformed into a glamour place where you could meet famous people.

===Fashion===
Rome is also widely recognised as a world fashion capital. Although not as important as Milan, Rome is the fourth most important centre for fashion in the world, according to the 2009 Global Language Monitor after Milan, New York, and Paris, and beating London.

Major luxury fashion houses and jewellery chains, such as Valentino, Bulgari, Fendi, Laura Biagiotti, Brioni, and Renato Balestra, are headquartered or were founded in the city. Also, other major labels, such as Gucci, Chanel, Prada, Dolce &amp; Gabbana, Armani, and Versace have luxury boutiques in Rome, primarily along its prestigious and upscale Via dei Condotti.

===Cuisine===

Rome&#x27;s cuisine has evolved through centuries and periods of social, cultural, and political changes. Rome became a major gastronomical centre during the ancient age. Ancient Roman cuisine was highly influenced by Ancient Greek culture, and after, the empire&#x27;s enormous expansion exposed Romans to many new, provincial culinary habits and cooking techniques.

Later, during the Renaissance, Rome became well known as a centre of high-cuisine, since some of the best chefs of the time worked for the popes. An example of this was Bartolomeo Scappi, who was a chef working for Pius IV; he acquired fame in 1570 when his cookbook &quot;Opera dell&#x27;arte del cucinare&quot; was published. In the book he lists approximately 1,000 recipes of the Renaissance cuisine and describes cooking techniques and tools, giving the first known picture of a fork.

The Testaccio, Rome&#x27;s trade and slaughterhouse area, was often known as the &quot;belly&quot; or &quot;slaughterhouse&quot; of Rome, and was inhabited by butchers, or &quot;vaccinari&quot;. The most common or ancient Roman cuisine included the &quot;fifth quarter&quot;. The old-fashioned &quot;coda alla vaccinara&quot; (oxtail cooked in the way of butchers) is still one of the city&#x27;s most popular meals and is part of most of Rome&#x27;s restaurants&#x27; menus. Lamb is also a very popular part of Roman cuisine, and is often roasted with spices and herbs.

In the modern age, the city developed its own peculiar cuisine, based on products of the nearby Campagna, as lamb and vegetables (globe artichokes are common). In parallel, Roman Jews – present in the city since the 1st century BC – developed their own cuisine, the &quot;cucina giudaico-romanesca&quot;.

Examples of Roman dishes include &quot;saltimbocca alla romana&quot; – a veal cutlet, Roman-style, topped with raw ham and sage and simmered with white wine and butter; &quot;carciofi alla romana&quot; – artichokes Roman-style, outer leaves removed, stuffed with mint, garlic, breadcrumbs and braised; &quot;carciofi alla giudia&quot; – artichokes fried in olive oil, typical of Roman Jewish cooking, outer leaves removed, stuffed with mint, garlic, breadcrumbs and braised; &quot;spaghetti alla carbonara&quot; – spaghetti with bacon, eggs and &quot;pecorino&quot;; and &quot;gnocchi di semolino alla romana&quot; – semolina dumpling, Roman-style.

===Cinema===

Rome hosts the Cinecittà Studios, the largest film and television production facility in continental Europe and the centre of the Italian cinema, where many of today&#x27;s biggest box office hits are filmed. The studio complex is from the centre of Rome and is part of one of the biggest production communities in the world, second only to Hollywood, with well over 5,000 professionals – from period costume makers to visual effects specialists. More than 3,000 productions have been made on its lot.

Founded in 1937 by Benito Mussolini, the studios were bombed by the Western Allies during the Second World War. In the 1950s, Cinecittà was the filming location for several large American film productions, and subsequently became the studio most closely associated with Federico Fellini. Today, Cinecittà is the only studio in the world with pre-production, production, and full post-production facilities on one lot, allowing directors and producers to walk in with their script and &quot;walkout&quot; with a completed film.

===Sports===
Association football is the most popular sport in Rome, as in the rest of the country. The city hosted the final games of the 1934 and 1990 FIFA World Cup. The latter took place in the Stadio Olimpico, which is also the shared home stadium for local Serie A clubs SS Lazio, founded in 1900, and AS Roma, founded in 1927, whose rivalry in the Derby della Capitale has become a staple of Roman sports culture. Footballers who play for these teams and are also born in the city tend to become especially popular, as has been the case with players such as Francesco Totti and Daniele De Rossi (both for AS Roma), and Alessandro Nesta (for SS Lazio).

Rome hosted the 1960 Summer Olympics, with great success, using many ancient sites such as the Villa Borghese and the Thermae of Caracalla as venues. For the Olympic Games many new facilities were built, notably the new large Olympic Stadium (which was then enlarged and renewed to host several matches and the final of the 1990 FIFA World Cup), the Stadio Flaminio, the Villaggio Olimpico (Olympic Village, created to host the athletes and redeveloped after the games as a residential district), ecc. Rome made a bid to host the 2020 Summer Olympics but it was withdrawn.

Further, Rome hosted the EuroBasket 1991 and is home to the internationally recognised basketball team Virtus Roma. Rugby union is gaining wider acceptance. Until 2011 the Stadio Flaminio was the home stadium for the Italy national rugby union team, which has been playing in the Six Nations Championship since 2000. The team now plays home games at the Stadio Olimpico because the Stadio Flaminio needs works of renovation in order to improve both its capacity and safety. Rome is home to local rugby union teams such as Rugby Roma (winner of five Italian championships), Unione Rugby Capitolina and S.S. Lazio Rugby 1927 (rugby union branch of the multisport club S.S. Lazio).

Every May, Rome hosts the Italian Open, an ATP Masters 1000 tennis tournament, on the clay courts of the Foro Italico. Cycling was popular in the post-World War II period, although its popularity has faded. Rome has hosted the final portion of the Giro d&#x27;Italia three times, in 1911, 1950, and 2009. Other local sports teams include volleyball (M. Roma Volley), handball or waterpolo.

==Transport==


Rome is at the centre of the radial network of roads that roughly follow the lines of the ancient Roman roads which began at the Capitoline Hill and connected Rome with its empire. Today Rome is circled, at a distance of about from the Capitol, by the ring-road (the Grande Raccordo Anulare or GRA).

Due to its location in the centre of the Italian peninsula, Rome is the principal railway node for central Italy. Rome&#x27;s main railway station, Termini, is one of the largest railway stations in Europe and the most heavily used in Italy, with around 400 thousand travellers passing through every day. The second-largest station in the city, Roma Tiburtina, has been redeveloped as a high-speed rail terminus. As well as frequent high-speed day trains to all major Italian cities, Rome is linked nightly by &#x27;boat train&#x27; sleeper services to Sicily, and internationally by overnight sleeper services to Munich and Vienna.

Rome is served by three airports. The intercontinental Leonardo da Vinci International Airport, Italy&#x27;s chief airport is located in the nearby Fiumicino, south-west of Rome. The older Rome Ciampino Airport is a joint civilian and military airport. It is commonly referred to as &quot;Ciampino Airport&quot;, as it is located beside Ciampino, south-east of Rome. A third airport, the Rome Urbe Airport, is a small, low-traffic airport located about north of the city centre, which handles most helicopter and private flights. The main airport system of the city (composed of Fiumicino and Ciampino), with 32.8 million passengers transported in 2022, is the second busiest airport system in Italy.

Although the city has its own quarter on the Mediterranean Sea (Lido di Ostia), this has only a marina and a small channel-harbour for fishing boats. The main harbour which serves Rome is Port of Civitavecchia, located about northwest of the city.

The city suffers from traffic problems largely due to this radial street pattern, making it difficult for Romans to move easily from the vicinity of one of the radial roads to another without going into the historic centre or using the ring-road. These problems are not helped by the limited size of Rome&#x27;s metro system when compared to other cities of similar size. Rome has only 21 taxis for every 10,000 inhabitants, far below other major European cities. Chronic congestion caused by cars during the 1970s and 1980s led to restrictions being placed on vehicle access to the inner city-centre during daylight hours. Areas, where these restrictions apply, are known as Limited Traffic Zones (&quot;Zona a Traffico Limitato&quot; (ZTL)). More recently, heavy night-time traffic in Trastevere, Testaccio and San Lorenzo has led to the creation of night-time ZTLs in those districts.

A three-line metro system called the &quot;Metropolitana&quot; operates in Rome. Construction on the first branch started in the 1930s. The line had been planned to quickly connect the main railway station with the newly planned E42 area in the southern suburbs, where 1942 the World Fair was supposed to be held. The event never took place because of war, but the area was later partly redesigned and renamed Esposizione Universale Roma in the 1950s to serve as a modern business district. The line was finally opened in 1955, and it is now the south part of the B Line.

The A line opened in 1980 from Ottaviano to Anagnina stations, later extended in stages (1999–2000) to Battistini. In the 1990s, an extension of the B line was opened from Termini to Rebibbia. The A and B lines intersect at Roma Termini station. A new branch of the B line (B1) opened on 13 June 2012 after an estimated building cost of €500 million. B1 connects to line B at Piazza Bologna and has four stations over a distance of .

A third line, the C line, is under construction with an estimated cost of €3 billion and will have 30 stations over a distance of . It will partly replace the existing Termini-Pantano rail line. It will feature full automated, driverless trains. The first section with 15 stations connecting Pantano with the quarter of Centocelle in the eastern part of the city, opened on 9 November 2014. The end of the work was scheduled in 2015, but archaeological findings often delay underground construction work.

A fourth line, D line, is also planned. It will have 22 stations over a distance of . The first section was projected to open in 2015 and the final sections before 2035, but due to the city&#x27;s financial crisis, the project has been put on hold.

Above-ground public transport in Rome is made up of a bus, tram and urban train network (FR lines). The bus network has in excess of 350 bus lines and over eight thousand bus stops, whereas the more-limited tram system has of track and 192 stops. There are also trolleybuses.

==See also==

* Outline of Rome
* SPQR
* Tourism in Italy

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* Comune of Rome 
* APT (official Tourist Office) of the City of Rome 
* Rome Museums – official site. .
* Capitoline Museums </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="0" end="4" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="6" end="13" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="29" end="41" title="capital city" label="capital city"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="45" end="50" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282" start="82" end="87" title="Lazio" label="Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16110" start="88" end="94" title="Regions of Italy" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q18288160" start="114" end="147" title="Metropolitan City of Rome Capital" label="Metropolitan City of Rome Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q727640" start="266" end="290" title="list of cities in the European Union by population within city limits" label="third most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="298" end="312" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q48800793" start="441" end="458" title="metropolitan cities of Italy" label="metropolitan city"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324995" start="469" end="490" title="Rome metropolitan area" label="Its metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="586" end="603" title="Italian Peninsula" label="Italian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048669" start="619" end="625" title="Latium" label="Latium"/>
<link wikidata="Q35431417" start="652" end="664" title="Tiber Valley" label="Tiber Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="666" end="678" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="748" end="763" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="792" end="800" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q185158" start="951" end="970" title="Seven hills of Rome" label="City of Seven Hills"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1094" end="1114" title="Western civilization" label="Western civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q842798" start="1119" end="1126" title="Western Christianity" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907236" start="1127" end="1144" title="Christian culture" label="Christian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1168" end="1183" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q646206" start="1186" end="1205" title="History of Rome" label="Rome&amp;#x27;s history"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="1232" end="1247" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247524" start="1258" end="1274" title="founding of Rome" label="founding of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862380" start="1413" end="1448" title="list of oldest continuously inhabited cities" label="oldest continuously occupied cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q202335" start="1518" end="1524" title="Latins (Italic tribe)" label="Latins"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="1526" end="1535" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q108356" start="1541" end="1548" title="Sabines" label="Sabines"/>
<link wikidata="Q201038" start="1610" end="1623" title="Roman Kingdom" label="Roman Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="1629" end="1643" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="1652" end="1664" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q200250" start="1726" end="1736" title="metropolis" label="metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q109598" start="1810" end="1818" title="Tibullus" label="Tibullus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="1882" end="1886" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="1888" end="1894" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="1900" end="1904" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1926" end="1926" title="Caput Mundi#Rome" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="1962" end="1992" title="fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="fall of the Empire in the west"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2028" end="2039" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="2093" end="2099" title="Papacy" label="Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="2154" end="2166" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="2212" end="2223" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q134588" start="2248" end="2258" title="Pope Nicholas V" label="Nicholas V"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="2484" end="2495" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="2539" end="2546" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="2557" end="2570" title="Neoclassicism" label="Neoclassicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="2747" end="2763" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="3032" end="3038" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="3044" end="3063" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q8415" start="3087" end="3107" title="1960 Summer Olympics" label="1960 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3170" end="3184" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="3198" end="3231" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q204344" start="3243" end="3263" title="World Food Programme" label="World Food Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q689859" start="3275" end="3322" title="International Fund for Agricultural Development" label="International Fund for Agricultural Development"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3338" end="3394" title="UN System Network on Rural Development and Food Security" label="UN System Network on Rural Development and Food Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q192177" start="3535" end="3562" title="Union for the Mediterranean" label="Union for the Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q565594" start="3649" end="3652" title="Eni" label="Eni"/>
<link wikidata="Q651222" start="3654" end="3658" title="Enel" label="Enel"/>
<link wikidata="Q144617" start="3660" end="3663" title="Gruppo TIM" label="TIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q910379" start="3665" end="3673" title="Leonardo S.p.A." label="Leonardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2201225" start="3693" end="3696" title="Banca Nazionale del Lavoro" label="BNL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368377" start="3746" end="3749" title="EUR, Rome" label="EUR"/>
<link wikidata="Q926575" start="3802" end="3807" title="Fendi" label="Fendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283476" start="3823" end="3853" title="Palazzo della Civiltà Italiana" label="Palazzo della Civiltà Italiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q728399" start="3978" end="3995" title="Cinecittà" label="Cinecittà Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="4022" end="4035" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247524" start="4127" end="4140" title="Founding of Rome" label="founding myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15842283" start="4212" end="4216" title="Rex (king)" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186" start="4218" end="4225" title="Romulus" label="Romulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="4602" end="4607" title="Tiber" label="Tiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="4752" end="4760" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136294" start="4858" end="4893" title="She-wolf (Roman mythology)" label="totem wolf that adopted and suckled"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197" start="4920" end="4937" title="Romulus and Remus" label="Romulus and Remus"/>
<link wikidata="Q200642" start="4962" end="4970" title="Palatine Hill" label="Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q194103" start="4975" end="4988" title="Aventine Hill" label="Aventine Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="5230" end="5240" title="Acronym" label="initialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131306" start="5244" end="5248" title="SPQR" label="SPQR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576746" start="5276" end="5309" title="Constitution of the Roman Republic" label="constituted republican government"/>
<link wikidata="Q777102" start="5395" end="5415" title="Capital of the world" label="Capital of the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="5428" end="5437" title="St. Peter" label="St. Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="5678" end="5690" title="Palaeolithic" label="Palaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="5695" end="5704" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056738" start="5869" end="5877" title="pastoralism" label="pastoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q200642" start="5897" end="5910" title="Palatine Hill" label="Palatine Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q180212" start="5946" end="5957" title="Roman Forum" label="Roman Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="5982" end="5992" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="6018" end="6026" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q977693" start="6332" end="6341" title="synoecism" label="synoecism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572679" start="6508" end="6525" title="Subsistence economy" label="subsistence level"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="6567" end="6576" title="secondary sector" label="secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="6581" end="6600" title="tertiary sector" label="tertiary activities"/>
<link wikidata="Q189387" start="6701" end="6707" title="Ischia" label="Ischia"/>
<link wikidata="Q243456" start="6712" end="6717" title="Cumae" label="Cumae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="7161" end="7175" title="ancient Romans" label="ancient Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q646206" start="7208" end="7229" title="History of Rome" label="history of their city"/>
<link wikidata="Q44342" start="7242" end="7248" title="legend" label="legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="7253" end="7257" title="myth" label="myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="7328" end="7339" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman myths"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197" start="7357" end="7374" title="Romulus and Remus" label="Romulus and Remus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136294" start="7408" end="7416" title="She-wolf (Roman mythology)" label="she-wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186" start="7471" end="7478" title="Romulus" label="Romulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4174478" start="7549" end="7557" title="annalist" label="annalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="7684" end="7698" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan refugee"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="7699" end="7705" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q655566" start="7767" end="7772" title="Ascanius" label="Iulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192841" start="7794" end="7816" title="Julio-Claudian dynasty" label="Julio-Claudian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="7858" end="7864" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="7903" end="7909" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12898802" start="7956" end="7964" title="Arcadia (ancient region)" label="Arcadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q837699" start="7983" end="7990" title="Evander of Pallene" label="Evander"/>
<link wikidata="Q704313" start="8016" end="8040" title="Lucius Coelius Antipater" label="Lucius Coelius Antipater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="8215" end="8233" title="monarchy" label="monarchical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q202335" start="8264" end="8269" title="Latins (Italic tribe)" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q108356" start="8274" end="8280" title="Sabines" label="Sabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="8298" end="8306" title="Etruscans" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186" start="8353" end="8360" title="Romulus" label="Romulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q200031" start="8362" end="8376" title="Numa Pompilius" label="Numa Pompilius"/>
<link wikidata="Q200859" start="8378" end="8394" title="Tullus Hostilius" label="Tullus Hostilius"/>
<link wikidata="Q206741" start="8396" end="8409" title="Ancus Marcius" label="Ancus Marcius"/>
<link wikidata="Q212671" start="8411" end="8429" title="Tarquinius Priscus" label="Tarquinius Priscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192998" start="8431" end="8446" title="Servius Tullius" label="Servius Tullius"/>
<link wikidata="Q193047" start="8451" end="8477" title="Lucius Tarquinius Superbus" label="Lucius Tarquinius Superbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="8560" end="8570" title="Oligarchy" label="oligarchic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="8571" end="8579" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="8608" end="8615" title="Roman consul" label="consuls"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="8686" end="8696" title="Patrician (ancient Rome)" label="patricians"/>
<link wikidata="Q104687" start="8715" end="8724" title="Plebs" label="plebeians"/>
<link wikidata="Q663655" start="8830" end="8836" title="Volsci" label="Volsci"/>
<link wikidata="Q381053" start="8838" end="8843" title="Aequi" label="Aequi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265446" start="8849" end="8854" title="Marsi" label="Marsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048669" start="8881" end="8887" title="Latium" label="Latium"/>
<link wikidata="Q273854" start="8924" end="8929" title="Gauls" label="Gauls"/>
<link wikidata="Q487908" start="8931" end="8935" title="Osci" label="Osci"/>
<link wikidata="Q500272" start="8936" end="8944" title="Samnites" label="Samnites"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="8969" end="8976" title="Taranto" label="Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q172353" start="8990" end="8997" title="Pyrrhus of Epirus" label="Pyrrhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q565751" start="9007" end="9013" title="Epirus" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="9052" end="9069" title="Italian peninsula" label="Italian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="9099" end="9112" title="Magna Graecia" label="Magna Graecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="9191" end="9204" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="9213" end="9220" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q124988" start="9239" end="9249" title="Punic Wars" label="Punic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="9278" end="9286" title="Ancient Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q75813" start="9301" end="9316" title="Macedonian Wars" label="Macedonian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="9338" end="9347" title="Macedonia (ancient kingdom)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="9359" end="9373" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q691321" start="9406" end="9412" title="Sicilia (Roman province)" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q281345" start="9414" end="9434" title="Sardinia and Corsica" label="Sardinia and Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="9436" end="9444" title="Hispania" label="Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q207497" start="9446" end="9455" title="Macedonia (Roman province)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q204772" start="9457" end="9463" title="Achaea (Roman province)" label="Achaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q181238" start="9468" end="9474" title="Africa (Roman province)" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q271108" start="9578" end="9587" title="optimates" label="optimates"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="9631" end="9637" title="Roman senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q271108" start="9647" end="9656" title="populares" label="populares"/>
<link wikidata="Q104687" start="9690" end="9695" title="plebs" label="plebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q212109" start="10192" end="10200" title="Tiberius Gracchus" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q297183" start="10205" end="10219" title="Gaius Gracchus" label="Gaius Gracchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156173" start="10241" end="10249" title="Jugurtha" label="Jugurtha"/>
<link wikidata="Q521868" start="10261" end="10272" title="Sulla&amp;#x27;s civil war" label="a civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="10296" end="10301" title="Sulla" label="Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q194378" start="10324" end="10342" title="Third Servile War" label="major slave revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q83406" start="10349" end="10358" title="Spartacus" label="Spartacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q715380" start="10403" end="10420" title="first Triumvirate" label="first Triumvirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="10426" end="10432" title="Julius Caesar" label="Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="10434" end="10440" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q175121" start="10445" end="10452" title="Marcus Licinius Crassus" label="Crassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="10471" end="10475" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238338" start="10535" end="10544" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273939" start="10625" end="10642" title="Dictator perpetuo" label="dictator for life"/>
<link wikidata="Q212079" start="10680" end="10698" title="second Triumvirate" label="second Triumvirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="10705" end="10713" title="Octavian" label="Octavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="10752" end="10763" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q105452" start="10768" end="10775" title="Lepidus" label="Lepidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116320" start="10786" end="10801" title="War of Actium" label="final civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q211804" start="10881" end="10889" title="Augustus (title)" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q396808" start="10906" end="10914" title="princeps" label="princeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q206414" start="10935" end="10945" title="principate" label="principate"/>
<link wikidata="Q936648" start="10949" end="10956" title="diarchy" label="diarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q725434" start="11063" end="11072" title="imperator" label="imperator"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="11086" end="11093" title="Roman emperor" label="emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="11147" end="11151" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q215231" start="11197" end="11215" title="Great Fire of Rome" label="Great Fire of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078506" start="11225" end="11250" title="Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire" label="persecution of Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="11352" end="11358" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q777102" start="11382" end="11393" title="caput Mundi" label="caput Mundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192841" start="11572" end="11586" title="Julio-Claudian dynasty" label="Julio-Claudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q200565" start="11588" end="11595" title="Flavian dynasty" label="Flavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="11646" end="11655" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202662" start="11662" end="11670" title="Antonine dynasty" label="Antonine"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="11768" end="11780" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q104028" start="11784" end="11789" title="Judea" label="Judea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="11836" end="11844" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="11869" end="11876" title="Apostles in the New Testament" label="apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="11998" end="12012" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="12020" end="12029" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="12039" end="12046" title="Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="12050" end="12055" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q321219" start="12079" end="12094" title="Severan dynasty" label="Severan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q329838" start="12160" end="12187" title="Crisis of the Third Century" label="Crisis of the Third Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321578" start="12320" end="12337" title="Plague of Cyprian" label="Plague of Cyprian"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="12531" end="12546" title="Germanic tribes" label="Germanic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="12704" end="12718" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Persian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="12863" end="12873" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q206414" start="12932" end="12942" title="Principate" label="Principate"/>
<link wikidata="Q238399" start="12997" end="13005" title="Dominate" label="Dominate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218843" start="13376" end="13390" title="price controls" label="price controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q209349" start="13484" end="13493" title="Nicomedia" label="Nicomedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46768" start="13516" end="13524" title="Maximian" label="Maximian"/>
<link wikidata="Q729978" start="13553" end="13563" title="Mediolanum" label="Mediolanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q188751" start="13653" end="13659" title="Caesar (title)" label="caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q211804" start="13674" end="13682" title="Augustus (title)" label="augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q759835" start="13912" end="13932" title="Civil wars of the Tetrarchy" label="series of civil wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="14014" end="14035" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q180764" start="14289" end="14303" title="Edict of Milan" label="Edict of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q184549" start="14364" end="14372" title="Licinius" label="Licinius"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="14796" end="14805" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="14811" end="14825" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="14934" end="14939" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138" start="14941" end="14946" title="Trier" label="Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q209349" start="14950" end="14959" title="Nicomedia" label="Nicomedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46418" start="14997" end="15011" title="Constantius II" label="Constantius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257878" start="15721" end="15742" title="Edict of Thessalonica" label="Edict of Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="15811" end="15823" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q159798" start="15968" end="15976" title="Honorius (emperor)" label="Honorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q159369" start="15981" end="15989" title="Arcadius" label="Arcadius"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="16005" end="16012" title="Western Roman Empire" label="western"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="16017" end="16024" title="Eastern Roman Empire" label="eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q13364" start="16117" end="16124" title="Ravenna" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463845" start="16258" end="16275" title="Sack of Rome (410)" label="was sacked in 410"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="16283" end="16292" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q102371" start="16300" end="16308" title="Alaric I" label="Alaric I"/>
<link wikidata="Q186282" start="16568" end="16588" title="Santa Maria Maggiore" label="Santa Maria Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q152127" start="16739" end="16747" title="Genseric" label="Genseric"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="16761" end="16768" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q130601" start="16864" end="16880" title="Romulus Augustus" label="Romulus Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="16953" end="16973" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="17021" end="17032" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q42827" start="17955" end="17972" title="Pope Gregory I" label="Gregory the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="18713" end="18745" title="Decline of the Roman Empire" label="fall of the Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q103333" start="18793" end="18800" title="Odoacer" label="Odoacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q583038" start="18829" end="18848" title="Ostrogothic Kingdom" label="Ostrogothic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="18869" end="18879" title="Byzantine Empire" label="East Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q477973" start="18898" end="18908" title="Gothic War (535–554)" label="Gothic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628454" start="18936" end="18942" title="Sack of Rome (546)" label="in 546"/>
<link wikidata="Q13554386" start="18947" end="18950" title="Siege of Rome (549–550)" label="550"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="19506" end="19510" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="19609" end="19614" title="Simon Peter" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="19619" end="19623" title="Paul of Tarsus" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="19839" end="19854" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19867" end="19892" title="Lombard invasion of Italy#Invasion and conquest of the Italian peninsula" label="Lombard invasion of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="20013" end="20023" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantines"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="20029" end="20035" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="20045" end="20053" title="Lombards" label="Lombards"/>
<link wikidata="Q251836" start="20080" end="20089" title="Liutprand, King of the Lombards" label="Liutprand"/>
<link wikidata="Q177741" start="20123" end="20128" title="Sutri" label="Sutri"/>
<link wikidata="Q81212" start="20181" end="20196" title="Pepin the Short" label="Pepin the Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q694740" start="20299" end="20319" title="Exarchate of Ravenna" label="Exarchate of Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="20339" end="20351" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="20738" end="20749" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="20773" end="20780" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q132086" start="20784" end="20796" title="Pope Leo III" label="Pope Leo III"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="20972" end="20990" title="Carolingian Empire" label="Carolingian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="21015" end="21032" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q979633" start="21055" end="21099" title="Arab raid against Rome" label="unsuccessfully stormed the city&amp;#x27;s walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q810126" start="21121" end="21130" title="Old St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="21215" end="21232" title="Carolingian Empire" label="Carolingian power"/>
<link wikidata="Q44978" start="21367" end="21375" title="Theodora (senatrix)" label="Theodora"/>
<link wikidata="Q231054" start="21393" end="21400" title="Marozia" label="Marozia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178289" start="21450" end="21461" title="Crescentius the Younger" label="Crescentius"/>
<link wikidata="Q150512" start="21519" end="21526" title="Otto II" label="Otto II"/>
<link wikidata="Q151090" start="21531" end="21539" title="Otto III" label="Otto III"/>
<link wikidata="Q133063" start="21752" end="21771" title="Ildebrando da Soana" label="Ildebrando da Soana"/>
<link wikidata="Q133063" start="21813" end="21824" title="Pope Gregory VII" label="Gregory VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q154764" start="21850" end="21873" title="Investiture Controversy" label="Investiture Controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60094" start="21890" end="21898" title="Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259892" start="21919" end="21940" title="Sack of Rome (1084)" label="was sacked and burned"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="21948" end="21955" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q203792" start="21962" end="21977" title="Robert Guiscard" label="Robert Guiscard"/>
<link wikidata="Q486382" start="22044" end="22067" title="Castel Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Castel Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107861" start="22260" end="22267" title="Medieval commune" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q170385" start="22347" end="22356" title="Lucius II" label="Lucius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q167610" start="22439" end="22456" title="Pope Eugenius III" label="Pope Eugenius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q456806" start="22532" end="22550" title="Arnaldo da Brescia" label="Arnaldo da Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132845" start="22659" end="22670" title="Adrianus IV" label="Adrianus IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q128076" start="22731" end="22748" title="Pope Innocent III" label="Pope Innocent III"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="22971" end="22985" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="23033" end="23040" title="monarch" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q203829" start="23096" end="23112" title="Charles of Anjou" label="Charles of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q130875" start="23149" end="23161" title="Hohenstaufen" label="Hohenstaufen"/>
<link wikidata="Q209344" start="23228" end="23236" title="Sapienza University of Rome" label="Sapienza"/>
<link wikidata="Q13395" start="23323" end="23330" title="Viterbo" label="Viterbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q186431" start="23537" end="23545" title="conclave" label="conclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618046" start="23646" end="23655" title="Annibaldi family" label="Annibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q940238" start="23657" end="23664" title="Caetani" label="Caetani"/>
<link wikidata="Q327202" start="23666" end="23673" title="Colonna family" label="Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q855303" start="23675" end="23681" title="Orsini family" label="Orsini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3688910" start="23683" end="23688" title="Conti di Segni" label="Conti"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="23794" end="23812" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Pope Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23877" end="23893" title="universal domain" label="universal domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q327202" start="23931" end="23945" title="Colonna family" label="Colonna family"/>
<link wikidata="Q838794" start="23981" end="24004" title="Jubilee (Christianity)" label="Jubilee of Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118145" start="24032" end="24040" title="Christian pilgrimage" label="pilgrims"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="24101" end="24116" title="Philip IV of France" label="Philip the Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q116404" start="24179" end="24185" title="Anagni" label="Anagni"/>
<link wikidata="Q202558" start="24358" end="24375" title="Avignon papacy" label="briefly relocated"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="24379" end="24386" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q433189" start="24461" end="24475" title="Cola di Rienzo" label="Cola di Rienzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q190401" start="24628" end="24635" title="Tribune" label="Tribuno"/>
<link wikidata="Q709181" start="24753" end="24761" title="Gil Álvarez Carrillo de Albornoz" label="Albornoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q169594" start="24997" end="25007" title="Gregory XI" label="Gregory XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q26189" start="25067" end="25081" title="Western Schism" label="Western Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q154001" start="25232" end="25252" title="Council of Constance" label="Council of Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q26189" start="25265" end="25279" title="Western Schism" label="Western Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q169612" start="25299" end="25307" title="Martin V" label="Martin V"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="25406" end="25417" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q134588" start="25483" end="25493" title="Nicholas V" label="Nicholas V"/>
<link wikidata="Q213678" start="25510" end="25525" title="Vatican Library" label="Vatican Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q101437" start="25530" end="25537" title="Pius II" label="Pius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q163514" start="25567" end="25576" title="Sixtus IV" label="Sixtus IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q108316" start="25597" end="25609" title="Alexander VI" label="Alexander VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="25623" end="25631" title="Nepotism" label="nepotist"/>
<link wikidata="Q80516" start="25638" end="25647" title="Julius II" label="Julius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q49237" start="25672" end="25677" title="Leo X" label="Leo X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="25898" end="25917" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="25974" end="26001" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943" start="26007" end="26021" title="Sistine Chapel" label="Sistine Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q586329" start="26032" end="26043" title="Ponte Sisto" label="Ponte Sisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="26091" end="26096" title="Tiber" label="Tiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="26237" end="26249" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5827" start="26251" end="26259" title="Pietro Perugino" label="Perugino"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="26261" end="26268" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q191423" start="26270" end="26281" title="Domenico Ghirlandaio" label="Ghirlandaio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7031" start="26283" end="26298" title="Luca Signorelli" label="Luca Signorelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669" start="26300" end="26310" title="Sandro Botticelli" label="Botticelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q29447" start="26316" end="26331" title="Cosimo Rosselli" label="Cosimo Rosselli"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="26437" end="26445" title="nepotism" label="nepotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q205302" start="26450" end="26456" title="simony" label="simony"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="26557" end="26568" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="26587" end="26606" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q235242" start="26958" end="26963" title="Pietà (Michelangelo)" label="Pietà"/>
<link wikidata="Q498557" start="27004" end="27021" title="Borgia Apartments" label="Borgia Apartments"/>
<link wikidata="Q80516" start="27073" end="27087" title="Pope Julius II" label="Pope Julius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q49237" start="27119" end="27124" title="Pope Leo X" label="Leo X"/>
<link wikidata="Q83159" start="27129" end="27140" title="Pope Clement VII" label="Clement VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q170022" start="27162" end="27175" title="House of Medici" label="Medici family"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="27318" end="27339" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q64881" start="27448" end="27459" title="Ridolfo Ghirlandaio" label="Ghirlandaio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5827" start="27461" end="27469" title="Pietro Perugino" label="Perugino"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669" start="27471" end="27481" title="Sandro Botticelli" label="Botticelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793" start="27486" end="27494" title="Donato Bramante" label="Bramante"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258576" start="27520" end="27542" title="San Pietro in Montorio" label="San Pietro in Montorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q145093" start="27587" end="27594" title="Apostolic Palace" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126723" start="27690" end="27705" title="Villa Farnesina" label="Villa Farnesina"/>
<link wikidata="Q249449" start="27711" end="27731" title="Raphael Rooms" label="Raphael&amp;#x27;s Rooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="27878" end="27883" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q395635" start="27989" end="28003" title="Agostino Chigi" label="Agostino Chigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429256" start="28163" end="28190" title="War of the League of Cognac" label="War of the League of Cognac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259892" start="28266" end="28283" title="Sack of Rome (1084)" label="the previous sack"/>
<link wikidata="Q156733" start="28298" end="28309" title="Landsknecht" label="Landsknecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="28322" end="28331" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q465627" start="28332" end="28347" title="Sack of Rome (1527)" label="sacked the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="28438" end="28454" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q161983" start="28737" end="28744" title="Pius IV" label="Pius IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q133350" start="28748" end="28756" title="Sixtus V" label="Sixtus V"/>
<link wikidata="Q807815" start="29092" end="29101" title="Barberini family" label="Barberini"/>
<link wikidata="Q962192" start="29103" end="29111" title="Pamphili family" label="Pamphili"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072540" start="29113" end="29118" title="Chigi family" label="Chigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3941572" start="29120" end="29131" title="Rospigliosi family" label="Rospigliosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3613194" start="29133" end="29140" title="Altieri family" label="Altieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q938697" start="29142" end="29152" title="Odescalchi family" label="Odescalchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="29261" end="29281" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q477324" start="29651" end="29674" title="Suppression of the Society of Jesus" label="Jesuit order suppressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q175881" start="29769" end="29783" title="Roman Republic (18th century)" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="29846" end="29863" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="29869" end="29881" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="29921" end="29929" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558632" start="29952" end="29988" title="Rome (department)" label="annexed as a &amp;quot;Département&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="29996" end="30009" title="First French Empire" label="French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="30204" end="30222" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072140" start="30242" end="30265" title="Roman Republic (19th century)" label="a second Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="30298" end="30317" title="revolutions in 1848" label="revolutions in 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="30362" end="30381" title="Italian unification" label="Italian unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q187336" start="30383" end="30399" title="Giuseppe Mazzini" label="Giuseppe Mazzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="30404" end="30422" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="30565" end="30581" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="30620" end="30628" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="30852" end="30864" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="30998" end="31017" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604547" start="31047" end="31059" title="Capture of Rome" label="capture Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338582" start="31100" end="31109" title="Porta Pia" label="Porta Pia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="31111" end="31123" title="Pope Pius IX" label="Pope Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236289" start="31143" end="31166" title="prisoner in the Vatican" label="prisoner in the Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="31551" end="31566" title="Italian Fascism" label="Italian Fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="31574" end="31590" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q468823" start="31602" end="31619" title="March on Rome" label="march on the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q839554" start="31684" end="31698" title="Imperial Italy (fascist)" label="Italian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="31722" end="31734" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q541703" start="32256" end="32276" title="Quartiere San Lorenzo" label="San Lorenzo district"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641960" start="32281" end="32312" title="Bombing of Rome in World War II" label="subject to Allied bombing raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885257" start="32409" end="32437" title="Fall of the Fascist regime in Italy" label="was arrested on 25 July 1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q196502" start="32458" end="32475" title="Armistice of Cassibile" label="Italian Armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q492173" start="32696" end="32720" title="Italian economic miracle" label="Italian economic miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q180098" start="32964" end="32971" title="Ben-Hur (1959 film)" label="Ben Hur"/>
<link wikidata="Q938137" start="32985" end="32994" title="Quo Vadis (1951 film)" label="Quo Vadis"/>
<link wikidata="Q201293" start="33008" end="33021" title="Roman Holiday" label="Roman Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q18407" start="33038" end="33051" title="La Dolce Vita" label="La Dolce Vita"/>
<link wikidata="Q728399" start="33091" end="33108" title="Cinecittà" label="Cinecittà Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282" start="33374" end="33379" title="Lazio" label="Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127320" start="33390" end="33403" title="central Italy" label="central Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="33411" end="33416" title="Tiber" label="Tiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q545404" start="33504" end="33516" title="Tiber Island" label="Tiber Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q194103" start="33619" end="33632" title="Aventine Hill" label="Aventine Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q216104" start="33638" end="33650" title="Caelian Hill" label="Caelian Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q34925" start="33656" end="33671" title="Capitoline Hill" label="Capitoline Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q211233" start="33677" end="33691" title="Esquiline Hill" label="Esquiline Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q200642" start="33697" end="33710" title="Palatine Hill" label="Palatine Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q207896" start="33716" end="33729" title="Quirinal Hill" label="Quirinal Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q216085" start="33739" end="33751" title="Viminal Hill" label="Viminal Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q546600" start="33803" end="33809" title="Aniene" label="Aniene"/>
<link wikidata="Q38882" start="33919" end="33933" title="Tyrrhenian Sea" label="Tyrrhenian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11171297" start="34012" end="34017" title="Ostia (Rome)" label="Ostia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="34083" end="34098" title="above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q99309" start="34119" end="34127" title="Pantheon, Rome" label="Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="34132" end="34147" title="Above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q692719" start="34161" end="34172" title="Monte Mario" label="Monte Mario"/>
<link wikidata="Q678313" start="34751" end="34765" title="Villa Borghese gardens" label="Villa Borghese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000387" start="34767" end="34776" title="Villa Ada" label="Villa Ada"/>
<link wikidata="Q774654" start="34782" end="34802" title="Villa Doria Pamphili" label="Villa Doria Pamphili"/>
<link wikidata="Q14479150" start="34878" end="34891" title="Villa Sciarra (Rome)" label="Villa Sciarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072277" start="35002" end="35015" title="Orto Botanico dell&amp;#x27;Università di Roma &amp;quot;La Sapienza&amp;quot;" label="Orto Botanico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558489" start="35261" end="35278" title="Villa Celimontana" label="Villa Celimontana"/>
<link wikidata="Q824997" start="35470" end="35487" title="Piazza del Popolo" label="Piazza del Popolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q550215" start="35529" end="35535" title="Pincio" label="Pincio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362663" start="35540" end="35552" title="Villa Medici" label="Villa Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895775" start="35591" end="35603" title="Castelfusano" label="Castelfusano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895760" start="35700" end="35720" title="Pineto Regional Park" label="Pineto Regional Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="35861" end="35882" title="hot-summer Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="35884" end="35913" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="36707" end="36724" title="relative humidity" label="relative humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="37017" end="37024" title="Taranto" label="Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q735628" start="37033" end="37050" title="Salento Peninsula" label="Salento Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="37488" end="37496" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42827" start="38641" end="38655" title="Pope Gregory I" label="Pope Gregory I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38880" end="38893" title="reform of 419" label="reform of 419"/>
<link wikidata="Q170026" start="39070" end="39085" title="Valentinian III" label="Valentinian III"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="39412" end="39419" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="39553" end="39570" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="39636" end="39647" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="39659" end="39675" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="39903" end="39910" title="Fascism" label="Fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324995" start="41193" end="41215" title="Rome metropolitan area" label="Rome metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="41627" end="41636" title="Filipinos" label="Filipinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368481" start="41697" end="41706" title="Esquilino (rione of Rome)" label="Esquilino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229454" start="41713" end="41718" title="Rioni of Rome" label="rione"/>
<link wikidata="Q754485" start="41730" end="41753" title="Termini Station (Rome)" label="Termini Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q747008" start="42377" end="42389" title="Romanization (cultural)" label="Romanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="42413" end="42419" title="Gallia" label="Gallia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="42425" end="42442" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q173082" start="42447" end="42452" title="Dacia" label="Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="42658" end="42673" title="Norman Conquest" label="Norman Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="42750" end="42773" title="Latin alphabet" label="Roman or Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231625" start="42882" end="42895" title="Roman dialect" label="Roman dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q33845" start="42981" end="43000" title="Neapolitan language" label="Neapolitan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q433189" start="43102" end="43116" title="Cola di Rienzo" label="Cola di Rienzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990745" start="43283" end="43297" title="Tuscan dialect" label="Tuscan dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q170022" start="43370" end="43376" title="House of Medici" label="Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q49237" start="43384" end="43389" title="Leo X" label="Leo X"/>
<link wikidata="Q83159" start="43394" end="43405" title="Clement VII" label="Clement VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q465627" start="43420" end="43440" title="Sack of Rome (1527)" label="Sack of Rome in 1527"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="43493" end="43500" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="43686" end="43695" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118145" start="43755" end="43765" title="Christian pilgrimage" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q212943" start="43829" end="43845" title="Pontifex Maximus" label="pontifex maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="43872" end="43879" title="Holy See" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="43944" end="43958" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="Religio Romana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="44108" end="44115" title="Jupiter (mythology)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="44136" end="44140" title="Mars (mythology)" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197" start="44199" end="44216" title="Romulus and Remus" label="Romulus and Remus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178710" start="44264" end="44269" title="Vesta (mythology)" label="Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q126916" start="44274" end="44281" title="Minerva" label="Minerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q219903" start="44354" end="44363" title="Mithraic Mysteries" label="Mithraism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="44378" end="44386" title="Saint Peter" label="St Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="44391" end="44398" title="Paul the Apostle" label="St Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q810126" start="44499" end="44528" title="Old St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="Old St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q202558" start="44596" end="44610" title="Avignon Papacy" label="Avignon papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="44657" end="44678" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="44687" end="44701" title="Pope" label="Bishop of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="44775" end="44787" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q84090" start="44848" end="44882" title="Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran" label="Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran"/>
<link wikidata="Q186282" start="45035" end="45067" title="Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore" label="Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q231699" start="45073" end="45113" title="Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls" label="Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q385910" start="45119" end="45143" title="Basilica di San Clemente" label="Basilica di San Clemente"/>
<link wikidata="Q867329" start="45145" end="45175" title="San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane" label="San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane"/>
<link wikidata="Q719794" start="45184" end="45202" title="Church of the Gesu" label="Church of the Gesù"/>
<link wikidata="Q741051" start="45231" end="45248" title="Catacombs of Rome" label="Catacombs of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q475007" start="45361" end="45390" title="Pontifical Lateran University" label="Pontifical Lateran University"/>
<link wikidata="Q951184" start="45392" end="45421" title="Pontifical Biblical Institute" label="Pontifical Biblical Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q467025" start="45423" end="45454" title="Pontifical Gregorian University" label="Pontifical Gregorian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q176473" start="45460" end="45489" title="Pontifical Oriental Institute" label="Pontifical Oriental Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="45513" end="45527" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="45569" end="45575" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q914255" start="45611" end="45621" title="Trastevere" label="Trastevere"/>
<link wikidata="Q527647" start="45640" end="45652" title="Roman Ghetto" label="Roman Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548485" start="45709" end="45724" title="Great Synagogue of Rome" label="Tempio Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="45750" end="45762" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053000" start="45806" end="45818" title="Vatican Hill" label="Vatican Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="45870" end="45895" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q145093" start="45901" end="45917" title="Apostolic Palace" label="Apostolic Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943" start="45923" end="45937" title="Sistine Chapel" label="Sistine Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="46030" end="46035" title="rione" label="rione"/>
<link wikidata="Q893556" start="46039" end="46044" title="Borgo (rione of Rome)" label="Borgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="46111" end="46116" title="Tiber" label="Tiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q228205" start="46197" end="46203" title="Pope Leo IV" label="Leo IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q133001" start="46258" end="46266" title="Pope Paul III" label="Paul III"/>
<link wikidata="Q161983" start="46268" end="46275" title="Pope Pius IV" label="Pius IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q131579" start="46281" end="46291" title="Pope Urban VIII" label="Urban VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q193270" start="46302" end="46316" title="Lateran Treaty" label="Lateran Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118145" start="46519" end="46539" title="Christian pilgrimage" label="Christian pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="46555" end="46566" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="46593" end="46608" title="Christian world" label="Christian world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="46702" end="46712" title="pilgrimage" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="46801" end="46812" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q202558" start="46902" end="46919" title="Avignon papacy" label="briefly relocated"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="46923" end="46930" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768461" start="47156" end="47176" title="scala sancta" label="Pilate&amp;#x27;s stairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309666" start="47256" end="47266" title="praetorium" label="praetorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q17131" start="47270" end="47284" title="Pontius Pilate" label="Pontius Pilate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="47288" end="47297" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="47305" end="47317" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q623306" start="47338" end="47345" title="Passion (Christianity)" label="Passion"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="47401" end="47409" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="47421" end="47427" title="Taoist" label="Taoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254859" start="47454" end="47472" title="Reconstructionist Roman religion" label="Roman modern pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870638" start="47590" end="47604" title="Natale di Roma" label="Natale di Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247524" start="47711" end="47729" title="foundation of Rome" label="foundation of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q44342" start="47768" end="47774" title="legend" label="legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186" start="47776" end="47783" title="Romulus" label="Romulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q493878" start="47838" end="47844" title="753 BC" label="753 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="47916" end="47921" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26805" start="47935" end="47950" title="Ab Urbe condita" label="Ab Urbe condita"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="48114" end="48122" title="comune" label="speciale"/>
<link wikidata="Q34925" start="48394" end="48409" title="Capitoline Hill" label="Capitoline Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q25550691" start="48644" end="48653" title="town hall" label="town hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229454" start="49437" end="49442" title="Rioni of Rome" label="rioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q625149" start="49486" end="49500" title="Aurelian Walls" label="Aurelian Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666696" start="49508" end="49513" title="Prati" label="Prati"/>
<link wikidata="Q893556" start="49518" end="49523" title="Borgo (rione of Rome)" label="Borgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243603" start="49550" end="49577" title="14 regions of Augustan Rome" label="14 regions of Augustan Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4549976" start="49621" end="49635" title="14 regions of Medieval Rome" label="medieval rioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="49644" end="49655" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q133350" start="49668" end="49676" title="Sixtus V" label="Sixtus V"/>
<link wikidata="Q126711" start="49755" end="49772" title="Pope Benedict XIV" label="Pope Benedict XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q18288160" start="49817" end="49842" title="Metropolitan City of Rome" label="Metropolitan City of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q15119" start="49915" end="49932" title="Province of Rome" label="provincia di Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q242533" start="50015" end="50028" title="Civitavecchia" label="Civitavecchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="50145" end="50152" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282" start="50200" end="50205" title="Lazio" label="Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q669701" start="50276" end="50294" title="Politics of Italy" label="Italian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q332711" start="50327" end="50360" title="President of Italy" label="President of the Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q796897" start="50369" end="50391" title="Prime Minister of Italy" label="Italian Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117578" start="50425" end="50443" title="Parliament of Italy" label="Italian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q981005" start="50460" end="50488" title="Constitutional Court of Italy" label="Italian Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423801" start="50645" end="50668" title="Palazzo della Farnesina" label="Palazzo della Farnesina"/>
<link wikidata="Q208511" start="50736" end="50749" title="global cities" label="global cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q190353" start="50923" end="50956" title="Sovereign Military Order of Malta" label="Sovereign Military Order of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="50999" end="51011" title="capital city" label="capital city"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="51046" end="51054" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="51119" end="51140" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="51333" end="51347" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="51353" end="51386" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q204344" start="51398" end="51418" title="World Food Programme" label="World Food Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q689859" start="51433" end="51480" title="International Fund for Agricultural Development" label="International Fund for Agricultural Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q11122" start="51581" end="51599" title="Treaties of the EU" label="Treaties of the EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423801" start="51615" end="51638" title="Palazzo della Farnesina" label="Palazzo della Farnesina"/>
<link wikidata="Q167457" start="51683" end="51697" title="Treaties of Rome" label="Treaty of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="51721" end="51748" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="51769" end="51783" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q189066" start="51847" end="51868" title="Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe" label="European Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q642949" start="51907" end="51933" title="European Olympic Committee" label="European Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959842" start="51945" end="51965" title="NATO Defense College" label="NATO Defense College"/>
<link wikidata="Q838958" start="51999" end="52042" title="Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court" label="Statute of the International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q183191" start="52051" end="52086" title="European Convention on Human Rights" label="European Convention on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q11977461" start="52175" end="52179" title="IDLO" label="IDLO"/>
<link wikidata="Q590182" start="52230" end="52236" title="ICCROM" label="ICCROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192641" start="52339" end="52347" title="UNIDROIT" label="UNIDROIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="52503" end="52510" title="twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="52519" end="52524" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="53411" end="53444" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q689859" start="53552" end="53599" title="International Fund for Agricultural Development" label="International Fund for Agricultural Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q204344" start="53608" end="53628" title="World Food Programme" label="World Food Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959842" start="53640" end="53660" title="NATO Defence College" label="NATO Defence College"/>
<link wikidata="Q590182" start="53670" end="53761" title="International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property" label="International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53790" end="53816" title="Global city#GaWC study" label="GaWC study of world cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079848" start="55034" end="55065" title="List of cities by GDP" label="GDP amounting to $167.8 billion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406919" start="55203" end="55211" title="service (economics)" label="services"/>
<link wikidata="Q19326" start="55484" end="55493" title="Fiumicino" label="Fiumicino"/>
<link wikidata="Q651222" start="55689" end="55693" title="Enel" label="Enel"/>
<link wikidata="Q565594" start="55695" end="55698" title="Eni" label="Eni"/>
<link wikidata="Q144617" start="55704" end="55718" title="Telecom Italia" label="Telecom Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q903165" start="55865" end="55886" title="Cinema of Italy" label="Italian film industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368377" start="56258" end="56285" title="Esposizione Universale Roma" label="Esposizione Universale Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q768521" start="56487" end="56500" title="Via Tiburtina" label="Via Tiburtina"/>
<link wikidata="Q333906" start="56882" end="56900" title="Capitoline Museums" label="Capitoline Museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q182955" start="56902" end="56921" title="Vatican Museums" label="the Vatican Museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q474" start="56984" end="56993" title="aqueduct (watercourse)" label="aqueducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q483453" start="56995" end="57003" title="fountain" label="fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16560" start="57016" end="57022" title="palace" label="palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4989906" start="57051" end="57059" title="monument" label="monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q180212" start="57078" end="57089" title="Roman Forum" label="Roman Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q172896" start="57099" end="57108" title="Catacombs" label="Catacombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q182955" start="57320" end="57335" title="Vatican Museums" label="Vatican Museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="57540" end="57563" title="archaeology" label="archaeological research"/>
<link wikidata="Q463271" start="57650" end="57674" title="American Academy in Rome" label="American Academy in Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135556" start="57734" end="57747" title="List of ancient monuments in Rome" label="ancient sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q180212" start="57763" end="57776" title="Roman Forum" label="Forum Romanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q478642" start="57778" end="57798" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Market" label="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q211295" start="57800" end="57819" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Forum" label="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="57825" end="57834" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q99309" start="57844" end="57852" title="Pantheon, Rome" label="Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="57877" end="57886" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q209287" start="57967" end="57986" title="Wonders of the World" label="wonder of the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q483453" start="58040" end="58048" title="fountain" label="fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="58051" end="58057" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="58060" end="58066" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354732" start="58199" end="58208" title="Roman art" label="Roman art"/>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="58217" end="58229" title="Architecture of ancient Rome" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="58255" end="58261" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q953045" start="58268" end="58278" title="Metalworking" label="Metal-work"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894248" start="58280" end="58288" title="coin die" label="coin die"/>
<link wikidata="Q351853" start="58308" end="58321" title="ivory carving" label="ivory carving"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752916" start="58340" end="58347" title="Ancient Roman pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="58471" end="58482" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="58564" end="58572" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q16560" start="58575" end="58581" title="palace" label="palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q174782" start="58584" end="58590" title="piazza" label="piazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="58711" end="58719" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="58803" end="58809" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581485" start="58848" end="58855" title="Italian Baroque" label="baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q160538" start="58926" end="58933" title="Gian Lorenzo Bernini" label="Bernini"/>
<link wikidata="Q42207" start="58935" end="58945" title="Caravaggio" label="Caravaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824" start="58947" end="58955" title="Annibale Carracci" label="Carracci"/>
<link wikidata="Q123150" start="58957" end="58966" title="Francesco Borromini" label="Borromini"/>
<link wikidata="Q333323" start="58971" end="58978" title="Pietro da Cortona" label="Cortona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682302" start="59068" end="59078" title="Grand Tour" label="Grand Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200427" start="59171" end="59192" title="Culture of ancient Rome" label="ancient Roman culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q286670" start="59300" end="59307" title="Giovanni Paolo Pannini" label="Pannini"/>
<link wikidata="Q164688" start="59312" end="59329" title="Bernardo Bellotto" label="Bernardo Bellotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881229" start="59854" end="59902" title="MAXXI – National Museum of the 21st Century Arts" label="MAXXI – National Museum of the 21st Century Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q190148" start="60177" end="60188" title="Renzo Piano" label="Renzo Piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q969726" start="60230" end="60249" title="Massimiliano Fuksas" label="Massimiliano Fuksas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="60888" end="60900" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="60909" end="60920" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q209344" start="61166" end="61177" title="Sapienza University of Rome" label="La Sapienza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031803" start="61678" end="61689" title="University of Rome Tor Vergata" label="Tor Vergata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297486" start="61703" end="61711" title="Roma Tre University" label="Roma Tre"/>
<link wikidata="Q13962825" start="61741" end="61767" title="LUISS School of Government" label="LUISS School of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206180" start="61887" end="61908" title="LUISS Business School" label="LUISS Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3803831" start="61960" end="61964" title="Istituto superiore per le industrie artistiche (ISIA)" label="ISIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q778445" start="61988" end="62006" title="Giulio Carlo Argan" label="Giulio Carlo Argan"/>
<link wikidata="Q243606" start="62062" end="62079" title="industrial design" label="industrial design"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120466" start="62100" end="62123" title="pontifical university" label="pontifical universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q588929" start="62160" end="62182" title="British School at Rome" label="British School at Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q337494" start="62188" end="62209" title="French Academy in Rome" label="French School in Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q467025" start="62215" end="62246" title="Pontifical Gregorian University" label="Pontifical Gregorian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="62259" end="62265" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534589" start="62309" end="62335" title="Istituto Europeo di Design" label="Istituto Europeo di Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949007" start="62341" end="62371" title="Lorenzo de&amp;#x27; Medici School" label="Scuola Lorenzo de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833046" start="62382" end="62397" title="Link Campus" label="Campus of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440288" start="62407" end="62435" title="Università Campus Bio-Medico" label="Università Campus Bio-Medico"/>
<link wikidata="Q469446" start="62493" end="62524" title="The American University of Rome" label="The American University of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314405" start="62529" end="62550" title="John Cabot University" label="John Cabot University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588850" start="62562" end="62588" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s University (Italy)" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232900" start="62604" end="62627" title="John Felice Rome Center" label="John Felice Rome Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537759" start="62641" end="62666" title="Loyola University Chicago" label="Loyola University Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420239" start="62707" end="62724" title="Temple University" label="Temple University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322589" start="62730" end="62744" title="Roman Colleges" label="Roman Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q233324" start="62757" end="62767" title="seminary" label="seminaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q17351675" start="62821" end="62831" title="Catholic priesthood" label="priesthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q981752" start="62885" end="62910" title="Venerable English College" label="Venerable English College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274070" start="62916" end="62949" title="Pontifical North American College" label="Pontifical North American College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762628" start="62955" end="62968" title="Scots College (Rome)" label="Scots College"/>
<link wikidata="Q615542" start="62978" end="63019" title="Pontifical Croatian College of St. Jerome" label="Pontifical Croatian College of St. Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901320" start="63129" end="63153" title="Biblioteca Vallicelliana" label="Biblioteca Vallicelliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901274" start="63180" end="63202" title="Biblioteca Casanatense" label="Biblioteca Casanatense"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382871" start="63224" end="63248" title="National Central Library (Rome)" label="National Central Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963340" start="63724" end="63751" title="Società Geografica Italiana" label="Società Geografica Italiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558489" start="63775" end="63792" title="Villa Mattei" label="Villa Celimontana"/>
<link wikidata="Q213678" start="63899" end="63914" title="Vatican Library" label="Vatican Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q213924" start="64058" end="64065" title="codex" label="codices"/>
<link wikidata="Q216665" start="64130" end="64140" title="Incunabulum" label="incunabula"/>
<link wikidata="Q463271" start="64263" end="64287" title="American Academy in Rome" label="American Academy in Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q337494" start="64293" end="64315" title="French Academy in Rome" label="French Academy in Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q339759" start="64324" end="64383" title="Bibliotheca Hertziana – Max Planck Institute of Art History" label="Bibliotheca Hertziana – Max Planck Institute of Art History"/>
<link wikidata="Q483453" start="64677" end="64685" title="fountain" label="fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q174782" start="64777" end="64783" title="piazza" label="piazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="64805" end="64817" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q297377" start="64842" end="64865" title="Sextus Julius Frontinus" label="Sextus Julius Frontinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007616" start="64904" end="64919" title="Curator Aquarum" label="curator aquarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q474" start="64978" end="64987" title="aqueduct (watercourse)" label="aqueducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599" start="65494" end="65500" title="Peter Paul Rubens" label="Rubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968684" start="65853" end="65876" title="talking statues of Rome" label="talking statues of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q958448" start="66092" end="66100" title="Pasquino" label="Pasquino"/>
<link wikidata="Q831467" start="66109" end="66117" title="Marforio" label="Marforio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085738" start="66156" end="66166" title="il Babuino" label="il Babuino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115154" start="66168" end="66183" title="Madama Lucrezia" label="Madama Lucrezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968656" start="66185" end="66196" title="il Facchino" label="il Facchino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603141" start="66201" end="66212" title="Abbot Luigi" label="Abbot Luigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171839" start="66372" end="66380" title="Menelaus" label="Menelaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q464091" start="66455" end="66462" title="Silenus" label="Silenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q831467" start="66464" end="66472" title="Marforio" label="Marforio"/>
<link wikidata="Q161419" start="66484" end="66491" title="Oceanus" label="Oceanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79876" start="66522" end="66526" title="Isis" label="Isis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968656" start="66532" end="66543" title="il Facchino" label="il Facchino"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="66696" end="66704" title="graffiti" label="graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q36330" start="66934" end="66948" title="Giordano Bruno" label="Giordano Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="67029" end="67042" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="67055" end="67068" title="ancient Rome" label="ancient Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q170980" start="67069" end="67076" title="obelisk" label="obelisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q139377" start="67167" end="67184" title="Aksumite Empire" label="ancient Ethiopian"/>
<link wikidata="Q174782" start="67240" end="67246" title="piazza" label="piazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q463400" start="67260" end="67273" title="Piazza Navona" label="Piazza Navona"/>
<link wikidata="Q83425" start="67275" end="67297" title="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s Square" label="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579746" start="67299" end="67318" title="Piazza di Monte Citorio" label="Piazza Montecitorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q824997" start="67324" end="67341" title="Piazza del Popolo" label="Piazza del Popolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3950" start="67357" end="67362" title="villa" label="villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581615" start="67365" end="67372" title="thermae" label="thermae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558489" start="67403" end="67420" title="Villa Mattei" label="Villa Celimontana"/>
<link wikidata="Q836108" start="67426" end="67445" title="Baths of Diocletian" label="Baths of Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q550215" start="67455" end="67467" title="Pincian Hill" label="Pincian Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q192784" start="67509" end="67515" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s column" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q265384" start="67527" end="67542" title="Column of Marcus Aurelius" label="Antonine Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q63785" start="67634" end="67648" title="Piazza Colonna" label="Piazza Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434" start="67683" end="67691" title="Commodus" label="Commodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q265384" start="67722" end="67747" title="Column of Marcus Aurelius" label="Column of Marcus Aurelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q192784" start="67764" end="67784" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Column" label="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q211295" start="67788" end="67807" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Forum" label="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q216568" start="67830" end="67843" title="Imperial Fora" label="Imperial Fora"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="67929" end="67934" title="Tiber" label="Tiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q944688" start="68010" end="68032" title="Pons Fabricius" label="Ponte dei Quattro Capi"/>
<link wikidata="Q545404" start="68053" end="68067" title="Isola Tiberina" label="Isola Tiberina"/>
<link wikidata="Q734903" start="68173" end="68185" title="Pons Cestius" label="Ponte Cestio"/>
<link wikidata="Q870476" start="68187" end="68209" title="Ponte Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Ponte Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127325" start="68214" end="68226" title="Ponte Milvio" label="Ponte Milvio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351222" start="68240" end="68255" title="Ponte Nomentano" label="Ponte Nomentano"/>
<link wikidata="Q546600" start="68307" end="68313" title="Aniene" label="Aniene"/>
<link wikidata="Q586329" start="68420" end="68431" title="Ponte Sisto" label="Ponte Sisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q640092" start="68500" end="68511" title="Ponte Rotto" label="Ponte Rotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q770949" start="68674" end="68700" title="Ponte Vittorio Emanuele II" label="Ponte Vittorio Emanuele II"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="68919" end="68942" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q870476" start="68995" end="69017" title="Ponte Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Ponte Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q160538" start="69112" end="69119" title="Gian Lorenzo Bernini" label="Bernini"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="69383" end="69388" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q484924" start="69570" end="69574" title="tuff" label="tuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q108689" start="69583" end="69596" title="volcanic rock" label="volcanic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="69642" end="69651" title="Roman law" label="Roman law"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="69757" end="69763" title="Pope" label="Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223659" start="69790" end="69812" title="Salesians of Don Bosco" label="Salesians of Don Bosco"/>
<link wikidata="Q181410" start="70085" end="70121" title="Accademia Nazionale di Santa Cecilia" label="Accademia Nazionale di Santa Cecilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q570949" start="70196" end="70214" title="Parco della Musica" label="Parco della Musica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050350" start="70298" end="70328" title="Teatro dell&amp;#x27;Opera di Roma" label="Teatro dell&amp;#x27;Opera di Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q208523" start="70410" end="70433" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1991" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640575" start="70450" end="70473" title="MTV Europe Music Awards 2004" label="MTV Europe Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294582" start="70539" end="70551" title="Roman School" label="Roman School"/>
<link wikidata="Q201405" start="70702" end="70713" title="Renaissance music" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="70724" end="70731" title="Baroque music" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="70840" end="70847" title="Holy See" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943" start="70856" end="70868" title="Sistine Chapel" label="papal chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q612039" start="70959" end="70974" title="Venetian School (music)" label="Venetian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q179277" start="71099" end="71131" title="Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina" label="Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q179465" start="71207" end="71217" title="polyphony" label="polyphonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240381" start="71610" end="71625" title="fashion capital" label="fashion capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q889368" start="71752" end="71775" title="Global Language Monitor" label="Global Language Monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="71782" end="71787" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="71789" end="71797" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="71803" end="71808" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="71822" end="71828" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q649646" start="71889" end="71898" title="Valentino SpA" label="Valentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q752515" start="71900" end="71907" title="Bulgari" label="Bulgari"/>
<link wikidata="Q926575" start="71909" end="71914" title="Fendi" label="Fendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q466195" start="71916" end="71931" title="Laura Biagiotti" label="Laura Biagiotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q849724" start="71933" end="71939" title="Brioni (brand)" label="Brioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154396" start="71945" end="71960" title="Renato Balestra" label="Renato Balestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q178516" start="72043" end="72048" title="Gucci" label="Gucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q218115" start="72050" end="72056" title="Chanel" label="Chanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q193136" start="72058" end="72063" title="Prada" label="Prada"/>
<link wikidata="Q214480" start="72065" end="72084" title="Dolce &amp;amp; Gabbana" label="Dolce &amp;amp; Gabbana"/>
<link wikidata="Q635484" start="72086" end="72092" title="Armani" label="Armani"/>
<link wikidata="Q696376" start="72098" end="72105" title="Versace" label="Versace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032122" start="72181" end="72197" title="Via Condotti" label="Via dei Condotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="72373" end="72384" title="Ancient Rome" label="ancient age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368949" start="72386" end="72407" title="Ancient Roman cuisine" label="Ancient Roman cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="72602" end="72613" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q683189" start="72753" end="72770" title="Bartolomeo Scappi" label="Bartolomeo Scappi"/>
<link wikidata="Q161983" start="72799" end="72806" title="Pope Pius IV" label="Pius IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778821" start="72980" end="72987" title="cuisine" label="cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q81881" start="73068" end="73072" title="fork" label="fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751443" start="73079" end="73088" title="Testaccio" label="Testaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105503" start="73375" end="73394" title="coda alla vaccinara" label="coda alla vaccinara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030086" start="73743" end="73751" title="Roman Campagna" label="Campagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q23041430" start="73777" end="73793" title="artichoke" label="globe artichokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060834" start="73992" end="74003" title="saltimbocca" label="saltimbocca"/>
<link wikidata="Q15827024" start="74128" end="74148" title="carciofi alla romana" label="carciofi alla romana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038172" start="74261" end="74281" title="carciofi alla giudia" label="carciofi alla giudia"/>
<link wikidata="Q876624" start="74434" end="74458" title="Carbonara" label="spaghetti alla carbonara"/>
<link wikidata="Q20026" start="74467" end="74476" title="spaghetti" label="spaghetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q11106" start="74482" end="74487" title="bacon" label="bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q93189" start="74489" end="74493" title="egg (food)" label="eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q677640" start="74504" end="74512" title="pecorino" label="pecorino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533235" start="74530" end="74561" title="Gnocchi alla romana" label="gnocchi di semolino alla romana"/>
<link wikidata="Q381350" start="74570" end="74578" title="semolina" label="semolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q728399" start="74632" end="74649" title="Cinecittà" label="Cinecittà Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q903165" start="74747" end="74761" title="Cinema of Italy" label="Italian cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="74958" end="74967" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles, California" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="75139" end="75155" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="75188" end="75202" title="Allies of World War II" label="Western Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371" start="75390" end="75406" title="Federico Fellini" label="Federico Fellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="75661" end="75681" title="Association football" label="Association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477177" start="75787" end="75791" title="1934 FIFA World Cup" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="75796" end="75815" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q159884" start="75846" end="75861" title="Stadio Olimpico" label="Stadio Olimpico"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804" start="75911" end="75918" title="Serie A" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609" start="75925" end="75933" title="SS Lazio" label="SS Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739" start="75956" end="75963" title="AS Roma" label="AS Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q19390" start="76003" end="76023" title="Derby della Capitale" label="Derby della Capitale"/>
<link wikidata="Q20110" start="76213" end="76228" title="Francesco Totti" label="Francesco Totti"/>
<link wikidata="Q168497" start="76233" end="76249" title="Daniele De Rossi" label="Daniele De Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q227892" start="76274" end="76290" title="Alessandro Nesta" label="Alessandro Nesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8415" start="76324" end="76344" title="1960 Summer Olympics" label="1960 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q678313" start="76403" end="76417" title="Villa Borghese gardens" label="Villa Borghese"/>
<link wikidata="Q502098" start="76426" end="76446" title="Baths of Caracalla" label="Thermae of Caracalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="76632" end="76651" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348100" start="76658" end="76673" title="Stadio Flaminio" label="Stadio Flaminio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816571" start="76822" end="76825" title="Rome bid for the 2020 Summer Olympics" label="bid"/>
<link wikidata="Q181278" start="76838" end="76858" title="2020 Summer Olympics" label="2020 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q36832" start="76907" end="76922" title="EuroBasket 1991" label="EuroBasket 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q36462" start="76985" end="76996" title="Virtus Roma" label="Virtus Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="76998" end="77009" title="Rugby union" label="Rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q113135" start="77099" end="77130" title="Italy national rugby union team" label="Italy national rugby union team"/>
<link wikidata="Q16642" start="77162" end="77186" title="Six Nations Championship" label="Six Nations Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q969462" start="77404" end="77414" title="Rugby Roma Olimpic" label="Rugby Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q474910" start="77455" end="77478" title="Unione Rugby Capitolina" label="Unione Rugby Capitolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101990" start="77483" end="77504" title="S.S. Lazio Rugby 1927" label="S.S. Lazio Rugby 1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q319496" start="77588" end="77600" title="Italian Open (tennis)" label="Italian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q300029" start="77605" end="77621" title="ATP Masters 1000 tournaments" label="ATP Masters 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437911" start="77667" end="77679" title="Foro Italico" label="Foro Italico"/>
<link wikidata="Q33861" start="77810" end="77828" title="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614750" start="77912" end="77926" title="M. Roma Volley" label="M. Roma Volley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="77929" end="77937" title="handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707" start="77941" end="77950" title="water polo" label="waterpolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34925" start="78098" end="78113" title="Capitoline Hill" label="Capitoline Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q614154" start="78236" end="78259" title="Grande Raccordo Anulare" label="Grande Raccordo Anulare"/>
<link wikidata="Q24045957" start="78352" end="78364" title="railway node" label="railway node"/>
<link wikidata="Q754485" start="78418" end="78425" title="Roma Termini railway station" label="Termini"/>
<link wikidata="Q801376" start="78615" end="78629" title="Roma Tiburtina railway station" label="Roma Tiburtina"/>
<link wikidata="Q838276" start="78657" end="78672" title="High-speed rail in Italy" label="high-speed rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q19101" start="78959" end="78998" title="Leonardo da Vinci–Fiumicino Airport" label="Leonardo da Vinci International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q19326" start="79052" end="79061" title="Fiumicino" label="Fiumicino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132616" start="79093" end="79114" title="Ciampino–G. B. Pastine International Airport" label="Rome Ciampino Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q242513" start="79241" end="79249" title="Ciampino" label="Ciampino"/>
<link wikidata="Q669060" start="79292" end="79309" title="Rome Urbe Airport" label="Rome Urbe Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11171297" start="79670" end="79683" title="Ostia (Rome)" label="Lido di Ostia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909229" start="79794" end="79815" title="Port of Civitavecchia" label="Port of Civitavecchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q914255" start="80642" end="80652" title="Trastevere" label="Trastevere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751443" start="80654" end="80663" title="Testaccio" label="Testaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q541703" start="80668" end="80679" title="San Lorenzo (Rome)" label="San Lorenzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q237480" start="80787" end="80800" title="Rome Metro" label="Metropolitana"/>
<link wikidata="Q754485" start="80929" end="80949" title="Roma Termini railway station" label="main railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q172754" start="81022" end="81032" title="List of world expositions" label="World Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368377" start="81154" end="81181" title="EUR, Rome" label="Esposizione Universale Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q754485" start="81920" end="81927" title="Roma Termini railway station" label="Termini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="82770" end="82780" title="trolleybus" label="trolleybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48740750" start="82801" end="82816" title="Outline of Rome" label="Outline of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q131306" start="82819" end="82823" title="SPQR" label="SPQR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166497" start="82826" end="82842" title="Tourism in Italy" label="Tourism in Italy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25459" wikidata="Q5463" url="?curid=25459" title="Rocky Mountains">
<text>The Rocky Mountains, also known as the Rockies, are a major mountain range and the largest mountain system in North America. The Rocky Mountains stretch in straight-line distance from the northernmost part of Western Canada, to New Mexico in the Southwestern United States. Depending on differing definitions between Canada and the U.S., its northern terminus is located either in northern British Columbia&#x27;s Terminal Range south of the Liard River and east of the Trench, or in the northeastern foothills of the Brooks Range/British Mountains that face the Beaufort Sea coasts between the Canning River and the Firth River across the Alaska-Yukon border. Its southernmost point is near the Albuquerque area adjacent to the Rio Grande rift and north of the Sandia–Manzano Mountain Range. Being the easternmost portion of the North American Cordillera, the Rockies are distinct from the tectonically younger Cascade Range and Sierra Nevada, which both lie farther to its west.

The Rockies formed 55 million to 80 million years ago during the Laramide orogeny, in which a number of plates began sliding underneath the North American plate. The angle of subduction was shallow, resulting in a broad belt of mountains running down western North America. Since then, further tectonic activity and erosion by glaciers have sculpted the Rockies into dramatic peaks and valleys. At the end of the last ice age, humans began inhabiting the mountain range. After explorations of the range by Europeans, such as Sir Alexander Mackenzie, and Anglo-Americans, such as the Lewis and Clark Expedition, natural resources such as minerals and fur drove the initial economic exploitation of the mountains, although the range itself has never experienced a dense population.

Most of the highest summits of the Rocky Mountains are in Colorado, with that state having an average elevation in excess of . Public parks and forest lands protect much of the mountain range, and they are popular tourist destinations, especially for hiking, camping, mountaineering, fishing, hunting, mountain biking, snowmobiling, skiing, and snowboarding.

==Etymology==
The name of the mountains is a calque of an Algonquian name, specifically Plains Cree (originally transcribed ), literally &quot;rocky mountain / alp&quot;. The first mention of their present name by a European was in the journal of Jacques Legardeur de Saint-Pierre in 1752, where they were called &quot;&quot;. Another name given to the place by the Cree is .

==Geography==

The Rocky Mountains are the easternmost portion of the expansive North American Cordillera. They are often defined as stretching from the Liard River in British Columbia south to the headwaters of the Pecos River, a tributary of the Rio Grande, in New Mexico. The Rockies vary in width from . The Rocky Mountains contain the highest peaks in central North America. The range&#x27;s highest peak is Mount Elbert in Colorado at above sea level. Mount Robson in British Columbia, at , is the highest peak in the Canadian Rockies.
The eastern edge of the Rockies rises dramatically above the Interior Plains of central North America, including the Sangre de Cristo Mountains of New Mexico and Colorado, the Front Range of Colorado, the Wind River Range and Big Horn Mountains of Wyoming, the Absaroka-Beartooth ranges and Rocky Mountain Front of Montana and the Clark Range of Alberta.

Central ranges of the Rockies include the La Sal Range along the Utah-Colorado border, the Abajo Mountains and Henry Mountains of Southeastern Utah, the Uinta Range of Utah and Wyoming, and the Teton Range of Wyoming and Idaho.

The western edge of the Rockies includes ranges such as the Wasatch near Salt Lake City, the San Juan Mountains of New Mexico and Colorado, the Bitterroots along the Idaho-Montana border, and the Sawtooths in central Idaho. The Great Basin and Columbia River Plateau separate these subranges from distinct ranges further to the west. In Canada, the western edge of the Rockies is formed by the huge Rocky Mountain Trench, which runs the length of British Columbia from its beginning as the Kechika Valley on the south bank of the Liard River, to the middle Lake Koocanusa valley in northwestern Montana.

The Canadian Rockies are defined by Canadian geographers as everything south of the Liard River and east of the Rocky Mountain Trench, and do not extend into Yukon, Northwest Territories or central British Columbia. They are divided into three main groups: the Muskwa Ranges, Hart Ranges (collectively called the Northern Rockies) and Continental Ranges. Other more northerly mountain ranges of the eastern Canadian Cordillera continue beyond the Liard River valley, including the Selwyn, Mackenzie and Richardson Mountains in Yukon as well as the British Mountains/Brooks Range in Alaska, but those are not officially recognized as part of the Rockies by the Geological Survey of Canada, although the Geological Society of America definition does consider them parts of the Rocky Mountains system as the &quot;Arctic Rockies&quot;.

The Continental Divide of the Americas is in the Rocky Mountains and designates the line at which waters flow either to the Atlantic or Pacific Oceans. Triple Divide Peak () in Glacier National Park is so named because water falling on the mountain reaches not only the Atlantic and Pacific but Hudson Bay as well. Farther north in Alberta, the Athabasca and other rivers feed the basin of the Mackenzie River, which has its outlet on the Beaufort Sea of the Arctic Ocean.

Human population is not very dense in the Rockies, with an average of four people per square kilometer and few cities with over 50,000 people. However, the human population grew rapidly in the Rocky Mountain states between 1950 and 1990. The forty-year statewide increases in population range from 35% in Montana to about 150% in Utah and Colorado. The populations of several mountain towns and communities have doubled in the forty years 1972–2012. Jackson, Wyoming, increased 260%, from 1,244 to 4,472 residents, in those forty years.

==Geology==

The rocks in the Rocky Mountains were formed before the mountains were raised by tectonic forces. The oldest rock is Precambrian metamorphic rock that forms the core of the North American continent. There is also Precambrian sedimentary argillite, dating back to 1.7 billion years ago. During the Paleozoic, western North America lay underneath a shallow sea, which deposited many kilometers of limestone and dolomite.

In the southern Rockies, near present-day Colorado, these ancestral rocks were disturbed by mountain building approximately 300 Ma, during the Pennsylvanian. This mountain-building produced the Ancestral Rocky Mountains. They consisted largely of Precambrian metamorphic rock forced upward through layers of the limestone laid down in the shallow sea. The mountains eroded throughout the late Paleozoic and early Mesozoic, leaving extensive deposits of sedimentary rock.

Terranes began colliding with the western edge of North America in the Mississippian (approximately 350 million years ago), causing the Antler orogeny. For 270 million years, the focus of the effects of plate collisions were near the edge of the North American Plate boundary, far to the west of the Rocky Mountain region. It was not until 80 Ma that these effects began reaching the Rockies.

The current Rocky Mountains arose in the Laramide orogeny from between 80 and 55 Ma. For the Canadian Rockies, the mountain building is analogous to pushing a rug on a hardwood floor: the rug bunches up and forms wrinkles (mountains). In Canada, the terranes and subduction are the foot pushing the rug, the ancestral rocks are the rug, and the Canadian Shield in the middle of the continent is the hardwood floor.

Further south, an unusual subduction may have caused the growth of the Rocky Mountains in the United States, where the Farallon Plate dove at a shallow angle below the North American Plate. This low angle moved the focus of melting and mountain building much farther inland than the normal . Scientists hypothesize that the shallow angle of the subducting plate increased the friction and other interactions with the thick continental mass above it. Tremendous thrusts piled sheets of crust on top of each other, building the broad, high Rocky Mountain range.
The current southern Rockies were forced upwards through the layers of Pennsylvanian and Permian sedimentary remnants of the Ancestral Rocky Mountains. Such sedimentary remnants were often tilted at steep angles along the flanks of the modern range; they are now visible in many places throughout the Rockies, and are shown along the Dakota Hogback, an early Cretaceous sandstone formation running along the eastern flank of the modern Rockies.

Just after the Laramide orogeny, the Rockies were like Tibet: a high plateau, probably above sea level. In the last sixty million years, erosion stripped away the high rocks, revealing the ancestral rocks beneath, and forming the current landscape of the Rockies.

Periods of glaciation occurred from the Pleistocene Epoch (1.8 million – 70,000 years ago) to the Holocene Epoch (fewer than 11,000 years ago). These ice ages left their mark on the Rockies, forming extensive glacial landforms, such as U-shaped valleys and cirques. Recent glacial episodes included the Bull Lake Glaciation, which began about 150,000 years ago, and the Pinedale Glaciation, which perhaps remained at full glaciation until 15,000–20,000 years ago.

All of these geological processes exposed a complex set of rocks at the surface. For example, volcanic rock from the Paleogene and Neogene periods (66 million – 2.6 million years ago) occurs in the San Juan Mountains and in other areas. Millennia of severe erosion in the Wyoming Basin transformed intermountain basins into a relatively flat terrain. The Tetons and other north-central ranges contain folded and faulted rocks of Paleozoic and Mesozoic age draped above cores of Proterozoic and Archean igneous and metamorphic rocks ranging in age from 1.2 billion (e.g., Tetons) to more than 3.3 billion years (Beartooth Mountains).

==Ecology and climate==
There are a wide range of environmental factors in the Rocky Mountains. The Rockies range in latitude between the Liard River in British Columbia (at 59° N) and the Rio Grande in New Mexico (at 35° N). Prairie occurs at or below , while the highest peak in the range is Mount Elbert at . Precipitation ranges from per year in the southern valleys to per year locally in the northern peaks. Average January temperatures can range from in Prince George, British Columbia, to in Trinidad, Colorado. Therefore, there is no single monolithic ecosystem for the entire Rocky Mountain Range.
Instead, ecologists divide the Rockies into a number of biotic zones. Each zone is defined by whether it can support trees and the presence of one or more indicator species. Two zones that do not support trees are the Plains and the Alpine tundra. The Great Plains lie to the east of the Rockies and is characterized by prairie grasses (below roughly ). Alpine tundra occurs in regions above the tree-line for the Rocky Mountains, which varies from in New Mexico to at the northern end of the Rockies (near the Yukon).

The U.S. Geological Survey defines ten forested zones in the Rockies. Zones in more southern, warmer, or drier areas are defined by the presence of pinyon pines/junipers, ponderosa pines, or oaks mixed with pines. In more northern, colder, or wetter areas, zones are defined by Douglas firs, Cascadian species (such as western hemlock), lodgepole pines/quaking aspens, or firs mixed with spruce. Near tree-line, zones can consist of white pines (such as whitebark pine or bristlecone pine); or a mixture of white pine, fir, and spruce that appear as shrub-like krummholz. Finally, rivers and canyons can create a unique forest zone in more arid parts of the mountain range.

The Rocky Mountains are an important habitat for a great deal of well-known wildlife, such as wolves, elk, moose, mule and white-tailed deer, pronghorn, mountain goats, bighorn sheep, badgers, black bears, grizzly bears, coyotes, lynxes, cougars, and wolverines. North America&#x27;s largest herds of elk are in the Alberta–British Columbia foothills forests.

The status of most species in the Rocky Mountains is unknown, due to incomplete information. European-American settlement of the mountains has adversely impacted native species. Examples of some species that have declined include western toads, greenback cutthroat trout, white sturgeon, white-tailed ptarmigan, trumpeter swan, and bighorn sheep.

In the U.S. portion of the mountain range, apex predators such as grizzly bears and wolf packs had been extirpated from their original ranges, but have partially recovered due to conservation measures and reintroduction. Other recovering species include the bald eagle and the peregrine falcon.

==History==
===Indigenous people===
Since the last great ice age, the Rocky Mountains were home first to indigenous peoples including the Apache, Arapaho, Bannock, Blackfoot, Cheyenne, Coeur d&#x27;Alene, Kalispel, Crow Nation, Flathead, Shoshone, Sioux, Ute, Kutenai (Ktunaxa in Canada), Sekani, Dunne-za, and others. Paleo-Indians hunted the now-extinct mammoth and ancient bison (an animal 20% larger than modern bison) in the foothills and valleys of the mountains. Like the modern tribes that followed them, Paleo-Indians probably migrated to the plains in fall and winter for bison and to the mountains in spring and summer for fish, deer, elk, roots, and berries. In Colorado, along with the crest of the Continental Divide, rock walls that Native Americans built for driving game date back 5,400–5,800 years. A growing body of scientific evidence indicates that indigenous people had significant effects on mammal populations by hunting and on vegetation patterns through deliberate burning.

===European exploration===
Recent human history of the Rocky Mountains is one of more rapid change. The Spanish explorer Francisco Vázquez de Coronado—with a group of soldiers and missionaries marched into the Rocky Mountain region from the south in 1540. In 1610, the Spanish founded the city of Santa Fe, the oldest continuous seat of government in the United States, at the foot of the Rockies in present-day New Mexico. The introduction of the horse, metal tools, rifles, new diseases, and different cultures profoundly changed the Native American cultures. Native American populations were extirpated from most of their historical ranges by disease, warfare, habitat loss (eradication of the bison), and continued assaults on their culture.

In 1739, French fur traders Pierre and Paul Mallet, while journeying through the Great Plains, discovered a range of mountains at the headwaters of the Platte River, which local American Indian tribes called the &quot;Rockies&quot;, becoming the first Europeans to report on this uncharted mountain range.
Sir Alexander Mackenzie (1764 – March 11, 1820) became the first European to cross the Rocky Mountains in 1793. He found the upper reaches of the Fraser River and reached the Pacific coast of what is now Canada on July 20 of that year, completing the first recorded transcontinental crossing of North America north of Mexico. He arrived at Bella Coola, British Columbia, where he first reached saltwater at South Bentinck Arm, an inlet of the Pacific Ocean.

The Lewis and Clark Expedition (1804–1806) was the first scientific reconnaissance of the Rocky Mountains. Specimens were collected for contemporary botanists, zoologists, and geologists. The expedition was said to have paved the way to (and through) the Rocky Mountains for European-Americans from the East, although Lewis and Clark met at least 11 European-American mountain men during their travels.

Mountain men, primarily French, Spanish, and British, roamed the Rocky Mountains from 1720 to 1800 seeking mineral deposits and furs. The fur-trading North West Company established Rocky Mountain House as a trading post in what is now the Rocky Mountain Foothills of present-day Alberta in 1799, and their business rivals the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company established Acton House nearby. These posts served as bases for most European activity in the Canadian Rockies in the early 19th century. Among the most notable are the expeditions of David Thompson, who followed the Columbia River to the Pacific Ocean. On his 1811 expedition, he camped at the junction of the Columbia River and the Snake River and erected a pole and notice claiming the area for the United Kingdom and stating the intention of the North West Company to build a fort at the site.

By the Anglo-American Convention of 1818, which established the 49th parallel north as the international boundary west from Lake of the Woods to the &quot;Stony Mountains&quot;, the UK and the US agreed to what has since been described as &quot;joint occupancy&quot; of lands further west to the Pacific Ocean. Resolution of the territorial and treaty issues, the Oregon dispute, was deferred until a later time.

In 1819, Spain ceded their rights north of the 42nd Parallel to the United States, though these rights did not include possession and also included obligations to Britain and Russia concerning their claims in the same region.

===Settlement===

After 1802, fur traders and explorers ushered in the first widespread American presence in the Rockies south of the 49th parallel. The more famous of these include William Henry Ashley, Jim Bridger, Kit Carson, John Colter, Thomas Fitzpatrick, Andrew Henry, and Jedediah Smith. On July 24, 1832, Benjamin Bonneville led the first wagon train across the Rocky Mountains by using South Pass in the present State of Wyoming. Similarly, in the wake of Mackenzie&#x27;s 1793 expedition, fur trading posts were established west of the Northern Rockies in a region of the northern Interior Plateau of British Columbia which came to be known as New Caledonia, beginning with Fort McLeod (today&#x27;s community of McLeod Lake) and Fort Fraser, but ultimately focused on Stuart Lake Post (today&#x27;s Fort St. James).

Negotiations between the United Kingdom and the United States over the next few decades failed to settle upon a compromise boundary and the Oregon Dispute became important in geopolitical diplomacy between the British Empire and the new American Republic. In 1841, James Sinclair, Chief Factor of the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company, guided some 200 settlers from the Red River Colony west to bolster settlement around Fort Vancouver in an attempt to retain the Columbia District for Britain. The party crossed the Rockies into the Columbia Valley, a region of the Rocky Mountain Trench near present-day Radium Hot Springs, British Columbia, then traveled south. Despite such efforts, in 1846, Britain ceded all claim to Columbia District lands south of the 49th parallel to the United States; as resolution to the Oregon boundary dispute by the Oregon Treaty.

Thousands passed through the Rocky Mountains on the Oregon Trail beginning in the 1840s. The Mormons began settling near the Great Salt Lake in 1847. From 1859 to 1864, gold was discovered in Colorado, Idaho, Montana, and British Columbia, sparking several gold rushes bringing thousands of prospectors and miners to explore every mountain and canyon and to create the Rocky Mountains&#x27; first major industry. The Idaho gold rush alone produced more gold than the California and Alaska gold rushes combined and was important in the financing of the Union Army during the American Civil War. The transcontinental railroad was completed in 1869, and Yellowstone National Park was established as the world&#x27;s first national park in 1872. Meanwhile, a transcontinental railroad in Canada was originally promised in 1871. Though political complications pushed its completion to 1885, the Canadian Pacific Railway eventually followed the Kicking Horse and Rogers Passes to the Pacific Ocean. Canadian railway officials also convinced Parliament to set aside vast areas of the Canadian Rockies as Jasper, Banff, Yoho, and Waterton Lakes National Parks, laying the foundation for a tourism industry which thrives to this day. Glacier National Park (MT) was established with a similar relationship to tourism promotions by the Great Northern Railway. While settlers filled the valleys and mining towns, conservation and preservation ethics began to take hold. U.S. President Benjamin Harrison established several forest reserves in the Rocky Mountains in 1891–1892. In 1905, U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt extended the Medicine Bow Forest Reserve to include the area now managed as Rocky Mountain National Park. Economic development began to center on mining, forestry, agriculture, and recreation, as well as on the service industries that support them. Tents and camps became ranches and farms, forts and train stations became towns, and some towns became cities.

==Economy==

===Industry and development===
Economic resources of the Rocky Mountains are varied and abundant. Minerals found in the Rocky Mountains include significant deposits of copper, gold, lead, molybdenum, silver, tungsten, and zinc. The Wyoming Basin and several smaller areas contain significant reserves of coal, natural gas, oil shale, and petroleum. For example, the Climax mine, near Leadville, Colorado, was the largest producer of molybdenum in the world. Molybdenum is used in heat-resistant steel in such things as cars and planes. The Climax mine employed over 3,000 workers. The Coeur d&#x27;Alene mine of northern Idaho produces silver, lead, and zinc. Canada&#x27;s largest coal mines are near Fernie, British Columbia and Sparwood, British Columbia; additional coal mines exist near Hinton, Alberta, and in the Northern Rockies surrounding Tumbler Ridge, British Columbia.

Abandoned mines with their wakes of mine tailings and toxic wastes dot the Rocky Mountain landscape. In one major example, eighty years of zinc mining profoundly polluted the river and bank near Eagle River in north-central Colorado. High concentrations of the metal carried by spring runoff harmed algae, moss, and trout populations. An economic analysis of mining effects at this site revealed declining property values, degraded water quality, and the loss of recreational opportunities. The analysis also revealed that cleanup of the river could yield $2.3 million in additional revenue from recreation. In 1983, the former owner of the zinc mine was sued by the Colorado Attorney General for the $4.8 million cleanup costs; five years later, ecological recovery was considerable.

The Rocky Mountains contain several sedimentary basins that are rich in coalbed methane. Coalbed methane is natural gas that arises from coal, either through bacterial action or through exposure to high temperature. Coalbed methane supplies 7 percent of the natural gas used in the U.S. The largest coalbed methane sources in the Rocky Mountains are in the San Juan Basin in New Mexico and Colorado and the Powder River Basin in Wyoming. These two basins are estimated to contain 38 trillion cubic feet of gas. Coalbed methane can be recovered by dewatering the coal bed, and separating the gas from the water; or injecting water to fracture the coal to release the gas (so-called hydraulic fracturing).

Agriculture and forestry are major industries. Agriculture includes dryland and irrigated farming and livestock grazing. Livestock are frequently moved between high-elevation summer pastures and low-elevation winter pastures, a practice known as transhumance.

===Tourism===


Every year the scenic areas of the Rocky Mountains draw millions of tourists. The main language of the Rocky Mountains is English. But there are also linguistic pockets of Spanish and indigenous languages.

People from all over the world visit the sites to hike, camp, or engage in mountain sports. In the summer season, examples of tourist attractions are:

In the United States:
* Yellowstone National Park
* Glacier National Park
* Grand Teton National Park
* Rocky Mountain National Park
* Great Sand Dunes National Park and Preserve
* Sawtooth National Recreation Area
* Flathead Lake

In Canada, the mountain range contains these national parks:
* Banff National Park
* Jasper National Park
* Kootenay National Park
* Waterton Lakes National Park
* Yoho National Park

Glacier National Park in Montana and Waterton Lakes National Park in Alberta border each other and are collectively known as Waterton-Glacier International Peace Park.

In the winter, skiing and snowboarding are the main attractions, with dozens of Rocky Mountain ski areas and resorts.

The adjacent Columbia Mountains in British Columbia contain major resorts such as Panorama and Kicking Horse, as well as Mount Revelstoke National Park and Glacier National Park.

There are numerous provincial parks in the British Columbia Rockies, the largest and most notable being Mount Assiniboine Provincial Park, Mount Robson Provincial Park, Northern Rocky Mountains Provincial Park, Kwadacha Wilderness Provincial Park, Stone Mountain Provincial Park and Muncho Lake Provincial Park.

John Denver wrote the song Rocky Mountain High in 1972. The song is one of the two official state songs of Colorado.

==Hazards==

Encountering bears or mountain lions (cougars) is a concern in the Rocky Mountains. There are other concerns as well, including bugs, wildfires, adverse snow conditions and nighttime cold temperatures.

Importantly, there have been notable incidents in the Rocky Mountains, including accidental deaths, due to falls from steep cliffs (a could be fatal in this class 4/5 terrain) and due to falling rocks, over the years, including 1993, 2007 (involving an experienced NOLS leader), 2015 and 2018. Other incidents include a seriously injured backpacker being airlifted near SquareTop Mountain in 2005, and a fatal hiker incident (from an apparent accidental fall) in 2006 that involved state search and rescue. The U.S. Forest Service does not offer updated aggregated records on the official number of fatalities in the Rocky Mountains.

==See also==
* Arabian Rocky Mountains
* Hazards in the Wind River Range
* List of mountain peaks of the Rocky Mountains
* Little Rocky Mountains, mountain range in north-central Montana 
* Rocky Mountains subalpine zone
* Southern Rocky Mountains

==References==
==Further reading==
* Hamp, Sidford F. (1899), &quot;The treasure of Mushroom Rock: A story of prospecting in the Rocky Mountains&quot;, United States: G. P. Putnam&#x27;s Sons.

==External links==

* Colorado Rockies Forests ecoregion images at bioimages.vanderbilt.edu (slow modem version)
* North Central Rockies Forests ecoregion images at bioimages.vanderbilt.edu (slow modem version)
* South Central Rockies Forests ecoregion images at bioimages.vanderbilt.edu (slow modem version)
* Sunset on the Top of the Rocky Mountains, CO, Historical Society of Pennsylvania </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="4" end="19" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="39" end="46" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="60" end="74" title="mountain range" label="mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="110" end="123" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q912925" start="156" end="178" title="great-circle distance" label="straight-line distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145847" start="209" end="223" title="Western Canada" label="Western Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="228" end="238" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="246" end="272" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="317" end="323" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="390" end="406" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702684" start="414" end="428" title="Terminal Range" label="Terminal Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249" start="442" end="453" title="Liard River" label="Liard River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481093" start="466" end="476" title="Rocky Mountain Trench" label="the Trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354045" start="501" end="509" title="foothill" label="foothill"/>
<link wikidata="Q929910" start="518" end="530" title="Brooks Range" label="Brooks Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q22595368" start="531" end="548" title="British Mountains" label="British Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q131274" start="563" end="575" title="Beaufort Sea" label="Beaufort Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033410" start="595" end="608" title="Canning River (Alaska)" label="Canning River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419623" start="617" end="628" title="Firth River" label="Firth River"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="640" end="646" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="647" end="652" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712839" start="696" end="712" title="Albuquerque metropolitan area" label="Albuquerque area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335255" start="729" end="744" title="Rio Grande rift" label="Rio Grande rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416319" start="762" end="791" title="Sandia–Manzano Mountains" label="Sandia–Manzano Mountain Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263948" start="830" end="855" title="North American Cordillera" label="North American Cordillera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558" start="912" end="925" title="Cascade Range" label="Cascade Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="930" end="943" title="Sierra Nevada (U.S.)" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q206492" start="1047" end="1063" title="Laramide orogeny" label="Laramide orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q220305" start="1122" end="1142" title="North American plate" label="North American plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="1157" end="1167" title="subduction" label="subduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040770" start="1395" end="1407" title="Quaternary glaciation" label="last ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q319657" start="1507" end="1530" title="Sir Alexander Mackenzie" label="Sir Alexander Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="1565" end="1591" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="Lewis and Clark Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925528" start="1775" end="1813" title="List of mountain peaks of the Rocky Mountains" label="highest summits of the Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="1821" end="1829" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q585096" start="1847" end="1874" title="List of U.S. states and territories by elevation" label="having an average elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="2014" end="2020" title="hiking" label="hiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q455550" start="2022" end="2029" title="camping" label="camping"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="2031" end="2045" title="mountaineering" label="mountaineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="2047" end="2054" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="2056" end="2063" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q520611" start="2065" end="2080" title="mountain biking" label="mountain biking"/>
<link wikidata="Q17240" start="2082" end="2094" title="snowmobiling" label="snowmobiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="2096" end="2102" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178131" start="2108" end="2120" title="snowboarding" label="snowboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q204826" start="2168" end="2174" title="calque" label="calque"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="2181" end="2191" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q56699" start="2211" end="2222" title="Plains Cree language" label="Plains Cree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159304" start="2370" end="2403" title="Jacques Legardeur de Saint-Pierre" label="Jacques Legardeur de Saint-Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263948" start="2580" end="2605" title="North American Cordillera" label="North American Cordillera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249" start="2653" end="2664" title="Liard River" label="Liard River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="2668" end="2684" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356561" start="2716" end="2727" title="Pecos River" label="Pecos River"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="2748" end="2758" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q657225" start="2913" end="2925" title="Mount Elbert" label="Mount Elbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161258" start="2958" end="2970" title="Mount Robson" label="Mount Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353201" start="3024" end="3040" title="Canadian Rockies" label="Canadian Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q603872" start="3103" end="3118" title="Interior Plains" label="Interior Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328749" start="3159" end="3185" title="Sangre de Cristo Mountains" label="Sangre de Cristo Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="3189" end="3199" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="3204" end="3212" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470027" start="3218" end="3229" title="Front Range" label="Front Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722116" start="3247" end="3263" title="Wind River Range" label="Wind River Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q643243" start="3268" end="3286" title="Big Horn Mountains" label="Big Horn Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="3290" end="3297" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q331762" start="3303" end="3311" title="Absaroka Range" label="Absaroka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145853" start="3312" end="3321" title="Beartooth Mountains" label="Beartooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438029" start="3333" end="3353" title="Rocky Mountain Front" label="Rocky Mountain Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="3357" end="3364" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961849" start="3373" end="3384" title="Clark Range (Rocky Mountains)" label="Clark Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="3388" end="3395" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q467386" start="3440" end="3452" title="La Sal Mountains" label="La Sal Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="3463" end="3467" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q130057" start="3489" end="3504" title="Abajo Mountains" label="Abajo Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367757" start="3509" end="3524" title="Henry Mountains" label="Henry Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q738543" start="3551" end="3562" title="Uinta Mountains" label="Uinta Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q586241" start="3592" end="3603" title="Teton Range" label="Teton Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544388" start="3687" end="3694" title="Wasatch Range" label="Wasatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="3700" end="3714" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165526" start="3720" end="3738" title="San Juan Mountains" label="San Juan Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q879014" start="3771" end="3782" title="Bitterroot Range" label="Bitterroots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428707" start="3823" end="3832" title="Sawtooth Range (Idaho)" label="Sawtooths"/>
<link wikidata="Q966943" start="3855" end="3866" title="Great Basin" label="Great Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q401815" start="3871" end="3893" title="Columbia River Plateau" label="Columbia River Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481093" start="4026" end="4047" title="Rocky Mountain Trench" label="Rocky Mountain Trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="4074" end="4090" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q268222" start="4117" end="4131" title="Kechika River" label="Kechika Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249" start="4157" end="4168" title="Liard River" label="Liard River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6476491" start="4184" end="4198" title="Lake Koocanusa" label="Lake Koocanusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249" start="4316" end="4327" title="Liard River" label="Liard River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481093" start="4344" end="4365" title="Rocky Mountain Trench" label="Rocky Mountain Trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="4390" end="4395" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007" start="4397" end="4418" title="Northwest Territories" label="Northwest Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="4430" end="4446" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942848" start="4493" end="4506" title="Muskwa Ranges" label="Muskwa Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072376" start="4508" end="4519" title="Hart Ranges" label="Hart Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058940" start="4545" end="4561" title="Northern Rockies" label="Northern Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165313" start="4567" end="4585" title="Continental Ranges" label="Continental Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122410" start="4639" end="4658" title="Canadian Cordillera" label="Canadian Cordillera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448930" start="4713" end="4719" title="Selwyn Mountains" label="Selwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817102" start="4721" end="4730" title="Mackenzie Mountains" label="Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q839280" start="4735" end="4755" title="Richardson Mountains" label="Richardson Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q22595368" start="4780" end="4797" title="British Mountains" label="British Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q929910" start="4798" end="4810" title="Brooks Range" label="Brooks Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="4814" end="4820" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986634" start="4892" end="4919" title="Geological Survey of Canada" label="Geological Survey of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503216" start="4934" end="4963" title="Geological Society of America" label="Geological Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q43743" start="5070" end="5104" title="Continental Divide of the Americas" label="Continental Divide of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="5190" end="5198" title="Atlantic" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148432" start="5218" end="5236" title="Triple Divide Peak (Montana)" label="Triple Divide Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q373567" start="5243" end="5264" title="Glacier National Park (U.S.)" label="Glacier National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040" start="5361" end="5371" title="Hudson Bay" label="Hudson Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216" start="5411" end="5420" title="Athabasca River" label="Athabasca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3411" start="5460" end="5475" title="Mackenzie River" label="Mackenzie River"/>
<link wikidata="Q131274" start="5505" end="5517" title="Beaufort Sea" label="Beaufort Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q871285" start="5990" end="6006" title="Jackson, Wyoming" label="Jackson, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="6220" end="6236" title="metamorphic rock" label="metamorphic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q103910" start="6304" end="6315" title="Precambrian" label="Precambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q836062" start="6328" end="6337" title="argillite" label="argillite"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="6388" end="6397" title="Paleozoic" label="Paleozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="6486" end="6495" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q167741" start="6500" end="6508" title="Dolomite (mineral)" label="dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6639" end="6641" title="Year#SI prefix multipliers" label="Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q373772" start="6654" end="6667" title="Pennsylvanian (geology)" label="Pennsylvanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="6924" end="6932" title="Mesozoic Era" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="6964" end="6980" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q509037" start="6983" end="6991" title="Terranes" label="Terranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q744718" start="7054" end="7067" title="Mississippian age" label="Mississippian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775375" start="7119" end="7133" title="Antler orogeny" label="Antler orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q206492" start="7418" end="7434" title="Laramide orogeny" label="Laramide orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q76034" start="7722" end="7737" title="Canadian Shield" label="Canadian Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203170" start="7912" end="7926" title="Farallon Plate" label="Farallon Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q220305" start="7961" end="7981" title="North American Plate" label="North American Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q496325" start="8254" end="8261" title="Thrust fault" label="thrusts"/>
<link wikidata="Q76402" start="8442" end="8449" title="Permian" label="Permian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210019" start="8687" end="8701" title="Dakota Hogback" label="Dakota Hogback"/>
<link wikidata="Q179842" start="8854" end="8859" title="Tibetan Plateau" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="8936" end="8943" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="9104" end="9115" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="9162" end="9170" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="9273" end="9280" title="Glacier" label="glacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q184368" start="9321" end="9327" title="cirque" label="cirque"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996585" start="9367" end="9387" title="Bull Lake Glaciation" label="Bull Lake Glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="9434" end="9453" title="Pinedale Glaciation" label="Pinedale Glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q55810" start="9646" end="9655" title="Paleogene" label="Paleogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q103924" start="9660" end="9667" title="Neogene" label="Neogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595744" start="9801" end="9814" title="Wyoming Basin" label="Wyoming Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q586241" start="9884" end="9890" title="Tetons" label="Tetons"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="9972" end="9980" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q104162" start="10007" end="10018" title="Proterozoic" label="Proterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q104168" start="10023" end="10030" title="Archean" label="Archean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145853" start="10140" end="10159" title="Beartooth Mountains" label="Beartooth Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q657225" start="10457" end="10469" title="Mount Elbert" label="Mount Elbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q74198" start="10663" end="10681" title="Trinidad, Colorado" label="Trinidad, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q126285699" start="10827" end="10839" title="life zones" label="biotic zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q864438" start="10926" end="10943" title="indicator species" label="indicator species"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149452" start="11004" end="11017" title="Alpine tundra" label="Alpine tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="11023" end="11035" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="11295" end="11317" title="U.S. Geological Survey" label="U.S. Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476258" start="11439" end="11450" title="pinyon pine" label="pinyon pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25662" start="11452" end="11459" title="juniper" label="juniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q460523" start="11462" end="11476" title="ponderosa pine" label="ponderosa pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="11482" end="11485" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="11498" end="11502" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q156687" start="11569" end="11580" title="Douglas fir" label="Douglas fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558" start="11583" end="11592" title="Cascade range" label="Cascadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144409" start="11610" end="11625" title="western hemlock" label="western hemlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q165091" start="11628" end="11642" title="lodgepole pine" label="lodgepole pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q469576" start="11644" end="11657" title="quaking aspen" label="quaking aspen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350" start="11663" end="11666" title="fir" label="fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="11679" end="11685" title="spruce" label="spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q761480" start="11745" end="11759" title="Pinus albicaulis" label="whitebark pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q515556" start="11763" end="11779" title="bristlecone pine" label="bristlecone pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518409" start="11852" end="11861" title="krummholz" label="krummholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="12060" end="12066" title="wolf" label="wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q742914" start="12068" end="12071" title="Rocky Mountain elk" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988509" start="12073" end="12078" title="western moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q338831" start="12080" end="12084" title="mule deer" label="mule"/>
<link wikidata="Q215887" start="12089" end="12106" title="white-tailed deer" label="white-tailed deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q187943" start="12108" end="12117" title="pronghorn" label="pronghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q242602" start="12119" end="12132" title="mountain goat" label="mountain goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q189466" start="12135" end="12148" title="bighorn sheep" label="bighorn sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q232129" start="12150" end="12157" title="American badger" label="badgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="12159" end="12170" title="American black bear" label="black bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="12172" end="12184" title="grizzly bear" label="grizzly bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="12187" end="12193" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q146457" start="12196" end="12200" title="Canada lynx" label="lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044439" start="12204" end="12210" title="North American cougar" label="cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q14334" start="12217" end="12226" title="wolverine" label="wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079257" start="12282" end="12324" title="Alberta–British Columbia foothills forests" label="Alberta–British Columbia foothills forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191167" start="12557" end="12569" title="western toad" label="western toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q15725792" start="12572" end="12597" title="greenback cutthroat trout" label="greenback cutthroat trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q592876" start="12599" end="12613" title="white sturgeon" label="white sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19055" start="12615" end="12637" title="white-tailed ptarmigan" label="white-tailed ptarmigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q733375" start="12639" end="12653" title="trumpeter swan" label="trumpeter swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19067" start="12718" end="12731" title="apex predator" label="apex predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q945835" start="12779" end="12789" title="Local extinction" label="extirpated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871088" start="12880" end="12894" title="Wolf reintroduction in Yellowstone" label="reintroduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="12933" end="12943" title="bald eagle" label="bald eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q30535" start="12952" end="12968" title="peregrine falcon" label="peregrine falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="13076" end="13094" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="13109" end="13115" title="Apache" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q626136" start="13117" end="13124" title="Arapaho" label="Arapaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q806902" start="13126" end="13133" title="Bannock (tribe)" label="Bannock"/>
<link wikidata="Q388264" start="13135" end="13144" title="Blackfoot" label="Blackfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q322951" start="13146" end="13154" title="Cheyenne" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q491755" start="13156" end="13174" title="Coeur d&amp;#x27;Alene people" label="Coeur d&amp;#x27;Alene"/>
<link wikidata="Q492901" start="13176" end="13184" title="Kalispel" label="Kalispel"/>
<link wikidata="Q331789" start="13186" end="13197" title="Crow Nation" label="Crow Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q497587" start="13199" end="13207" title="Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes of the Flathead Nation" label="Flathead"/>
<link wikidata="Q26774" start="13209" end="13217" title="Shoshone" label="Shoshone"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="13219" end="13224" title="Lakota people" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253290" start="13226" end="13229" title="Ute Tribe" label="Ute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6440914" start="13231" end="13238" title="Ktunaxa Kinbasket Tribal Council" label="Kutenai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186518" start="13260" end="13266" title="Sekani" label="Sekani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028277" start="13268" end="13276" title="Dunne-za" label="Dunne-za"/>
<link wikidata="Q36715" start="13327" end="13334" title="mammoth" label="mammoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q694570" start="13339" end="13352" title="ancient bison" label="ancient bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q271974" start="14093" end="14122" title="Francisco Vázquez de Coronado" label="Francisco Vázquez de Coronado"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="14269" end="14277" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="14735" end="14744" title="fur trade" label="fur trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q655754" start="14871" end="14883" title="Platte River" label="Platte River"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="14897" end="14912" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="American Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q319657" start="15025" end="15048" title="Alexander Mackenzie (explorer)" label="Sir Alexander Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q815765" start="15365" end="15394" title="Bella Coola, British Columbia" label="Bella Coola, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="15488" end="15514" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="Lewis and Clark Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308103" start="15888" end="15900" title="Mountain man" label="Mountain men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142049" start="16038" end="16056" title="North West Company" label="North West Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743575" start="16069" end="16089" title="Rocky Mountain House" label="Rocky Mountain House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355895" start="16127" end="16151" title="Rocky Mountain Foothills" label="Rocky Mountain Foothills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="16167" end="16174" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="16214" end="16239" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q763043" start="16424" end="16438" title="David Thompson (explorer)" label="David Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q649599" start="16746" end="16779" title="Anglo-American Convention of 1818" label="Anglo-American Convention of 1818"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256141" start="16803" end="16822" title="49th parallel north" label="49th parallel north"/>
<link wikidata="Q845876" start="16863" end="16880" title="Lake of the Woods" label="Lake of the Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q781474" start="17103" end="17117" title="Oregon dispute" label="Oregon dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="17410" end="17420" title="fur trader" label="fur trader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345876" start="17562" end="17582" title="William Henry Ashley" label="William Henry Ashley"/>
<link wikidata="Q713423" start="17584" end="17595" title="Jim Bridger" label="Jim Bridger"/>
<link wikidata="Q379673" start="17597" end="17607" title="Kit Carson" label="Kit Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359737" start="17609" end="17620" title="John Colter" label="John Colter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362388" start="17622" end="17640" title="Thomas Fitzpatrick (trapper)" label="Thomas Fitzpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q505095" start="17642" end="17654" title="Andrew Henry (fur trader)" label="Andrew Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q465232" start="17660" end="17674" title="Jedediah Smith" label="Jedediah Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896167" start="17694" end="17713" title="Benjamin Bonneville" label="Benjamin Bonneville"/>
<link wikidata="Q13393124" start="17728" end="17739" title="wagon train" label="wagon train"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779610" start="17776" end="17786" title="South Pass (Wyoming)" label="South Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2201031" start="18035" end="18048" title="New Caledonia (Canada)" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14874685" start="18065" end="18076" title="McLeod Lake" label="Fort McLeod"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471171" start="18121" end="18132" title="Fort Fraser, British Columbia" label="Fort Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q177800" start="18191" end="18205" title="Fort St. James" label="Fort St. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q781474" start="18349" end="18363" title="Oregon Dispute" label="Oregon Dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q16066230" start="18474" end="18488" title="James Sinclair (fur trapper)" label="James Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032545" start="18571" end="18587" title="Red River Colony" label="Red River Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438804" start="18622" end="18636" title="Fort Vancouver" label="Fort Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980922" start="18665" end="18682" title="Columbia District" label="Columbia District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554073" start="18735" end="18750" title="Columbia Valley" label="Columbia Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422308" start="18807" end="18825" title="Radium Hot Springs (British Columbia)" label="Radium Hot Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q781474" start="19018" end="19041" title="Oregon boundary dispute" label="Oregon boundary dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q823433" start="19049" end="19062" title="Oregon Treaty" label="Oregon Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q862312" start="19117" end="19129" title="Oregon Trail" label="Oregon Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177118" start="19158" end="19164" title="Mormon" label="Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q178741" start="19190" end="19205" title="Great Salt Lake" label="Great Salt Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q273182" start="19322" end="19331" title="gold rush" label="gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="19617" end="19627" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="19639" end="19657" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064041" start="19663" end="19688" title="transcontinental railroad" label="transcontinental railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q351" start="19716" end="19741" title="Yellowstone National Park" label="Yellowstone National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q46974" start="19955" end="19979" title="Canadian Pacific Railway" label="Canadian Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q392154" start="20004" end="20017" title="Kicking Horse Pass" label="Kicking Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q383051" start="20022" end="20028" title="Rogers Pass (British Columbia)" label="Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q475689" start="20100" end="20110" title="Parliament of Canada" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q503429" start="20162" end="20168" title="Jasper National Park" label="Jasper"/>
<link wikidata="Q41858" start="20170" end="20175" title="Banff National Park" label="Banff"/>
<link wikidata="Q828404" start="20177" end="20181" title="Yoho National Park" label="Yoho"/>
<link wikidata="Q902778" start="20187" end="20215" title="Waterton Lakes National Park" label="Waterton Lakes National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272318" start="20390" end="20412" title="Great Northern Railway (U.S.)" label="Great Northern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q35678" start="20528" end="20555" title="Benjamin Harrison" label="President Benjamin Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="20653" end="20671" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q250597" start="20685" end="20712" title="Medicine Bow – Routt National Forest" label="Medicine Bow Forest Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q777183" start="20748" end="20776" title="Rocky Mountain National Park" label="Rocky Mountain National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="20826" end="20834" title="forestry" label="forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q184872" start="20853" end="20863" title="recreation" label="recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="21234" end="21244" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="21254" end="21262" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="21268" end="21272" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q221378" start="21369" end="21378" title="oil shale" label="oil shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q637747" start="21412" end="21418" title="Climax, Colorado" label="Climax"/>
<link wikidata="Q286702" start="21430" end="21449" title="Leadville, Colorado" label="Leadville, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q499681" start="21631" end="21649" title="Coeur d&amp;#x27;Alene, Idaho" label="Coeur d&amp;#x27;Alene"/>
<link wikidata="Q204442" start="21748" end="21772" title="Fernie, British Columbia" label="Fernie, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573961" start="21777" end="21785" title="Sparwood" label="Sparwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016692" start="21838" end="21853" title="Hinton, Alberta" label="Hinton, Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852567" start="21895" end="21926" title="Tumbler Ridge, British Columbia" label="Tumbler Ridge, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325229" start="22124" end="22135" title="Eagle River (Colorado)" label="Eagle River"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="22228" end="22233" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25347" start="22235" end="22239" title="moss" label="moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258881" start="22245" end="22250" title="trout" label="trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q785020" start="22751" end="22768" title="sedimentary basin" label="sedimentary basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q955546" start="22787" end="22802" title="coalbed methane" label="coalbed methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887494" start="23072" end="23086" title="San Juan Basin" label="San Juan Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106899" start="23122" end="23140" title="Powder River Basin" label="Powder River Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q890794" start="23396" end="23416" title="hydraulic fracturing" label="hydraulic fracturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q30121" start="23602" end="23609" title="pasture" label="pasture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657754" start="23666" end="23678" title="transhumance" label="transhumance"/>
<link wikidata="Q820236" start="23979" end="23994" title="Mountain sport" label="mountain sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q351" start="24080" end="24105" title="Yellowstone National Park" label="Yellowstone National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q373567" start="24108" end="24129" title="Glacier National Park (U.S.)" label="Glacier National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q222695" start="24132" end="24157" title="Grand Teton National Park" label="Grand Teton National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q777183" start="24160" end="24188" title="Rocky Mountain National Park" label="Rocky Mountain National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q609097" start="24191" end="24234" title="Great Sand Dunes National Park and Preserve" label="Great Sand Dunes National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428703" start="24237" end="24270" title="Sawtooth National Recreation Area" label="Sawtooth National Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427364" start="24273" end="24286" title="Flathead Lake" label="Flathead Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896949" start="24333" end="24347" title="National Parks of Canada" label="national parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q41858" start="24351" end="24370" title="Banff National Park" label="Banff National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q503429" start="24373" end="24393" title="Jasper National Park" label="Jasper National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q903323" start="24396" end="24418" title="Kootenay National Park" label="Kootenay National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q902778" start="24421" end="24449" title="Waterton Lakes National Park" label="Waterton Lakes National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q828404" start="24452" end="24470" title="Yoho National Park" label="Yoho National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q828212" start="24597" end="24638" title="Waterton-Glacier International Peace Park" label="Waterton-Glacier International Peace Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24721" end="24757" title="List of ski areas and resorts in the United States#Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountain ski areas and resorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q995986" start="24842" end="24850" title="Panorama Mountain Resort" label="Panorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q6402050" start="24855" end="24868" title="Kicking Horse Resort" label="Kicking Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q862265" start="24881" end="24911" title="Mount Revelstoke National Park" label="Mount Revelstoke National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113955" start="24959" end="24975" title="List of provincial parks in British Columbia" label="provincial parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q649501" start="25044" end="25077" title="Mount Assiniboine Provincial Park" label="Mount Assiniboine Provincial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950710" start="25079" end="25107" title="Mount Robson Provincial Park" label="Mount Robson Provincial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058942" start="25109" end="25149" title="Northern Rocky Mountains Provincial Park" label="Northern Rocky Mountains Provincial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6449941" start="25151" end="25186" title="Kwadacha Wilderness Provincial Park" label="Kwadacha Wilderness Provincial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351546" start="25188" end="25218" title="Stone Mountain Provincial Park" label="Stone Mountain Provincial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952659" start="25223" end="25250" title="Muncho Lake Provincial Park" label="Muncho Lake Provincial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q105460" start="25253" end="25264" title="John Denver" label="John Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904567" start="25280" end="25299" title="Rocky Mountain High" label="Rocky Mountain High"/>
<link wikidata="Q783790" start="25345" end="25356" title="List of U.S. state songs" label="state songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876603" start="25397" end="25402" title="Bear danger" label="bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q35255" start="25406" end="25420" title="Cougar" label="mountain lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="25512" end="25516" title="Insect" label="bugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="25518" end="25526" title="wildfire" label="wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q614847" start="25529" end="25552" title="Classifications of snow" label="adverse snow conditions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25557" end="25584" title="Rocky Mountain National Park#Elevation" label="nighttime cold temperatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q21142718" start="25668" end="25684" title="accidental death" label="accidental death"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25694" end="25717" title="Mountaineering#Falls from rocks" label="falls from steep cliffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055930" start="25744" end="25761" title="Yosemite Decimal System" label="class 4/5 terrain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25774" end="25787" title="Mountaineering#Falling rocks" label="falling rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974711" start="25852" end="25863" title="National Outdoor Leadership School" label="NOLS leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q373456" start="25957" end="25975" title="Pinedale, Wyoming" label="SquareTop Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q21142718" start="26030" end="26045" title="Accidental death" label="accidental fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q741964" start="26075" end="26092" title="search and rescue" label="search and rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="26098" end="26117" title="U.S. Forest Service" label="U.S. Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422726" start="26237" end="26260" title="Hajar Mountains" label="Arabian Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26263" end="26294" title="Wind River Range#Hazards" label="Hazards in the Wind River Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925528" start="26297" end="26342" title="List of mountain peaks of the Rocky Mountains" label="List of mountain peaks of the Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651780" start="26345" end="26367" title="Little Rocky Mountains" label="Little Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190123" start="26412" end="26442" title="Rocky Mountains subalpine zone" label="Rocky Mountains subalpine zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570444" start="26445" end="26469" title="Southern Rocky Mountains" label="Southern Rocky Mountains"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25470" wikidata="Q1340226" url="?curid=25470" title="Feminazi">
<text>Feminazi (also Femi-Nazi) is a pejorative term for feminists that was popularized by politically conservative American radio talk show host Rush Limbaugh.

==Origins and usage==
&quot;Feminazi&quot; is a portmanteau of the nouns &quot;feminist&quot; and &quot;Nazi&quot;. According to &quot;The Oxford Dictionary of American Political Slang&quot;, it refers (pejoratively) to &quot;a committed feminist or a strong-willed woman&quot;. The earliest attested use, according to the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary,&quot; is a 1989 article in the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; about an anti-abortion protest that used the slogan &quot;Feminazis Go Home&quot;. The term was later popularized by American conservative radio talk show host Rush Limbaugh in the early 1990s. Limbaugh credited the coining of the term to university professor Thomas Hazlett.

Limbaugh, who was vocally critical of the feminist movement, stated that the term &quot;feminazi&quot; refers to &quot;radical feminists&quot; whose goal is &quot;to see that there are as many abortions as possible&quot;, a small group of &quot;militants&quot; whom he characterized as having a &quot;quest for power&quot; and a &quot;belief that men aren&#x27;t necessary&quot;. Limbaugh distinguished these women from &quot;well-intentioned but misguided people who call themselves &#x27;feminists. However, the term came to be widely used for feminism as a whole. According to &quot;The New Partridge Dictionary of Slang and Unconventional English&quot;, Limbaugh used the term &quot;to marginalize any feminist as a hardline, uncompromising manhater&quot;. &quot;The New York Times&quot; has described it as &quot;one of [Limbaugh&#x27;s] favorite epithets for supporters of women&#x27;s rights&quot;.

The term &quot;feminazi&quot; is used to characterize feminist perspectives as extreme in order to discredit feminist arguments and to stigmatize women&#x27;s views or behavior as &quot;radical&quot;, &quot;extreme&quot;, and &quot;tyrannical&quot;. It has been used in mainstream American discourse to erroneously portray women as hyper-vigilant to perceived sexism. Literary critic Toril Moi writes that the term reflects commonplace ideas that feminists &quot;hate men&quot;, are &quot;dogmatic, inflexible, and intolerant&quot;, and constitute &quot;an extremist, power-hungry minority&quot;. In his book &quot;Angry White Men&quot;, the sociologist Michael Kimmel says the term is used to attack feminist campaigns for equal pay and safety from rape and domestic violence by associating them with Nazi genocide.

The term is used as an insult across mass media and social media. &quot;Feminazis&quot; are often described as dangerous, strident, man-hating, prudish, humorless, and overly sensitive. Linguist Geraldine Horan writes that there is a marked increase in the use of the term in mainstream media whenever a female public figure makes headlines. Usage in the United Kingdom peaked in 2015 along with reporting on barrister Charlotte Proudman, who had criticized a male colleague for commenting on her appearance online. In Australia, the term gained wider use following the 1995 publication of the book &quot;The First Stone&quot;, and has been used in popular media to characterize feminists as threatening, &quot;vindictive&quot;, and &quot;puritanical&quot;.

==Reactions==
The meaning and appropriateness of the term &quot;feminazi&quot; have frequently been discussed in the media. Horan attributes use of &quot;feminazi&quot; as an insult to &quot;a wider phenomenon of gendered criticism, bullying and trolling aimed [at] women in the public eye&quot;. According to Helen Lewis, deputy editor of the &quot;New Statesman&quot;, &quot;the idea of conflating a liberation movement with Nazism is just deeply ignorant. It’s self-undermining, because it’s so over the top.&quot; Laura Bates, the founder of the Everyday Sexism Project, has said that &quot;It’s a desperate attempt to demonise us, and it’s frustrating, because if it wasn’t such an offensive word, you could actually start to embrace it and own it&quot;.

Activist Gloria Steinem writes, &quot;I&#x27;ve never met anyone who fits that description [of wanting as many abortions as possible], though [Limbaugh] lavishes it on me among many others&quot;.
Steinem has suggested a boycott of Limbaugh for his use of the term, stating, &quot;Hitler came to power against the strong feminist movement in Germany, padlocked the family planning clinics, and declared abortion a crime against the stateall views that more closely resemble Rush Limbaugh&#x27;s&quot;.

Moi writes that Limbaugh&#x27;s words prompted a shift in the public perception of feminism across the American political spectrum starting in the mid-1990s; Americans came to see feminists as dogmatic and power-hungry women who hate men and who are incapable of challenging their own assumptions; though the term &quot;feminazi&quot; may have been created to describe a small group of particular feminists, it calcified into a stereotype of all feminists or all women. Moi writes that feminism became &quot;the F-word,&quot; a label that women hesitated to claim for themselves lest they be seen as &quot;feminazis&quot;, even among those who agreed with the goals of feminism.

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 

== References == 

== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q545779" start="31" end="41" title="pejorative" label="pejorative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="51" end="59" title="feminist" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="85" end="109" title="politically conservative" label="politically conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q319072" start="140" end="153" title="Rush Limbaugh" label="Rush Limbaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="204" end="215" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="235" end="243" title="feminist" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="260" end="264" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="485" end="510" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="549" end="566" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242907" start="582" end="603" title="United States anti-abortion movement" label="anti-abortion protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q319072" start="733" end="746" title="Rush Limbaugh" label="Rush Limbaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q15126424" start="833" end="847" title="Thomas Hazlett" label="Thomas Hazlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q15580856" start="892" end="909" title="feminist movement" label="feminist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914207" start="969" end="986" title="Radical feminism" label="radical feminists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656434" start="1436" end="1500" title="The New Partridge Dictionary of Slang and Unconventional English" label="The New Partridge Dictionary of Slang and Unconventional English"/>
<link wikidata="Q93200" start="2117" end="2123" title="sexism" label="sexism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779042" start="2141" end="2150" title="Toril Moi" label="Toril Moi"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906375" start="2372" end="2387" title="Angry White Men" label="Angry White Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q11414572" start="2481" end="2490" title="Equal pay for equal work" label="equal pay"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="2507" end="2511" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="2516" end="2533" title="domestic violence" label="domestic violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="2559" end="2572" title="The Holocaust" label="Nazi genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="2612" end="2622" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="2627" end="2639" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2770" end="2785" title="Geraldine Horan" label="Geraldine Horan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2994" end="3012" title="Charlotte Proudman" label="Charlotte Proudman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734196" start="3180" end="3195" title="The First Stone" label="The First Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q13515552" start="3644" end="3655" title="Helen Lewis (journalist)" label="Helen Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566255" start="3684" end="3697" title="New Statesman" label="New Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17579877" start="3852" end="3863" title="Laura Bates" label="Laura Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q14784046" start="3884" end="3907" title="Everyday Sexism Project" label="Everyday Sexism Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q231178" start="4104" end="4118" title="Gloria Steinem" label="Gloria Steinem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684105" start="4375" end="4395" title="Adolf Hitler&amp;#x27;s rise to power" label="Hitler came to power"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25473" wikidata="Q9588" url="?curid=25473" title="Richard Nixon">
<text>Richard Milhous Nixon (January 9, 1913April 22, 1994) was the 37th president of the United States, serving from 1969 until his resignation in 1974. A member of the Republican Party, he previously served as a representative and senator from California and as the 36th vice president from 1953 to 1961 under President Dwight D. Eisenhower. His presidency saw the reduction of U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War, &quot;détente&quot; with the Soviet Union and China, the Apollo 11 Moon landing, and the establishment of the Environmental Protection Agency and Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Nixon&#x27;s second term ended early when he became the only U.S. president to resign from office, as a result of the Watergate scandal.

Nixon was born into a poor family of Quakers in Yorba Linda, Southern California. He graduated from Whittier College with a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1934 and from Duke University with a Juris Doctor in 1937, practiced law in California, and then moved with his wife Pat to Washington, D.C., in 1942 to work for the federal government. After serving active duty in the Naval Reserve during World War II, he was elected to the House of Representatives in 1946. His work on the Alger Hiss case established his reputation as a leading anti-communist. In 1950, he was elected to the Senate. Nixon was the running mate of Eisenhower, the Republican Party&#x27;s presidential nominee in the 1952 election, and served for eight years as vice president. He narrowly lost the 1960 presidential election to John F. Kennedy. After his loss in the 1962 race for governor of California, he announced his retirement from politics. However, in 1968, he made another run for the presidency and narrowly defeated the Democratic incumbent vice president Hubert Humphrey.

Seeking to bring the North Vietnamese to the negotiating table, Nixon ordered military operations and carpet bombing campaigns in Cambodia. He covertly aided Pakistan during the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971 and ended American combat involvement in Vietnam in 1973 and the military draft the same year. His visit to China in 1972 eventually led to diplomatic relations between the two nations, and he then finalized the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty with the Soviet Union. Domestically, Nixon pushed for the Controlled Substances Act and began the war on drugs. Nixon&#x27;s first term took place at the height of the American environmental movement and enacted many progressive environmental policy shifts; his administration created the Environmental Protection Agency and passed legislation such as the Endangered Species Act and the Clean Air Acts. He implemented the ratified Twenty-sixth Amendment, which lowered the voting age from 21 to 18, and enforced the desegregation of Southern schools. Under Nixon, relations with Native Americans improved, seeing an increase in self-determination for Native Americans and his administration rescinded the termination policy. Nixon imposed wage and price controls for 90 days, began the war on cancer, and presided over the Apollo 11 Moon landing, which signaled the end of the Space Race. He was re-elected in 1972, when he defeated George McGovern in one of the largest landslide victories in American history.

In his second term, Nixon ordered an airlift to resupply Israeli materiel losses in the Yom Kippur War, a conflict which led to the oil crisis at home. From 1973, ongoing revelations from the Nixon administration&#x27;s involvement in Watergate eroded his support in Congress and the country. The scandal began with a break-in at the Democratic National Committee office, ordered by administration officials, and escalated despite cover-up efforts by the Nixon administration, of which he was aware. On August 9, 1974, facing almost certain impeachment and removal from office, Nixon resigned. Afterward, he was issued a controversial pardon by his successor, Gerald Ford. During nearly 20 years of retirement, Nixon wrote nine books and undertook many foreign trips, rehabilitating his image into that of an elder statesman and leading expert on foreign affairs. On April 18, 1994, he suffered a debilitating stroke, and died four days later. Rankings of his time in office have proven complex, with the successes of his presidency contrasted against the circumstances of both his ascension and his departure from office.

== Early life and education ==

Richard Milhous Nixon was born on January 9, 1913, in what was then the township precinct of Yorba Linda, California, in a house built by his father, on his family&#x27;s lemon ranch. His parents were Francis A. Nixon and Hannah (Milhous) Nixon. His mother was a Quaker, and his father converted from Methodism to the Quaker faith. Through his mother, Nixon was a descendant of the early English settler Thomas Cornell.

Nixon&#x27;s upbringing was influenced by Quaker observances of the time such as abstinence from alcohol, dancing, and swearing. He had four brothers: Harold (1909–1933), Donald (1914–1987), Arthur (1918–1925), and Edward (1930– 2019). Four of the five Nixon boys were named after historic British kings; Richard, for example, was named after Richard the Lionheart.

Nixon&#x27;s early life was marked by hardship, and he later quoted Dwight Eisenhower in describing his boyhood: &quot;We were poor, but the glory of it was we didn&#x27;t know it&quot;. The Nixon family ranch failed in 1922, and the family moved to Whittier, California. In an area of East Whittier with many Quakers, Frank Nixon opened a grocery store and gas station at what is now the corner of Whittier Boulevard and Santa Gertrudes Avenue. During this time period, the Nixon family attended East Whittier Friends Church. Richard&#x27;s younger brother Arthur died in 1925 at the age of seven after a short illness. Richard was 12 years old when a spot was found on his lung; with a family history of tuberculosis, he was forbidden to play sports. The spot turned out to be scar tissue from an early bout of pneumonia.

=== Primary and secondary education ===

Nixon attended East Whittier Elementary School, where he was president of his eighth-grade class. His older brother Harold had attended Whittier High School, which his parents thought resulted in Harold&#x27;s dissolute lifestyle, before he contracted the tuberculosis that killed him in 1933. They decided to send Nixon to the larger Fullerton Union High School. Though he had to ride a school bus an hour each way during his freshman year, he attained excellent grades. Later, he lived with an aunt in Fullerton during the week. He played junior varsity football, and seldom missed a practice, though he rarely was used in games. He had greater success as a debater, winning a number of championships and taking his only formal tutelage in public speaking from Fullerton&#x27;s Head of English, H. Lynn Sheller. Nixon later mused on Sheller&#x27;s words, &quot;Remember, speaking is conversation...don&#x27;t shout at people. Talk to them. Converse with them.&quot; Nixon said he tried to use a conversational tone as much as possible.

At the start of his junior year in September 1928, Nixon&#x27;s parents permitted him to transfer to Whittier High School. At Whittier, Nixon lost a bid for student body president—his first electoral defeat. He often rose at 4 a.m. to drive the family truck to Los Angeles to purchase vegetables at the market and then drove to the store to wash and display them before going to school. Harold was diagnosed with tuberculosis the previous year; when their mother took him to Arizona hoping to improve his health, the demands on Nixon increased, causing him to give up football. Nevertheless, Nixon graduated from Whittier High third in his class of 207.

=== College and law school ===
Nixon was offered a tuition grant to attend Harvard University, but with Harold&#x27;s continued illness requiring his mother&#x27;s care, Richard was needed at the store. He remained in his hometown and enrolled at Whittier College in September 1930. His expenses were met by his maternal grandfather. Nixon played for the basketball team; he also tried out for football, and though he lacked the size to play, he remained on the team as a substitute and was noted for his enthusiasm. Instead of fraternities and sororities, Whittier had literary societies. Nixon was snubbed by the only one for men, the Franklins, many of whom were from prominent families, unlike Nixon. He responded by helping to found a new society, the Orthogonian Society. In addition to the society, his studies, and work at the store, Nixon engaged in several extracurricular activities; he was a champion debater and hard worker. In 1933, he was engaged to Ola Florence Welch, daughter of the Whittier police chief, but they broke up in 1935.

After graduating &quot;summa cum laude&quot; with a Bachelor of Arts degree in history from Whittier in 1934, Nixon was accepted at the new Duke University School of Law, which offered scholarships to top students, including Nixon. It paid high salaries to its professors, many of whom had national or international reputations. The number of scholarships was greatly reduced for second- and third-year students, creating intense competition. Nixon kept his scholarship, was elected president of the Duke Bar Association, inducted into the Order of the Coif, and graduated third in his class in June 1937.

== Early career and marriage ==

After graduating from Duke, Nixon initially hoped to join the FBI. He received no response to his letter of application, and learned years later that he had been hired, but his appointment had been canceled at the last minute due to budget cuts. He was admitted to the California bar in 1937, and began practicing in Whittier with the law firm Wingert and Bewley in the National Bank of Whittier Building. His work concentrated on commercial litigation for local petroleum companies and other corporate matters, as well as on wills. Nixon was reluctant to work on divorce cases, disliking frank sexual talk from women. In 1938, he opened up his own branch of Wingert and Bewley in La Habra, California, and became a full partner in the firm the following year. In later years, Nixon proudly said he was the only modern president to have previously worked as a practicing attorney. During this period, Nixon was also the president of the Citra-Frost Company, which attempted to produce and sell frozen orange juice, but the company went bankrupt after just 18 months.

In January 1938, Nixon was cast in the Whittier Community Players production of &quot;The Dark Tower&quot; in which he played opposite his future wife, a high school teacher named Thelma &quot;Pat&quot; Ryan. In his memoirs, Nixon described it as &quot;a case of love at first sight&quot;, but apparently for Nixon only, since Pat Ryan turned him down several times before agreeing to date him. Once they began their courtship, Ryan was reluctant to marry Nixon; they dated for two years before she assented to his proposal. They wed in a small ceremony on June 21, 1940. After a honeymoon in Mexico, the Nixons began their married life in Whittier. They had two daughters: Tricia, born in 1946, and Julie, born in 1948.

== Military service ==

In January 1942, the couple moved to the Northern Virginia suburbs, where Nixon took a job at the Office of Price Administration in Washington, D.C. In his political campaigns, Nixon suggested that this was his response to Pearl Harbor, but he had sought the position throughout the latter part of 1941. Both Nixon and his wife believed he was limiting his prospects by remaining in Whittier. He was assigned to the tire rationing division, where he was tasked with replying to correspondence. He did not enjoy the role, and four months later applied to join the United States Navy. Though he could have claimed an exemption from the draft as a birthright Quaker, or a deferral due to his government service, Nixon nevertheless sought a commission in the Navy. His application was approved, and he was appointed a lieutenant junior grade in the United States Naval Reserve on June 15, 1942.

In October 1942, he was given his first assignment as aide to the commander of the Naval Air Station Ottumwa in Wapello County, Iowa, until May 1943. Seeking more excitement, he requested sea duty; on July 2, 1943, he was assigned to Marine Aircraft Group 25 and the South Pacific Combat Air Transport Command (SCAT), where he supported the logistics of operations in the South Pacific theater during World War II.

On October 1, 1943, Nixon was promoted to lieutenant. Nixon commanded the SCAT forward detachments at Vella Lavella, Bougainville, and finally at Nissan Island. His unit prepared manifests and flight plans for R4D/C-47 operations and supervised the loading and unloading of the transport aircraft. For this service, he received a Navy Letter of Commendation, awarded a Navy Commendation Ribbon, which was later updated to the Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal, from his commanding officer for &quot;meritorious and efficient performance of duty as Officer in Charge of the South Pacific Combat Air Transport Command&quot;. Upon his return to the U.S., Nixon was appointed the administrative officer of the Alameda Naval Air Station in Alameda, California.

In January 1945, he was transferred to the Bureau of Aeronautics office in Philadelphia, where he helped negotiate the termination of World War II contracts, and received his second letter of commendation, from the Secretary of the Navy for &quot;meritorious service, tireless effort, and devotion to duty&quot;. Later, Nixon was transferred to other offices to work on contracts, and he moved from the Virginia suburbs of Washington, D.C. to Philadelphia, New York and finally to Baltimore. On October 3, 1945, he was promoted to lieutenant commander. On March 10, 1946, he was relieved of active duty. On June 1, 1953, he was promoted to commander in the U.S. Naval Reserve, and he retired from the U.S. Naval Reserve on June 6, 1966.

While in the Navy, Nixon became a very good five-card stud poker player, helping finance his first congressional campaign with the winnings. In a 1983 interview, he described turning down an invitation to dine with Charles Lindbergh because he was hosting a game.

== U.S. House of Representatives (1947–1950) ==
Republicans in California&#x27;s 12th congressional district were frustrated by their inability to defeat Democratic representative Jerry Voorhis, and they sought a consensus candidate who would run a strong campaign against him. In 1945, they formed a &quot;Committee of 100&quot; to decide on a candidate, hoping to avoid internal dissensions which had led to previous Voorhis victories. After the committee failed to attract higher-profile candidates, Herman Perry, manager of Whittier&#x27;s Bank of America branch, suggested Nixon, a family friend with whom he had served on Whittier College&#x27;s board of trustees before the war. Perry wrote to Nixon in Baltimore, and after a night of excited conversation with his wife, Nixon gave Perry an enthused response, confirming that he was registered to vote in California at his parents&#x27; Whittier residence. Nixon flew to California and was selected by the committee. When he left the Navy at the start of 1946, Nixon and his wife returned to Whittier, where he began a year of intensive campaigning. He contended that Voorhis had been ineffective as a representative and suggested that Voorhis&#x27;s endorsement by a group linked to Communists meant that Voorhis must have radical views. Nixon won the election, receiving 65,586 votes to Voorhis&#x27;s 49,994.

In June 1947, Nixon supported the Taft–Hartley Act, a federal law that monitors the activities and power of labor unions, and he served on the Education and Labor Committee. In August 1947, he became one of 19 House members to serve on the Herter Committee, which went to Europe to report on the need for U.S. foreign aid. Nixon was the youngest member of the committee and the only Westerner. Advocacy by Herter Committee members, including Nixon, led to congressional passage of the Marshall Plan.

In his memoirs, Nixon wrote that he joined the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) &quot;at the end of 1947&quot;. However, he was already a HUAC member in early February 1947, when he heard &quot;Enemy Number One&quot; Gerhard Eisler and his sister Ruth Fischer testify. On February 18, 1947, Nixon referred to Eisler&#x27;s belligerence toward HUAC in his maiden speech to the House. Also by early February 1947, fellow U.S. Representative Charles J. Kersten had introduced him to Father John Francis Cronin in Baltimore. Cronin shared with Nixon his 1945 privately circulated paper &quot;The Problem of American Communism in 1945&quot;, with much information from the FBI&#x27;s William C. Sullivan who by 1961 headed domestic intelligence under J. Edgar Hoover.
By May 1948, Nixon had co-sponsored the Mundt–Nixon Bill to implement &quot;a new approach to the complicated problem of internal communist subversion... It provided for registration of all Communist Party members and required a statement of the source of all printed and broadcast material issued by organizations that were found to be Communist fronts.&quot; He served as floor manager for the Republican Party. On May 19, 1948, the bill passed the House by 319 to 58, but later it failed to pass the Senate. The Nixon Library cites this bill&#x27;s passage as Nixon&#x27;s first significant victory in Congress.
Nixon first gained national attention in August 1948, when his persistence as a House Un-American Activities Committee member helped break the Alger Hiss spy case. While many doubted Whittaker Chambers&#x27;s allegations that Hiss, a former State Department official, had been a Soviet spy, Nixon believed them to be true and pressed for the committee to continue its investigation. After Hiss filed suit, alleging defamation, Chambers produced documents corroborating his allegations, including paper and microfilm copies that Chambers turned over to House investigators after hiding them overnight in a field; they became known as the &quot;Pumpkin Papers&quot;. Hiss was convicted of perjury in 1950 for denying under oath he had passed documents to Chambers. In 1948, Nixon successfully cross-filed as a candidate in his district, winning both major party primaries, and was comfortably reelected.

== U.S. Senate (1950–1953) ==
In 1949, Nixon began to consider running for the United States Senate against the Democratic incumbent, Sheridan Downey, and entered the race in November. Downey, faced with a bitter primary battle with Representative Helen Gahagan Douglas, announced his retirement in March 1950. Nixon and Douglas won the primary elections and engaged in a contentious campaign in which the ongoing Korean War was a major issue. Nixon tried to focus attention on Douglas&#x27;s liberal voting record. As part of that effort, a &quot;Pink Sheet&quot; was distributed by the Nixon campaign suggesting that Douglas&#x27;s voting record was similar to that of New York Congressman Vito Marcantonio, reputed to be a communist, and their political views must be nearly identical. Nixon won the election by almost twenty percentage points. During the campaign, Nixon was first called &quot;Tricky Dick&quot; by his opponents for his campaign tactics.

In the Senate, Nixon took a prominent position in opposing global communism, traveling frequently and speaking out against it. He maintained friendly relations with Joseph McCarthy, his fellow anti-communist, controversial U.S. Senate colleague from Wisconsin, but was careful to keep some distance between himself and McCarthy&#x27;s allegations. Nixon criticized President Harry S. Truman&#x27;s handling of the Korean War. He supported statehood for Alaska and Hawaii, voted in favor of civil rights for minorities, and supported federal disaster relief for India and Yugoslavia. He voted against price controls and other monetary restrictions, benefits for illegal immigrants, and public power.

== Vice presidency (1953–1961) ==


General Dwight D. Eisenhower was nominated for president by the Republicans in 1952. He had no strong preference for a vice-presidential candidate, and Republican officeholders and party officials met in a &quot;smoke-filled room&quot; and recommended Nixon to the general, who agreed to the senator&#x27;s selection. Nixon&#x27;s youth (he was then 39), stance against communism, and political base in California—one of the largest states—were all seen as vote-winners by the leaders. Among the candidates considered along with Nixon were Senator Robert A. Taft of Ohio, Governor Alfred Driscoll of New Jersey, and Senator Everett Dirksen of Illinois. On the campaign trail, Eisenhower spoke of his plans for the country, and left the negative campaigning to his running mate.

In mid-September, the Republican ticket faced a major crisis when the media reported that Nixon had a political fund, maintained by his backers, which reimbursed him for political expenses. Such a fund was not illegal, but it exposed Nixon to allegations of a potential conflict of interest. With pressure building for Eisenhower to demand Nixon&#x27;s resignation from the ticket, Nixon went on television to address the nation on September 23, 1952. The address, later named the Checkers speech, was heard by about 60 million Americans, which represented the largest audience ever for a television broadcast at that point. In the speech, Nixon emotionally defended himself, stating that the fund was not secret and that his donors had not received special favors. He painted himself as a patriot and man of modest means, mentioning that his wife had no mink coat; instead, he said, she wore a &quot;respectable Republican cloth coat&quot;. The speech was remembered for the gift which Nixon had received, but which he would not give back, which he described as &quot;a little cocker spaniel dog...sent all the way from Texas. And our little girl—Tricia, the 6-year-old—named it Checkers.&quot; The speech prompted a huge public outpouring of support for Nixon. Eisenhower decided to retain him on the ticket, and the ticket was victorious in the November election.

Eisenhower granted Nixon more responsibilities during his term than any previous vice president. Nixon attended Cabinet and National Security Council meetings and chaired them in Eisenhower&#x27;s absence. A 1953 tour of the Far East succeeded in increasing local goodwill toward the United States and gave Nixon an appreciation of the region as a potential industrial center. He visited Saigon and Hanoi in French Indochina. On his return to the United States at the end of 1953, Nixon increased the time he devoted to foreign relations.

Biographer Irwin Gellman, who chronicled Nixon&#x27;s congressional years, said of his vice presidency:
Despite intense campaigning by Nixon, who reprised his strong attacks on the Democrats, the Republicans lost control of both houses of Congress in the 1954 elections. These losses caused Nixon to contemplate leaving politics once he had served out his term. On September 24, 1955, President Eisenhower suffered a heart attack and his condition was initially believed to be life-threatening. Eisenhower was unable to perform his duties for six weeks. The Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution had not yet been proposed, and the vice president had no formal power to act. Nonetheless, Nixon acted in Eisenhower&#x27;s stead during this period, presiding over Cabinet meetings and ensuring that aides and Cabinet officers did not seek power. According to Nixon biographer Stephen Ambrose, Nixon had &quot;earned the high praise he received for his conduct during the crisis ... he made no attempt to seize power&quot;.

His spirits buoyed, Nixon sought a second term, but some of Eisenhower&#x27;s aides aimed to displace him. In a December 1955 meeting, Eisenhower proposed that Nixon not run for reelection and instead become a Cabinet officer in a second Eisenhower administration, to give him administrative experience before a 1960 presidential run. Nixon believed this would destroy his political career. When Eisenhower announced his reelection bid in February 1956, he hedged on the choice of his running mate, saying it was improper to address that question until he had been renominated. Although no Republican was opposing Eisenhower, Nixon received a substantial number of write-in votes against the president in the 1956 New Hampshire primary election. In late April, the President announced that Nixon would again be his running mate. Eisenhower and Nixon were reelected by a comfortable margin in the November 1956 election.

In early 1957, Nixon undertook another foreign trip, this time to Africa. On his return, he helped shepherd the Civil Rights Act of 1957 through Congress. The bill was weakened in the Senate, and civil rights leaders were divided over whether Eisenhower should sign it. Nixon advised the President to sign the bill, which he did. Eisenhower suffered a mild stroke in November 1957, and Nixon gave a press conference, assuring the nation that the Cabinet was functioning well as a team during Eisenhower&#x27;s brief illness.
On April 27, 1958, Richard and Pat Nixon reluctantly embarked on a goodwill tour of South America. In Montevideo, Uruguay, Nixon made an impromptu visit to a college campus, where he fielded questions from students on U.S. foreign policy. The trip was uneventful until the Nixon party reached Lima, Peru, where he was met with student demonstrations. Nixon went to the historical campus of National University of San Marcos, the oldest university in the Americas, got out of his car to confront the students, and stayed until forced back into the car by a volley of thrown objects. At his hotel, Nixon faced another mob, and one demonstrator spat on him. In Caracas, Venezuela, Nixon and his wife were spat on by anti-American demonstrators and their limousine was attacked by a pipe-wielding mob. According to Ambrose, Nixon&#x27;s courageous conduct &quot;caused even some of his bitterest enemies to give him some grudging respect&quot;. Reporting to the cabinet after the trip, Nixon claimed there was &quot;absolute proof that [the protestors] were directed and controlled by a central Communist conspiracy.&quot; Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and his brother, Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles, both concurred with Nixon.

In July 1959, President Eisenhower sent Nixon to the Soviet Union for the opening of the American National Exhibition in Moscow. On July 24, Nixon was touring the exhibits with Soviet first secretary and premier Nikita Khrushchev when the two stopped at a model of an American kitchen and engaged in an impromptu exchange about the merits of capitalism versus communism that became known as the &quot;Kitchen Debate&quot;.

== 1960 presidential campaign ==


In 1960, Nixon launched his first campaign for President of the United States, officially announcing on January 9, 1960. He faced little opposition in the Republican primaries and chose former Massachusetts senator Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. as his running mate. His Democratic opponent was John F. Kennedy and the race remained close for the duration. Nixon campaigned on his experience, but Kennedy called for new blood and claimed the Eisenhower–Nixon administration had allowed the Soviet Union to overtake the U.S. in quantity and quality of ballistic missiles. While Kennedy faced issues about his Catholicism, Nixon remained a divisive figure to some.

Televised presidential debates made their debut as a political medium during the campaign. In the first of four such debates, Nixon appeared pale, with a five o&#x27;clock shadow, in contrast to the photogenic Kennedy. Nixon&#x27;s performance in the debate was perceived to be mediocre in the visual medium of television, though many people listening on the radio thought Nixon had won. Nixon narrowly lost the election, with Kennedy winning the popular vote by only 112,827 votes (0.2 percent).

There were charges of voter fraud in Texas and Illinois, both states won by Kennedy. Nixon refused to consider contesting the election, feeling a lengthy controversy would diminish the United States in the eyes of the world and that the uncertainty would hurt U.S. interests. At the end of his term of office as vice president in January 1961, Nixon and his family returned to California, where he practiced law and wrote a bestselling book, &quot;Six Crises&quot;, which included coverage of the Hiss case, Eisenhower&#x27;s heart attack, and the Fund Crisis, which had been resolved by the Checkers speech.

==1962 California gubernatorial campaign==
Local and national Republican leaders encouraged Nixon to challenge incumbent Pat Brown for governor of California in the 1962 gubernatorial election. Despite initial reluctance, Nixon entered the race. The campaign was clouded by public suspicion that Nixon viewed the office as a stepping stone for another presidential run, some opposition from the far-right of the party, and his own lack of interest in being California&#x27;s governor. Nixon hoped a successful run would confirm his status as the nation&#x27;s leading active Republican politician, and ensure he remained a major player in national politics. Instead, he lost to Brown by more than five percentage points, and the defeat was widely believed to be the end of his political career.

In an impromptu concession speech the morning after the election, Nixon blamed the media for favoring his opponent, saying, &quot;You won&#x27;t have Nixon to kick around anymore because, gentlemen, this is my last press conference.&quot; The California defeat was highlighted in the November 11, 1962, episode of Howard K. Smith&#x27;s ABC News show, &quot;Howard K. Smith: News and Comment&quot;, titled &quot;The Political Obituary of Richard M. Nixon&quot;. Alger Hiss appeared on the program, and many members of the public complained that it was unseemly to give a convicted felon air time to attack a former vice president. The furor drove Smith and his program from the air, and public sympathy for Nixon grew.

== Wilderness years ==

In 1963 the Nixon family traveled to Europe, where Nixon gave press conferences and met with leaders of the countries he visited. The family moved to New York City, where Nixon became a senior partner in the leading law firm Nixon, Mudge, Rose, Guthrie &amp; Alexander. When announcing his California campaign, Nixon had pledged not to run for president in 1964; even if he had not, he believed it would be difficult to defeat Kennedy, or after his assassination, Kennedy&#x27;s successor, Lyndon Johnson.

In 1964, Nixon won write-in votes in the primaries, and was considered a serious contender by both Gallup polls and members of the press. He was even placed on a primary ballot as an active candidate by Oregon&#x27;s secretary of state. As late as two months before the 1964 Republican National Convention, however, Nixon fulfilled his promise to remain out of the presidential nomination process and instead endorsed Arizona senator Barry Goldwater, the eventual Republican nominee. When Goldwater won the nomination, Nixon was selected to introduce him at the convention. Nixon felt that Goldwater was unlikely to win, but campaigned for him loyally. In the 1964 general election, Goldwater lost in a landslide to Johnson and Republicans experienced heavy losses in Congress and among state governors.

Nixon was one of the few leading Republicans not blamed for the disastrous results, and he sought to build on that in the 1966 congressional elections in which he campaigned for many Republicans and sought to regain seats lost in the Johnson landslide. Nixon was credited with helping Republicans win major electoral gains that year.

In 1967, Nixon was approached by an associate at his firm in Leonard Garment about a case involving the press and perceived invasion of privacy. Garment suggested Nixon to argue on behalf of the Hill family in &quot;Time, Inc. v. Hill&quot; at the Supreme Court of the United States. Nixon studied strenuously in the months prior to the oral argument before the Court. While the final decision was in favor of Time Inc., Nixon was encouraged by the praise he received for his argument. It was the first and only case he argued in front of the Supreme Court.

== 1968 presidential campaign ==

At the end of 1967, Nixon told his family he planned to run for president a second time. Pat Nixon did not always enjoy public life, being embarrassed, for example, by the need to reveal how little the family owned in the Checkers speech. She still managed to be supportive of her husband&#x27;s ambitions. Nixon believed that with the Democrats torn over the issue of the Vietnam War, a Republican had a good chance of winning, although he expected the election to be as close as in 1960.

An exceptionally tumultuous primary election season began as the Tet Offensive was launched in January 1968. President Johnson withdrew as a candidate in March, after an unexpectedly poor showing in the New Hampshire primary. In June, Senator Robert F. Kennedy, a Democratic candidate, was assassinated just moments after his victory in the California primary. On the Republican side, Nixon&#x27;s main opposition was Michigan governor George Romney, though New York governor Nelson Rockefeller and California governor Ronald Reagan each hoped to be nominated in a brokered convention. Nixon secured the nomination on the first ballot. He was able to secure the nomination to the support of many Southern delegates, after he and his subordinates made concessions to Strom Thurmond and Harry Dent. He selected Maryland governor Spiro Agnew as his running mate, a choice which Nixon believed would unite the party, appealing both to Northern moderates and to Southerners disaffected with the Democrats.

Nixon&#x27;s Democratic opponent in the general election was Vice President Hubert Humphrey, who was nominated at a convention marked by violent protests. Throughout the campaign, Nixon portrayed himself as a figure of stability during this period of national unrest and upheaval. He appealed to what he later called the &quot;silent majority&quot; of socially conservative Americans who disliked the hippie counterculture and the anti-war demonstrators. Agnew became an increasingly vocal critic of these groups, solidifying Nixon&#x27;s position with the right.

Nixon waged a prominent television advertising campaign, meeting with supporters in front of cameras. He stressed that the crime rate was too high, and attacked what he perceived as a surrender of the United States&#x27; nuclear superiority by the Democrats. Nixon promised &quot;peace with honor&quot; in the Vietnam War and proclaimed that &quot;new leadership will end the war and win the peace in the Pacific&quot;. He did not give specifics of how he hoped to end the war, resulting in media intimations that he must have a &quot;secret plan&quot;. His slogan of &quot;Nixon&#x27;s the One&quot; proved to be effective.

Johnson&#x27;s negotiators hoped to reach a truce in Vietnam, or at least a cessation of bombings. On October 22, 1968, candidate Nixon received information that Johnson was preparing a so-called &quot;October surprise&quot;, abandoning three non-negotiable conditions for a bombing halt, to help elect Humphrey in the last days of the campaign. Whether the Nixon campaign interfered with negotiations between the Johnson administration and the South Vietnamese by engaging Anna Chennault, a fundraiser for the Republican party, remains a controversy. It is not clear whether the government of South Vietnam needed encouragement to opt out of a peace process they considered disadvantageous.

In a three-way race between Nixon, Humphrey, and American Independent Party candidate George Wallace, Nixon defeated Humphrey by only 500,000 votes, a margin almost as close as in 1960, with both elections seeing a gap of less than one percentage point of the popular vote. However, Nixon earned 301 electoral votes to 191 for Humphrey and 46 for Wallace, a majority. He became the first non-incumbent vice president to be elected president. In his victory speech, Nixon pledged that his administration would try to bring the divided nation together. Nixon said: &quot;I have received a very gracious message from the Vice President, congratulating me for winning the election. I congratulated him for his gallant and courageous fight against great odds. I also told him that I know exactly how he felt. I know how it feels to lose a close one.&quot;

== Presidency (1969–1974) ==

Nixon was inaugurated as president on January 20, 1969, sworn in by his onetime political rival, Chief Justice Earl Warren. Pat Nixon held the family Bibles open at Isaiah 2:4, which reads, &quot;They shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks.&quot; In his inaugural address, which received almost uniformly positive reviews, Nixon remarked that &quot;the greatest honor history can bestow is the title of peacemaker&quot;—a phrase that found a place on his gravestone. He spoke about turning partisan politics into a new age of unity:
=== Foreign policy ===

==== China ====

Nixon laid the groundwork for his overture to China before he became president, writing in &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot; a year before his election: &quot;There is no place on this small planet for a billion of its potentially most able people to live in angry isolation.&quot; Among the reasons that Nixon sought to improve relations with China was in the hope of weakening the Soviet Union and decreasing China&#x27;s support to the North in the Vietnam War. Nixon ultimately used the idea of gaining leverage against the Soviet Union through relations with China to obtain the support of key conservative figures including Barry Goldwater and Ronald Reagan.

Assisting him in pursuing relations with China was Henry Kissinger, Nixon&#x27;s national security advisor and future secretary of state. They collaborated closely, bypassing Cabinet officials. With relations between the Soviet Union and China at a nadir—border clashes between the two took place during Nixon&#x27;s first year in office—Nixon sent private word to the Chinese that he desired closer relations. A breakthrough came in early 1971, when Chinese Communist Party (CCP) chairman Mao Zedong invited a team of American table tennis players to visit China and play against top Chinese players. Nixon followed up by sending Kissinger to China for clandestine meetings with Chinese officials. On July 15, 1971, with announcements from Washington and Beijing, it was learned that the President would visit China the following February. The secrecy had allowed both sets of leaders time to prepare the political climate in their countries for the visit.

In February 1972, Nixon and his wife traveled to China after Kissinger briefed Nixon for over 40 hours in preparation. Upon touching down, the President and First Lady emerged from Air Force One and were greeted by Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai. Nixon made a point of shaking Zhou&#x27;s hand, something which then-secretary of state John Foster Dulles had refused to do in 1954 when the two met in Geneva. More than a hundred television journalists accompanied the president. On Nixon&#x27;s orders, television was strongly favored over printed publications, as Nixon felt that the medium would capture the visit much better than print. It also gave him the opportunity to snub the print journalists he despised.

Nixon and Kissinger immediately met for an hour with CCP Chairman Mao Zedong and Premier Zhou at Mao&#x27;s official private residence, where they discussed a range of issues. Mao later told his doctor that he had been impressed by Nixon&#x27;s forthrightness, unlike the leftists and the Soviets. He said he was suspicious of Kissinger, though the National Security Advisor referred to their meeting as his &quot;encounter with history&quot;. A formal banquet welcoming the presidential party was given that evening in the Great Hall of the People. The following day, Nixon met with Zhou; the joint communique following this meeting recognized Taiwan as a part of China and looked forward to a peaceful solution to the problem of reunification. When not in meetings, Nixon toured architectural wonders, including the Forbidden City, the Ming tombs, and the Great Wall. Americans took their first glance into everyday Chinese life through the cameras that accompanied Pat Nixon, who toured the city of Beijing and visited communes, schools, factories, and hospitals.

The visit ushered in a new era of US–China relations. Fearing the possibility of a US–China alliance, the Soviet Union yielded to pressure for détente with the United States. This was one component of triangular diplomacy.

==== Vietnam War ====

When Nixon took office, about 300 American soldiers were dying each week in Vietnam, and the war was widely unpopular in the United States, the subject of ongoing violent protests. The Johnson administration had offered to suspend bombing unconditionally in exchange for negotiations, but to no avail. According to Walter Isaacson, Nixon concluded soon after taking office that the Vietnam War could not be won, and he was determined to end it quickly. He sought an arrangement that would permit American forces to withdraw while leaving South Vietnam secure against attack.

Nixon approved a secret B-52 carpet bombing campaign of North Vietnamese and Khmer Rouge positions in Cambodia beginning in March 1969 and code-named Operation Menu, without the consent of Cambodian leader Norodom Sihanouk. In mid-1969, Nixon began efforts to negotiate peace with the North Vietnamese, sending a personal letter to their leaders, and peace talks began in Paris. Initial talks did not result in an agreement, and in May 1969 he publicly proposed to withdraw all American troops from South Vietnam provided North Vietnam did so, and suggesting South Vietnam hold internationally supervised elections with Viet Cong participation.

In July 1969, Nixon visited South Vietnam, where he met with his U.S. military commanders and President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu. Amid protests at home demanding an immediate pullout, he implemented a strategy of replacing American troops with Vietnamese troops, known as &quot;Vietnamization&quot;. He soon instituted phased U.S. troop withdrawals, but also authorized incursions into Laos, in part to interrupt the Ho Chi Minh trail passing through Laos and Cambodia and used to supply North Vietnamese forces. In March 1970, at the explicit request of the Khmer Rouge and negotiated by Pol Pot&#x27;s then-second-in-command, Nuon Chea, North Vietnamese troops launched an offensive and overran much of Cambodia. Nixon announced the ground invasion of Cambodia on April 30, 1970, against North Vietnamese bases in the east of the country, and further protests erupted against perceived expansion of the conflict, which resulted in Ohio National Guardsmen killing four unarmed students at Kent State University. Nixon&#x27;s responses to protesters included an impromptu, early morning meeting with them at the Lincoln Memorial on May 9, 1970. Nixon&#x27;s campaign promise to curb the war, contrasted with the escalated bombing, led to claims that Nixon had a &quot;credibility gap&quot; on the issue. It is estimated that between 50,000 and 150,000 people were killed during the bombing of Cambodia between 1970 and 1973.

In 1971, excerpts from the &quot;Pentagon Papers&quot;, which had been leaked by Daniel Ellsberg, were published by &quot;The New York Times&quot; and &quot;The Washington Post&quot;. When news of the leak first appeared, Nixon was inclined to do nothing; the Papers, a history of United States&#x27; involvement in Vietnam, mostly concerned the lies of prior administrations and contained few real revelations. He was persuaded by Kissinger that the Papers were more harmful than they appeared, and the President tried to prevent publication, but the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the newspapers.

As U.S. troop withdrawals continued, conscription was phased out by 1973, and the armed forces became all-volunteer. After years of fighting, the Paris Peace Accords were signed at the beginning of 1973. The agreement implemented a cease fire and allowed for the withdrawal of remaining American troops without requiring withdrawal of the 160,000 North Vietnam Army regulars located in the South. Once American combat support ended, there was a brief truce, before fighting resumed, and North Vietnam conquered South Vietnam in 1975.

==== Latin American policy ====

Nixon had been a firm supporter of Kennedy during the 1961 Bay of Pigs Invasion and 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis. On taking office in 1969, he stepped up covert operations against Cuba and its president, Fidel Castro. He maintained close relations with the Cuban-American exile community through his friend, Bebe Rebozo, who often suggested ways of irritating Castro. The Soviets and Cubans became concerned, fearing Nixon might attack Cuba and break the understanding between Kennedy and Khrushchev that ended the missile crisis. In August 1970, the Soviets asked Nixon to reaffirm the understanding, which he did, despite his hard line against Castro. The process was not completed before the Soviets began expanding their base at the Cuban port of Cienfuegos in October 1970. A minor confrontation ensued, the Soviets stipulated they would not use Cienfuegos for submarines bearing ballistic missiles, and the final round of diplomatic notes were exchanged in November.

The election of Marxist candidate Salvador Allende as President of Chile in September 1970 spurred a vigorous campaign of covert opposition to him by Nixon and Kissinger. This began by trying to convince the Chilean congress to confirm Jorge Alessandri as the winner of the election, and then messages to military officers in support of a coup. Other support included strikes organized against Allende and funding for Allende opponents. It was even alleged that &quot;Nixon personally authorized&quot; $700,000 in covert funds to print anti-Allende messages in a prominent Chilean newspaper. Following an extended period of social, political, and economic unrest, General Augusto Pinochet assumed power in a violent coup d&#x27;état on September 11, 1973; among the dead was Allende.

==== Soviet Union ====
Nixon used the improving international environment to address the topic of nuclear peace. Following the announcement of his visit to China, the Nixon administration concluded negotiations for him to visit the Soviet Union. The President and First Lady arrived in Moscow on May 22, 1972, and met with Leonid Brezhnev, the general secretary of the Communist Party; Alexei Kosygin, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers; and Nikolai Podgorny, the Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, among other leading Soviet officials.

Nixon engaged in intense negotiations with Brezhnev. Out of the summit came agreements for increased trade and two landmark arms control treaties: SALT I, the first comprehensive limitation pact signed by the two superpowers, and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, which banned the development of systems designed to intercept incoming missiles. Nixon and Brezhnev proclaimed a new era of &quot;peaceful coexistence&quot;. A banquet was held that evening at the Kremlin.

Nixon and Kissinger planned to link arms control to détente and to the resolution of other urgent problems through what Nixon called &quot;linkage&quot;. David Tal argues:

Seeking to foster better relations with the United States, China and the Soviet Union both cut back on their diplomatic support for North Vietnam and advised Hanoi to come to terms militarily. Nixon later described his strategy:

In 1973, Nixon encouraged the Export-Import Bank to finance in part a trade deal with the Soviet Union in which Armand Hammer&#x27;s Occidental Petroleum would export phosphate from Florida to the Soviet Union, and import Soviet ammonia. The deal, valued at $20 billion over 20 years, involved the construction of two major Soviet port facilities at Odessa and Ventspils, and a pipeline connecting four ammonia plants in the greater Volga region to the port at Odessa. In 1973, Nixon announced his administration was committed to seeking most favored nation trade status with the USSR, which was challenged by Congress in the Jackson-Vanik Amendment.

During the previous two years, Nixon had made considerable progress in U.S.–Soviet relations, and he embarked on a second trip to the Soviet Union in 1974. He arrived in Moscow on June 27 to a welcome ceremony, cheering crowds, and a state dinner at the Grand Kremlin Palace that evening. Nixon and Brezhnev met in Yalta, where they discussed a proposed mutual defense pact, détente, and MIRVs. Nixon considered proposing a comprehensive test-ban treaty, but he felt he would not have time to complete it during his presidency. There were no significant breakthroughs in these negotiations.

==== Middle Eastern policy ==== 


As part of the Nixon Doctrine, the U.S. avoided giving direct combat assistance to its allies and instead gave them assistance to defend themselves. During the Nixon administration, the U.S. greatly increased arms sales to the Middle East, particularly Israel, Iran and Saudi Arabia. The Nixon administration strongly supported Israel, an American ally in the Middle East, but the support was not unconditional. Nixon believed Israel should make peace with its Arab neighbors and that the U.S. should encourage it. The president believed that—except during the Suez Crisis—the U.S. had failed to intervene with Israel, and should use the leverage of the large U.S. military aid to Israel to urge the parties to the negotiating table. The Arab-Israeli conflict was not a major focus of Nixon&#x27;s attention during his first term—for one thing, he felt that no matter what he did, American Jews would oppose his reelection.

On October 6, 1973, an Arab coalition led by Egypt and Syria, supported with arms and materiel by the Soviet Union, attacked Israel in the Yom Kippur War. Israel suffered heavy losses and Nixon ordered an airlift to resupply Israeli losses, cutting through inter-departmental squabbles and bureaucracy and taking personal responsibility for any response by Arab nations. More than a week later, by the time the U.S. and Soviet Union began negotiating a truce, Israel had penetrated deep into enemy territory. The truce negotiations rapidly escalated into a superpower crisis; when Israel gained the upper hand, Egyptian president Sadat requested a joint U.S.–USSR peacekeeping mission, which the U.S. refused. When Soviet Premier Brezhnev threatened to unilaterally enforce any peacekeeping mission militarily, Nixon ordered the U.S. military to DEFCON3, placing all U.S. military personnel and bases on alert for nuclear war. This was the closest the world had come to nuclear war since the Cuban Missile Crisis. Brezhnev backed down as a result of Nixon&#x27;s actions.

Because Israel&#x27;s victory was largely due to U.S. support, the Arab OPEC nations retaliated by refusing to sell crude oil to the U.S., resulting in the 1973 oil crisis. The embargo caused gasoline shortages and rationing in the United States in late 1973, but was eventually ended by the oil-producing nations as peace in the Middle East took hold.

After the war, and under Nixon&#x27;s presidency, the U.S. reestablished relations with Egypt for the first time since 1967. Nixon used the Middle East crisis to restart the stalled Middle East Peace Negotiations; he wrote in a confidential memo to Kissinger on October 20:
I believe that, beyond a doubt, we are now facing the best opportunity we have had in 15 years to build a lasting peace in the Middle East. I am convinced history will hold us responsible if we let this opportunity slip by ... I now consider a permanent Middle East settlement to be the most important final goal to which we must devote ourselves.

Nixon made one of his final international visits as president to the Middle East in June 1974, and became the first president to visit Israel.

==== South Asia policy ====

Since 1960s, the United States perceived Pakistan as an integral bulwark against global communism in the Cold War. Nixon was fond of Pakistani president Yahya Khan and according to American journalist Gary Bass, &quot;Nixon liked very few people, but he did like General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan.&quot;

During the Bangladesh Liberation War, the United States stood by Pakistan against Bengali nationalists in terms of diplomacy and military threats. Nixon urged President Khan multiple times to exercise restraint, fearing an Indian invasion of Pakistan that would lead to Indian domination of the subcontinent and strengthen the position of the Soviet Union. In the wake of the Third India–Pakistan War, Nixon issued a statement blaming Pakistan for starting the conflict and blaming India for escalating it while personally favoring a ceasefire. The United States used the threat of an aid cut-off to force Pakistan to back down, while its continued military aid to Islamabad prevented India from launching incursions deeper into the country. Nixon denied getting involved in the situation, saying that it was an internal matter of Pakistan, but when Pakistan&#x27;s defeat seemed certain, he sent the aircraft carrier USS &quot;Enterprise&quot; to the Bay of Bengal.

=== Domestic policy ===
==== Economy ====
At the time Nixon took office in 1969, inflation was at 4.7 percent—its highest rate since the Korean War. The Great Society had been enacted under Johnson, which, together with the Vietnam War costs, was causing large budget deficits. Unemployment was low, but interest rates were at their highest in a century. Nixon&#x27;s major economic goal was to reduce inflation; the most obvious means of doing so was to end the war. This could not be accomplished overnight, and the U.S. economy continued to struggle through 1970, contributing to a lackluster Republican performance in the midterm congressional elections (Democrats controlled both Houses of Congress throughout Nixon&#x27;s presidency). According to political economist Nigel Bowles in his 2011 study of Nixon&#x27;s economic record, the new president did little to alter Johnson&#x27;s policies through the first year of his presidency.

Nixon was far more interested in foreign affairs than domestic policies, but he believed that voters tend to focus on their own financial condition and that economic conditions were a threat to his reelection. As part of his &quot;New Federalism&quot; philosophy, he proposed greater local autonomy in the allocation of domestic spending through grants to the states. These proposals were for the most part lost in the congressional budget process. However, Nixon gained political credit for advocating them. In 1970, Congress had granted the president the power to impose wage and price freezes, though the Democratic majorities, knowing Nixon had opposed such controls throughout his career, did not expect Nixon to actually use the authority. With inflation unresolved by August 1971, and an election year looming, Nixon convened a summit of his economic advisers at Camp David. Nixon&#x27;s options were to limit fiscal and monetary expansionist policies that reduced unemployment or end the dollar&#x27;s fixed exchange rate; Nixon&#x27;s dilemma has been cited as an example of the Impossible trinity in international economics. He then announced temporary wage and price controls, allowed the dollar to float against other currencies, and ended the convertibility of the dollar into gold. Bowles points out,
by identifying himself with a policy whose purpose was inflation&#x27;s defeat, Nixon made it difficult for Democratic opponents ... to criticize him. His opponents could offer no alternative policy that was either plausible or believable since the one they favored was one they had designed but which the president had appropriated for himself.

Nixon&#x27;s policies dampened inflation through 1972, although their aftereffects contributed to inflation during his second term and into the Ford administration. Nixon&#x27;s decision to end the gold standard in the United States led to the collapse of the Bretton Woods system. According to Thomas Oatley, &quot;the Bretton Woods system collapsed so that Nixon might win the 1972 presidential election.&quot;

After Nixon won re-election, inflation was returning. He reimposed price controls in June 1973. The price controls became unpopular with the public and businesspeople, who saw powerful labor unions as preferable to the price board bureaucracy. The controls produced food shortages, as meat disappeared from grocery stores and farmers drowned chickens rather than sell them at a loss. Despite the failure to control inflation, controls were slowly ended, and on April 30, 1974, their statutory authorization lapsed.

==== Governmental initiatives and organization ====

Nixon advocated a &quot;New Federalism&quot;, which would devolve power to state and local elected officials, though Congress was hostile to these ideas and enacted few of them. He eliminated the Cabinet-level United States Post Office Department, which in 1971 became the government-run United States Postal Service.

Nixon was a late supporter of the conservation movement. Environmental policy had not been a significant issue in the 1968 election, and the candidates were rarely asked for their views on the subject. Nixon broke new ground by discussing environmental policy in his State of the Union speech in 1970. He saw that the first Earth Day in April 1970 presaged a wave of voter interest on the subject, and sought to use that to his benefit; in June he announced the formation of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). He relied on his domestic advisor John Ehrlichman, who favored protection of natural resources, to keep him &quot;out of trouble on environmental issues.&quot; Other initiatives supported by Nixon included the Clean Air Act of 1970 and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), and the National Environmental Policy Act required environmental impact statements for many Federal projects. Nixon vetoed the Clean Water Act of 1972—objecting not to the policy goals of the legislation but to the amount of money to be spent on them, which he deemed excessive. After Congress overrode his veto, Nixon impounded the funds he deemed unjustifiable.

In 1971, Nixon proposed health insurance reform—a private health insurance employer mandate, federalization of Medicaid for poor families with dependent minor children, and support for health maintenance organizations (HMOs). A limited HMO bill was enacted in 1973. In 1974, Nixon proposed more comprehensive health insurance reform—a private health insurance employer mandate and replacement of Medicaid by state-run health insurance plans available to all, with income-based premiums and cost sharing.

Nixon was concerned about the prevalence of domestic drug use in addition to drug use among American soldiers in Vietnam. He called for a war on drugs and pledged to cut off sources of supply abroad. He also increased funds for education and for rehabilitation facilities.

As one policy initiative, Nixon called for more money for sickle-cell research, treatment, and education in February 1971 and signed the National Sickle Cell Anemia Control Act on May 16, 1972. While Nixon called for increased spending on such high-profile items as sickle-cell disease and for a war on cancer, at the same time he sought to reduce overall spending at the National Institutes of Health.

==== Civil rights ====
The Nixon presidency witnessed the first large-scale integration of public schools in the South. Nixon sought a middle way between the segregationist Wallace and liberal Democrats, whose support of integration was alienating some Southern whites. Hopeful of doing well in the South in 1972, he sought to dispose of desegregation as a political issue before then. Soon after his inauguration, he appointed Vice President Agnew to lead a task force, which worked with local leaders—both white and black—to determine how to integrate local schools. Agnew had little interest in the work, and most of it was done by Labor Secretary George Shultz. Federal aid was available, and a meeting with President Nixon was a possible reward for compliant committees. By September 1970, less than ten percent of black children were attending segregated schools. By 1971, however, tensions over desegregation surfaced in Northern cities, with angry protests over the busing of children to schools outside their neighborhood to achieve racial balance. Nixon opposed busing personally but enforced court orders requiring its use.

Some scholars, such as James Morton Turner and John Isenberg, believe that Nixon, who had advocated for civil rights in his 1960 campaign, slowed down desegregation as president, appealing to the racial conservatism of Southern whites, who were angered by the civil rights movement. This, he hoped, would boost his election chances in 1972.

In addition to desegregating public schools, Nixon implemented the Philadelphia Plan in 1970—the first significant federal affirmative action program. He also endorsed the Equal Rights Amendment after it passed both houses of Congress in 1972 and went to the states for ratification. He also pushed for African American civil rights and economic equity through a concept known as black capitalism. Nixon had campaigned as an ERA supporter in 1968, though feminists criticized him for doing little to help the ERA or their cause after his election. Nevertheless, he appointed more women to administration positions than Lyndon Johnson had.

=== Space policy ===

After a nearly decade-long national effort, the United States won the race to land astronauts on the Moon on July 20, 1969, with the flight of Apollo 11. Nixon spoke with Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin during their moonwalk. He called the conversation &quot;the most historic phone call ever made from the White House&quot;.

Nixon was unwilling to keep funding for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) at the high level seen during the 1960s as NASA prepared to send men to the Moon. NASA Administrator Thomas O. Paine drew up ambitious plans for the establishment of a permanent base on the Moon by the end of the 1970s and the launch of a crewed expedition to Mars as early as 1981. Nixon rejected both proposals due to the expense. Nixon also canceled the Air Force Manned Orbital Laboratory program in 1969, because uncrewed spy satellites were a more cost-effective way to achieve the same reconnaissance objective. NASA cancelled the last three planned Apollo lunar missions to place Skylab in orbit more efficiently and free money up for the design and construction of the Space Shuttle.

On May 24, 1972, Nixon approved a five-year cooperative program between NASA and the Soviet space program, culminating in the 1975 joint mission of an American Apollo and Soviet Soyuz spacecraft linking in space.

=== Reelection, Watergate scandal, and resignation ===

==== 1972 presidential campaign ====
Nixon believed his rise to power had peaked at a moment of political realignment. The Democratic &quot;Solid South&quot; had long been a source of frustration to Republican ambitions. Goldwater had won several Southern states by opposing the Civil Rights Act of 1964 but had alienated more moderate Southerners. Nixon&#x27;s efforts to gain Southern support in 1968 were diluted by Wallace&#x27;s candidacy. Through his first term, he pursued a Southern Strategy with policies, such as his desegregation plans, that would be broadly acceptable among Southern whites, encouraging them to realign with the Republicans in the aftermath of the civil rights movement. He nominated two Southern conservatives, Clement Haynsworth and G. Harrold Carswell, to the Supreme Court, but neither was confirmed by the Senate.

Nixon entered his name on the New Hampshire primary ballot on January 5, 1972, effectively announcing his candidacy for reelection. Virtually assured the Republican nomination, the President had initially expected his Democratic opponent to be Massachusetts senator Ted Kennedy (brother of the late president), who was largely removed from contention after the July 1969 Chappaquiddick incident. Instead, Maine senator Edmund Muskie became the front runner, with South Dakota senator George McGovern in a close second place.

On June 10, McGovern won the California primary and secured the Democratic nomination. The following month, Nixon was renominated at the 1972 Republican National Convention. He dismissed the Democratic platform as cowardly and divisive. McGovern intended to sharply reduce defense spending and supported amnesty for draft evaders as well as abortion rights. With some of his supporters believed to be in favor of drug legalization, McGovern was perceived as standing for &quot;amnesty, abortion and acid&quot;. McGovern was also damaged by his vacillating support for his original running mate, Missouri senator Thomas Eagleton, dumped from the ticket following revelations that he had received electroshock treatment for depression. Nixon was ahead in most polls for the entire election cycle, and was reelected on November 7, 1972, in one of the largest landslide election victories in American history. He defeated McGovern with over 60 percent of the popular vote, losing only in Massachusetts and D.C.

==== Watergate ====

The term &quot;Watergate&quot; has come to encompass an array of clandestine and often illegal activities undertaken by members of the Nixon administration. Those activities included &quot;dirty tricks&quot;, such as bugging the offices of political opponents, and the harassment of activist groups and political figures. The activities were brought to light after five men were caught breaking into the Democratic party headquarters at the Watergate complex in Washington, D.C., on June 17, 1972. &quot;The Washington Post&quot; picked up on the story; reporters Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward relied on an informant known as &quot;Deep Throat&quot;—later revealed to be Mark Felt, associate director at the FBI—to link the men to the Nixon administration. Nixon downplayed the scandal as mere politics, calling news articles biased and misleading. A series of revelations made it clear that the Committee to Re-elect President Nixon, and later the White House, were involved in attempts to sabotage the Democrats. Senior aides such as White House Counsel John Dean faced prosecution; in total 48 officials were convicted of wrongdoing.

In July 1973, White House aide Alexander Butterfield testified under oath to Congress that Nixon had a secret taping system and recorded his conversations and phone calls in the Oval Office. These tapes were subpoenaed by Watergate Special Counsel Archibald Cox; Nixon provided transcripts of the conversations but not the actual tapes, citing executive privilege. With the White House and Cox at loggerheads, Nixon had Cox fired in October in the &quot;Saturday Night Massacre&quot;; he was replaced by Leon Jaworski. In November, Nixon&#x27;s lawyers revealed that a tape of conversations held in the White House on June 20, 1972, had an minute gap. Rose Mary Woods, the President&#x27;s personal secretary, claimed responsibility for the gap, saying that she had accidentally wiped the section while transcribing the tape, but her story was widely mocked. The gap, while not conclusive proof of wrongdoing by the President, cast doubt on Nixon&#x27;s statement that he had been unaware of the cover-up.

Though Nixon lost much popular support, even from his own party, he rejected accusations of wrongdoing and vowed to stay in office. He admitted he had made mistakes but insisted he had no prior knowledge of the burglary, did not break any laws, and did not learn of the cover-up until early 1973. On October 10, 1973, Vice President Agnew resigned for reasons unrelated to Watergate: he was convicted on charges of bribery, tax evasion and money laundering during his tenure as governor of Maryland. Believing his first choice, John Connally, would not be confirmed by Congress, Nixon chose Gerald Ford, Minority Leader of the House of Representatives, to replace Agnew. One researcher suggests Nixon effectively disengaged from his own administration after Ford was sworn in as vice president on December 6, 1973.

On November 17, 1973, during a televised question-and-answer session with 400 Associated Press managing editors, Nixon said, &quot;People have got to know whether or not their president is a crook. Well, I&#x27;m not a crook. I&#x27;ve earned everything I&#x27;ve got.&quot;

The legal battle over the tapes continued through early 1974, and in April Nixon announced the release of 1,200 pages of transcripts of White House conversations between himself and his aides. The House Judiciary Committee opened impeachment hearings against the President on May 9, 1974, which were televised on the major TV networks. These hearings culminated in votes for impeachment. On July 24, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously that the full tapes, not just selected transcripts, must be released.

The scandal grew to involve a slew of additional allegations against the President, ranging from the improper use of government agencies to accepting gifts in office and his personal finances and taxes; Nixon repeatedly stated his willingness to pay any outstanding taxes due, and later paid $465,000 (equivalent to $ million in ) in back taxes in 1974.

Even with support diminished by the continuing series of revelations, Nixon hoped to fight the charges. But one of the new tapes, recorded soon after the break-in, demonstrated that Nixon had been told of the White House connection to the Watergate burglaries soon after they took place, and had approved plans to thwart the investigation. In a statement accompanying the release of what became known as the &quot;Smoking Gun Tape&quot; on August 5, 1974, Nixon accepted blame for misleading the country about when he had been told of White House involvement, stating that he had had a lapse of memory. Senate Minority Leader Hugh Scott, Senator Barry Goldwater, and House Minority Leader John Jacob Rhodes met with Nixon soon after. Rhodes told Nixon he faced certain impeachment in the House. Scott and Goldwater told the president that he had, at most, only 15 votes in his favor in the Senate, far fewer than the 34 needed to avoid removal from office.

==== Resignation ====
In light of his loss of political support and the near-certainty that he would be impeached and removed from office, Nixon resigned the presidency on August 9, 1974, after addressing the nation on television the previous evening. The resignation speech was delivered from the Oval Office and was carried live on radio and television. Nixon said he was resigning for the good of the country and asked the nation to support the new president, Gerald Ford. Nixon went on to review the accomplishments of his presidency, especially in foreign policy. He defended his record as president, quoting from Theodore Roosevelt&#x27;s 1910 speech &quot;Citizenship in a Republic&quot;:
Nixon&#x27;s speech received generally favorable initial responses from network commentators, with only Roger Mudd of CBS stating that Nixon had not admitted wrongdoing. It was termed &quot;a masterpiece&quot; by Conrad Black, one of his biographers. Black opined that &quot;What was intended to be an unprecedented humiliation for any American president, Nixon converted into a virtual parliamentary acknowledgement of almost blameless insufficiency of legislative support to continue. He left while devoting half his address to a recitation of his accomplishments in office.&quot;

== Post-presidency (1974–1994) ==
=== Pardon and illness ===

Following his resignation, the Nixons flew to their home La Casa Pacifica in San Clemente, California. According to his biographer, Jonathan Aitken, &quot;Nixon was a soul in torment&quot; after his resignation. Congress had funded Nixon&#x27;s transition costs, including some salary expenses, though reducing the appropriation from $850,000 to $200,000. With some of his staff still with him, Nixon was at his desk by 7:00 a.m. with little to do. His former press secretary, Ron Ziegler, sat with him alone for hours each day.

Nixon&#x27;s resignation had not put an end to the desire among many to see him punished. The Ford White House considered a pardon of Nixon, even though it would be unpopular in the country. Nixon, contacted by Ford emissaries, was initially reluctant to accept the pardon, but then agreed to do so. Ford insisted on a statement of contrition, but Nixon felt he had not committed any crimes and should not have to issue such a document. Ford eventually agreed and, on September 8, 1974, he granted Nixon a &quot;full, free, and absolute pardon&quot;, which ended any possibility of an indictment. Nixon then released a statement:
In October 1974, Nixon fell ill with phlebitis. Told by his doctors that he could either be operated on or die, a reluctant Nixon chose surgery, and President Ford visited him in the hospital. Nixon was under subpoena for the trial of three of his former aides—Dean, Haldeman, and John Ehrlichman—and &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, disbelieving his illness, printed a cartoon showing Nixon with a cast on the &quot;wrong foot&quot;. Judge John Sirica excused Nixon&#x27;s presence despite the defendants&#x27; objections. Congress instructed Ford to retain Nixon&#x27;s presidential papers—beginning a three-decade legal battle over the documents that was eventually won by the former president and his estate. Nixon was in the hospital when the 1974 midterm elections were held, and Watergate and the pardon were contributing factors to the Republican loss of 49 seats in the House and four in the Senate.

=== Return to public life ===
In December 1974, Nixon began planning his comeback despite the considerable ill will against him in the country. He wrote in his diary, referring to himself and Pat,
By early 1975, Nixon&#x27;s health was improving. He maintained an office in a Coast Guard station from his home, at first taking a golf cart and later walking the route each day; he mainly worked on his memoirs. He had hoped to wait before writing his memoirs; the fact that his assets were being eaten away by expenses and lawyer fees compelled him to begin work quickly. He was handicapped in this work by the end of his transition allowance in February, which compelled him to part with many of his staff, including Ziegler. In August of that year, he met with British talk-show host and producer David Frost, who paid him $600,000 (equivalent to $ million in ) for a series of sit-down interviews, filmed and aired in 1977. They began on the topic of foreign policy, recounting the leaders he had known, but the most remembered section of the interviews was that on Watergate. Nixon admitted he had &quot;let down the country&quot; and that &quot;I brought myself down. I gave them a sword and they stuck it in. And they twisted it with relish. And, I guess, if I&#x27;d been in their position, I&#x27;d have done the same thing.&quot; The interviews garnered 45–50 million viewers—becoming the most-watched program of its kind in television history.

The interviews helped improve Nixon&#x27;s financial position—at one point in early 1975 he had only $500 in the bank—as did the sale of his Key Biscayne property to a trust set up by wealthy friends of Nixon, such as Bebe Rebozo. In February 1976, Nixon visited China at the personal invitation of Mao. Nixon had wanted to return to China but chose to wait until after Ford&#x27;s own visit in 1975. Nixon remained neutral in the close 1976 primary battle between Ford and Reagan. Ford won, but was defeated by Georgia governor Jimmy Carter in the general election. The Carter administration had little use for Nixon and blocked his planned trip to Australia, causing the government of Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser to withhold its official invitation.

In 1976, Nixon was disbarred by the New York State Bar Association for obstruction of justice in the Watergate affair. He chose not to present any defense. In early 1978, he visited the United Kingdom; there, he was shunned by American diplomats, most ministers of the James Callaghan government, and two former prime ministers, Harold Macmillan and Edward Heath. He was welcomed, however, by the Leader of the Opposition, Margaret Thatcher, and former prime ministers Lord Home and Sir Harold Wilson. Nixon addressed the Oxford Union regarding Watergate:
=== Author and elder statesman ===

In 1978, Nixon published his memoirs, &quot;RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon&quot;, the first of nine books he was to author in his retirement. John A. Farrell deemed it one of the better presidential memoirs, candid and capturing its author&#x27;s voice; he deemed its rise up the bestseller lists justified. Nixon visited the White House in 1979, invited by Carter for the state dinner for Chinese Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping. Carter had not wanted to invite Nixon, but Deng had said he would visit Nixon in California if the former president was not invited. Nixon had a private meeting with Deng and visited Beijing again in mid-1979.

On August 10, 1979, the Nixons purchased a 12‐room condominium occupying the seventh floor of 817 Fifth Avenue New York City after being rejected by two Manhattan co-ops. When the deposed Shah of Iran died in Egypt in July 1980, Nixon defied the State Department, which intended to send no U.S. representative, by attending the funeral. Though Nixon had no official credentials, as a former president he was seen as the American presence at its former ally&#x27;s funeral. Nixon supported Ronald Reagan for president in 1980, making television appearances portraying himself as, in biographer Stephen Ambrose&#x27;s words, &quot;the senior statesman above the fray&quot;. He wrote guest articles for many publications both during the campaign and after Reagan&#x27;s victory. After 18 months in the New York City townhouse, Nixon and his wife moved in 1981 to Saddle River, New Jersey.

Throughout the 1980s, Nixon maintained an ambitious schedule of speaking engagements and writing, traveled, and met with many foreign leaders, especially those of Third World countries. He joined former presidents Ford and Carter as representatives of the United States at the funeral of Egyptian president Anwar Sadat. On a trip to the Middle East, Nixon made his views known regarding Saudi Arabia and Libya, which attracted significant U.S. media attention; &quot;The Washington Post&quot; ran stories on Nixon&#x27;s &quot;rehabilitation&quot;. Nixon visited the Soviet Union in 1986 and on his return sent President Reagan a lengthy memorandum containing foreign policy suggestions and his personal impressions of Soviet general secretary Mikhail Gorbachev. Following this trip, Nixon was ranked in a Gallup poll as one of the ten most admired men in the world.

In 1986, Nixon addressed a convention of newspaper publishers, impressing his audience with his &quot;tour d&#x27;horizon&quot; of the world. At the time, political pundit Elizabeth Drew wrote, &quot;Even when he was wrong, Nixon still showed that he knew a great deal and had a capacious memory, as well as the capacity to speak with apparent authority, enough to impress people who had little regard for him in earlier times.&quot; &quot;Newsweek&quot; ran a story on &quot;Nixon&#x27;s comeback&quot; with the headline &quot;He&#x27;s back&quot;.

On July 19, 1990, the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace in Yorba Linda, California, opened as a private institution with the Nixons in attendance. They were joined by a large crowd of people, including Presidents Ford, Reagan, and George H. W. Bush, as well as their wives, Betty, Nancy, and Barbara. In January 1994, the former president founded the Nixon Center (today the Center for the National Interest), a Washington policy think tank and conference center.

Pat Nixon died on June 22, 1993, of emphysema and lung cancer. Her funeral services were held on the grounds of the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace. Former president Nixon was distraught throughout the interment and delivered a tribute to her inside the library building.

== Death and funeral ==
Nixon suffered a severe stroke on April 18, 1994, while preparing to eat dinner in his home at Park Ridge, New Jersey. A blood clot resulting from the atrial fibrillation he had suffered for many years had formed in his upper heart, broken off, and traveled to his brain. He was taken to NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital in Manhattan, initially alert but unable to speak or to move his right arm or leg. Damage to the brain caused swelling (cerebral edema), and Nixon slipped into a deep coma. He died at 9:08 p.m. on April 22, 1994, with his daughters at his bedside. He was 81 years old.

Nixon&#x27;s funeral took place on April 27, 1994, in Yorba Linda, California. Eulogists at the Nixon Library ceremony included President Bill Clinton, former secretary of state Henry Kissinger, Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole, California governor Pete Wilson, and the Reverend Billy Graham. Also in attendance were former presidents Ford, Carter, Reagan, George H. W. Bush, and their wives.

Richard Nixon was buried beside his wife Pat on the grounds of the Nixon Library. He was survived by his two daughters, Tricia and Julie, and four grandchildren. In keeping with his wishes, his funeral was not a full state funeral, though his body did lie in repose in the Nixon Library lobby from April 26 to the morning of the funeral service. Mourners waited in line for up to eight hours in chilly, wet weather to pay their respects. At its peak, the line to pass by Nixon&#x27;s casket was three miles long with an estimated 42,000 people waiting.

John F. Stacks of &quot;Time&quot; magazine said of Nixon shortly after his death,
An outsize energy and determination drove him on to recover and rebuild after every self-created disaster that he faced. To reclaim a respected place in American public life after his resignation, he kept traveling and thinking and talking to the world&#x27;s leaders ... and by the time Bill Clinton came to the White House [in 1993], Nixon had virtually cemented his role as an elder statesman. Clinton, whose wife served on the staff of the committee that voted to impeach Nixon, met openly with him and regularly sought his advice.

Tom Wicker of &quot;The New York Times&quot; noted that Nixon had been equalled only by Franklin Roosevelt in being five times nominated on a major party ticket and, quoting Nixon&#x27;s 1962 farewell speech, wrote,
Richard Nixon&#x27;s jowly, beard-shadowed face, the ski-jump nose and the widow&#x27;s peak, the arms upstretched in the V-sign, had been so often pictured and caricatured, his presence had become such a familiar one in the land, he had been so often in the heat of controversy, that it was hard to realize the nation really would not &quot;have Nixon to kick around anymore&quot;.

Ambrose said of the reaction to Nixon&#x27;s death, &quot;To everyone&#x27;s amazement, except his, he&#x27;s our beloved elder statesman.&quot;

Upon Nixon&#x27;s death, the news coverage mentioned Watergate and the resignation but much of the coverage was favorable to the former president. &quot;The Dallas Morning News&quot; stated, &quot;History ultimately should show that despite his flaws, he was one of our most farsighted chief executives.&quot; This offended some; columnist Russell Baker complained of &quot;a group conspiracy to grant him absolution&quot;. Cartoonist Jeff Koterba of the &quot;Omaha World-Herald&quot; depicted History before a blank canvas, his subject Nixon, as America looks on eagerly. The artist urges his audience to sit down; the work will take some time to complete, as &quot;this portrait is a little more complicated than most&quot;. Hunter S. Thompson wrote a scathing piece denouncing Nixon for &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, entitled &quot;He Was a Crook&quot; (which also appeared a month later in &quot;The Atlantic&quot;). In his article, Thompson described Nixon as &quot;a political monster straight out of Grendel and a very dangerous enemy&quot;.

== Legacy ==

Historian and political scientist James MacGregor Burns asked of Nixon, &quot;How can one evaluate such an idiosyncratic president, so brilliant and so morally lacking?&quot; Evaluations of his presidency have proven complex, contrasting his presidency&#x27;s domestic and foreign policy successes with the acrimonious circumstances of his departure. According to Ambrose, &quot;Nixon wanted to be judged by what he accomplished. What he will be remembered for is the nightmare he put the country through in his second term and for his resignation.&quot; Irwin Gellman, who chronicled Nixon&#x27;s congressional career, suggests, &quot;He was remarkable among his congressional peers, a success story in a troubled era, one who steered a sensible anti-Communist course against the excess of McCarthy.&quot; Aitken feels that &quot;Nixon, both as a man and as a statesman, has been excessively maligned for his faults and inadequately recognised for his virtues. Yet even in a spirit of historical revisionism, no simple verdict is possible.&quot;

Nixon saw his policies on Vietnam, China, and the Soviet Union as central to his place in history. Nixon&#x27;s onetime opponent George McGovern commented in 1983, &quot;President Nixon probably had a more practical approach to the two superpowers, China and the Soviet Union, than any other president since World WarII ... With the exception of his inexcusable continuation of the war in Vietnam, Nixon really will get high marks in history.&quot; Political scientist Jussi Hanhimäki disagrees, saying that Nixon&#x27;s diplomacy was merely a continuation of the Cold War policy of containment by diplomatic, rather than military, means. Historian Christopher Andrew concludes that &quot;Nixon was a great statesman on the world stage as well as a shabby practitioner of electoral politics in the domestic arena. While the criminal farce of Watergate was in the making, Nixon&#x27;s inspirational statesmanship was establishing new working relationships both with Communist China and with the Soviet Union.&quot;

Nixon&#x27;s stance on domestic affairs has been credited with the passage and enforcement of environmental and regulatory legislation. In a 2011 paper on Nixon and the environment, historian Paul Charles Milazzo points to Nixon&#x27;s creation of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and to his enforcement of legislation such as the 1973 Endangered Species Act, stating that &quot;though unsought and unacknowledged, Richard Nixon&#x27;s environmental legacy is secure&quot;. Nixon himself did not consider the environmental advances he made in office an important part of his legacy; some historians contend that his choices were driven more by political expediency than any strong environmentalism. Some historians say Nixon&#x27;s Southern Strategy turned the Southern United States into a Republican stronghold, while others deem economic factors more important in the change. Throughout his career, Nixon moved his party away from the control of isolationists, and as a Congressman he was a persuasive advocate of containing Soviet communism.

Historian Keith W. Olson has written that Nixon left a legacy of fundamental mistrust of government, rooted in Vietnam and Watergate. During the impeachment of Bill Clinton in 1998, both sides tried to use Nixon and Watergate to their advantage: Republicans suggested that Clinton&#x27;s misconduct was comparable to Nixon&#x27;s, while Democrats contended that Nixon&#x27;s actions had been far more serious than Clinton&#x27;s. For a time, there was a decrease in the power of the presidency as Congress passed restrictive legislation in the wake of Watergate. Olson suggests that legislation in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks restored the president&#x27;s power.

According to his biographer Herbert Parmet, &quot;Nixon&#x27;s role was to steer the Republican party along a middle course, somewhere between the competitive impulses of the Rockefellers, the Goldwaters, and the Reagans.&quot; 

A self-described “progressive conservative,” Nixon presided over a number of activist governmental initiatives during the course of his presidency. As one speechwriter said of Nixon, “His heart was on the right, and his head was, with FDR, ‘slightly left of center.’” 

Commenting on Nixon’s progressive conservative approach to government, one historian has argued that 
 

== Personality and public image ==
Nixon&#x27;s career was frequently dogged by his persona and the public&#x27;s perception of it. Editorial cartoonists and comedians often exaggerated his appearance and mannerisms, to the point where the line between the human and the caricature became increasingly blurred. He was often portrayed with unshaven jowls, slumped shoulders, and a furrowed, sweaty brow.

Nixon had a complex personality, both very secretive and awkward, yet strikingly reflective about himself. He was inclined to distance himself from people and was formal in all aspects, wearing a coat and tie even when home alone. Nixon biographer Conrad Black described him as being &quot;driven&quot; though also &quot;uneasy with himself in some ways&quot;. According to Black, Nixon
thought that he was doomed to be traduced, double-crossed, unjustly harassed, misunderstood, underappreciated, and subjected to the trials of Job, but that by the application of his mighty will, tenacity, and diligence, he would ultimately prevail.

Nixon sometimes drank alcohol to excess, especially during 1970. He also was prescribed sleeping pills. According to Ray Price, Nixon sometimes took them in together. Nixon also took dilantin, recommended by Jack Dreyfus. That medicine is usually prescribed to treat and prevent seizures, but in Nixon&#x27;s case it was for depression. His periodic overindulgences, especially during stressful times such as during Apollo 13, concerned Price and others, including then-advisor Ehrlichman and long-time valet Manolo Sanchez. Author and former British politician David Owen deemed Nixon an alcoholic.

Biographer Elizabeth Drew summarized Nixon as a &quot;smart, talented man, but most peculiar and haunted of presidents&quot;. In his account of the Nixon presidency, author Richard Reeves described Nixon as &quot;a strange man of uncomfortable shyness, who functioned best alone with his thoughts&quot;. Nixon&#x27;s presidency was doomed by his personality, Reeves argues:
He assumed the worst in people and he brought out the worst in them ... He clung to the idea of being &quot;tough&quot;. He thought that was what had brought him to the edge of greatness. But that was what betrayed him. He could not open himself to other men and he could not open himself to greatness.

In October 1999, a volume of 1971 White House audio tapes was released which contained multiple statements by Nixon deemed derogatory toward Jews. In one conversation with H. R. Haldeman, Nixon said that Washington was &quot;full of Jews&quot; and that &quot;most Jews are disloyal&quot;, making exceptions for some of his top aides. He then added, &quot;But, Bob, generally speaking, you can&#x27;t trust the bastards. They turn on you. Am I wrong or right?&quot; Elsewhere on the 1971 recordings, Nixon denies being antisemitic, saying, &quot;If anybody who&#x27;s been in this chair ever had reason to be antisemitic, I did ... And I&#x27;m not, you know what I mean?&quot;

Nixon believed that putting distance between himself and other people was necessary for him as he advanced in his political career and became president. Even Bebe Rebozo, by some accounts his closest friend, did not call him by his first name. Nixon said of this,
Even with close friends, I don&#x27;t believe in letting your hair down, confiding this and that and the other thing—saying, &quot;Gee, I couldn&#x27;t sleep ...&quot; I believe you should keep your troubles to yourself. That&#x27;s just the way I am. Some people are different. Some people think it&#x27;s good therapy to sit with a close friend and, you know, just spill your guts ... [and] reveal their inner psyche—whether they were breast-fed or bottle-fed. Not me. No way.
When Nixon was told that most Americans felt they did not know him even at the end of his career, he replied, &quot;Yeah, it&#x27;s true. And it&#x27;s not necessary for them to know.&quot;

==Books==
* Nixon, Richard M. (1960). &quot;Six Crises&quot;, Doubleday, .
* Nixon, Richard M. (1978). &quot;RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon&quot;, Simon &amp; Schuster, .
* Nixon, Richard M. (1980). &quot;The Real War&quot;, Sidgwick &amp; Jackson Ltd. .
* Nixon, Richard M. (1982). &quot;Leaders&quot;, Random House .
* Nixon, Richard M. (1984). &quot;Real Peace&quot;, Sidgwick &amp; Jackson Ltd. .

* Nixon, Richard M. (1987). &quot;No More Vietnams&quot;, Arbor House Publishing. .
* Nixon, Richard M. (1988). &quot;1999: Victory Without War&quot;, Simon &amp; Schuster. .
* Nixon, Richard M. (1990). &quot;In the Arena: A Memoir of Victory, Defeat, and Renewal&quot;, Simon &amp; Schuster. .
* Nixon, Richard M. (1992). &quot;Seize the Moment: America&#x27;s Challenge in a One-Superpower World&quot;, Simon &amp; Schuster. .
* Nixon, Richard M. (1994). &quot;Beyond Peace&quot;, Random House. .

== See also ==
* Cultural depictions of Richard Nixon
* Electoral history of Richard Nixon
* List of presidents of the United States
* List of presidents of the United States by previous experience
* &quot;Nixon&quot;, film, 1995
* Presidential transition of Richard Nixon
* Timeline of the Watergate scandal

== Notes ==

== References ==
=== Citations ===

=== Print sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Greenberg, David. &quot;Nixon&#x27;s Shadow: The History of an Image&quot; (2003). Important study of how Nixon was perceived by media and scholars.
* Hall, Mitchell K. ed. &quot;Historical Dictionary of the Nixon-Ford Era&quot; (2008) 285pp
* 
* 
* Malsberger, John W. &quot;The General and the Politician: Dwight Eisenhower, Richard Nixon, and American Politics&quot; (2014)
* 
* 
* 
* Originally published: Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1975 (new material 2005)
* ; Emphasis on historiography
* 
* 

=== Nixon Library ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

=== Other sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
* 

==External links==
===Official websites===
* White House biography
* Nixon Presidential Library and Museum
* Richard Nixon Foundation

===Media coverage===
* 
** &quot;Life Portrait of Richard M. Nixon&quot;, from C-SPAN&#x27;s &quot;American Presidents: Life Portraits&quot;, November 19, 1999

===Other===
* Essays on Richard Nixon, each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs
* Richard Nixon: A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress
* &quot;The Presidents: Nixon&quot;, an American Experience documentary
* 
* Richard Nixon Personal Manuscripts
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="0" end="21" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Milhous Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="67" end="97" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241106" start="123" end="138" title="Resignation of Richard Nixon" label="his resignation"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="164" end="180" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="208" end="222" title="United States House of Representatives" label="representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="227" end="234" title="United States Senate" label="senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="240" end="250" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="267" end="281" title="Vice President of the United States" label="vice president"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="316" end="336" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241106" start="338" end="352" title="Presidency of Richard Nixon" label="His presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="398" end="409" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q155705" start="417" end="424" title="détente" label="détente"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="440" end="452" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="457" end="462" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="468" end="477" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="521" end="552" title="Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q746186" start="557" end="602" title="Occupational Safety and Health Administration" label="Occupational Safety and Health Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="722" end="739" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="779" end="786" title="Quakers" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q493518" start="790" end="801" title="Yorba Linda" label="Yorba Linda"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="803" end="822" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996868" start="842" end="858" title="Whittier College" label="Whittier College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="866" end="882" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q168751" start="907" end="922" title="Duke University" label="Duke University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="930" end="942" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q158707" start="1010" end="1013" title="Pat Nixon" label="Pat"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1017" end="1033" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="1059" end="1077" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550750" start="1112" end="1125" title="United States Navy Reserve" label="Naval Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1133" end="1145" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="1169" end="1193" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019932" start="1197" end="1201" title="1946 California&amp;#x27;s 12th congressional district election" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q549966" start="1219" end="1229" title="Alger Hiss" label="Alger Hiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="1275" end="1289" title="Anti-communism" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891408" start="1294" end="1298" title="1950 United States Senate election in California" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="1322" end="1328" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q699548" start="1428" end="1441" title="1952 United States presidential election" label="1952 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q699590" start="1510" end="1536" title="1960 United States presidential election" label="1960 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="1540" end="1555" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021250" start="1579" end="1583" title="1962 California gubernatorial election" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q693742" start="1672" end="1676" title="1968 United States presidential election" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q209989" start="1779" end="1794" title="Hubert Humphrey" label="Hubert Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994973" start="1875" end="1894" title="Cambodian campaign" label="military operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q683271" start="1899" end="1923" title="Operation Menu" label="carpet bombing campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q371394" start="1975" end="2000" title="Bangladesh Liberation War" label="Bangladesh Liberation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162775" start="2074" end="2088" title="Conscription in the United States" label="military draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q862054" start="2108" end="2122" title="1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China" label="visit to China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269155" start="2149" end="2193" title="Joint Communiqué on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations" label="diplomatic relations between the two nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q287422" start="2221" end="2250" title="Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty" label="Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q928770" start="2309" end="2334" title="Controlled Substances Act" label="Controlled Substances Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q185517" start="2349" end="2361" title="war on drugs" label="war on drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381339" start="2428" end="2450" title="Environmental movement in the United States" label="environmental movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="2540" end="2571" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743374" start="2607" end="2629" title="Endangered Species Act of 1973" label="Endangered Species Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978744" start="2638" end="2652" title="Clean Air Act (United States)" label="Clean Air Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q219274" start="2682" end="2704" title="Twenty-sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-sixth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382217" start="2767" end="2780" title="Desegregation busing" label="desegregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979971" start="2879" end="2897" title="Native American self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q20712906" start="2902" end="2918" title="Native American policy of the Richard Nixon administration" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404841" start="2956" end="2974" title="Indian termination policy" label="termination policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333411" start="2990" end="3013" title="Economic Stabilization Act of 1970" label="wage and price controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q475706" start="3037" end="3050" title="war on cancer" label="war on cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932" start="3128" end="3138" title="Space Race" label="Space Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q644161" start="3161" end="3165" title="1972 United States presidential election" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="3184" end="3199" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602899" start="3203" end="3261" title="List of United States presidential elections by popular vote margin" label="one of the largest landslide victories in American history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007093" start="3298" end="3308" title="Operation Nickel Grass" label="an airlift"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="3352" end="3366" title="Yom Kippur War" label="Yom Kippur War"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="3396" end="3406" title="1973 oil crisis" label="oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185863" start="3598" end="3627" title="Democratic National Committee" label="Democratic National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229735" start="3695" end="3703" title="cover-up" label="cover-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711778" start="3805" end="3816" title="Impeachment process against Richard Nixon" label="impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065445" start="3883" end="3905" title="Pardon of Richard Nixon" label="a controversial pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="3924" end="3935" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="4174" end="4180" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247273" start="4186" end="4206" title="Death and state funeral of Richard Nixon" label="died four days later"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243931" start="4208" end="4216" title="Historical rankings of presidents of the United States" label="Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q493518" start="4513" end="4536" title="Yorba Linda, California" label="Yorba Linda, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479914" start="4621" end="4637" title="Francis A. Nixon" label="Francis A. Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648899" start="4642" end="4664" title="Hannah Milhous Nixon" label="Hannah (Milhous) Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="4683" end="4689" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="4721" end="4730" title="Methodism" label="Methodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788616" start="4824" end="4838" title="Thomas Cornell (settler)" label="Thomas Cornell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294941" start="5012" end="5018" title="Donald Nixon" label="Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344628" start="5056" end="5062" title="Edward Nixon" label="Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="5184" end="5205" title="Richard I of England" label="Richard the Lionheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="5276" end="5293" title="Dwight Eisenhower" label="Dwight Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q838791" start="5458" end="5478" title="Whittier, California" label="Whittier, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="5914" end="5926" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="6021" end="6030" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996874" start="6210" end="6230" title="Whittier High School" label="Whittier High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508304" start="6409" end="6436" title="Fullerton Union High School" label="Fullerton Union High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q494723" start="6578" end="6587" title="Fullerton, California" label="Fullerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="7843" end="7861" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996868" start="8015" end="8031" title="Whittier College" label="Whittier College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8843" end="8858" title="Latin honors#North America" label="summa cum laude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="8872" end="8888" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="8899" end="8906" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312901" start="8960" end="8989" title="Duke University School of Law" label="Duke University School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100653" start="9360" end="9377" title="Order of the Coif" label="Order of the Coif"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="9522" end="9525" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603078" start="9729" end="9743" title="State Bar of California" label="California bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q14683460" start="9830" end="9864" title="National Bank of Whittier Building" label="National Bank of Whittier Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q219186" start="9891" end="9912" title="Commercial law" label="commercial litigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q155656" start="9986" end="9991" title="Will (law)" label="wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q948071" start="10141" end="10161" title="La Habra, California" label="La Habra, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520516" start="10614" end="10628" title="The Dark Tower (play)" label="The Dark Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q158707" start="10708" end="10735" title="Pat Nixon" label="Thelma &amp;quot;Pat&amp;quot; Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526635" start="10791" end="10810" title="love at first sight" label="love at first sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="11121" end="11127" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841119" start="11202" end="11208" title="Tricia Nixon Cox" label="Tricia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770472" start="11228" end="11233" title="Julie Nixon Eisenhower" label="Julie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079289" start="11372" end="11402" title="Office of Price Administration" label="Office of Price Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="11406" end="11422" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="11497" end="11509" title="Attack on Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="11837" end="11855" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162775" start="11904" end="11913" title="Conscription in the United States" label="the draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824398" start="12088" end="12111" title="Lieutenant (junior grade)" label="lieutenant junior grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550750" start="12119" end="12146" title="United States Navy Reserve" label="United States Naval Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12249" end="12274" title="Ottumwa Regional Airport#History" label="Naval Air Station Ottumwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q485467" start="12278" end="12298" title="Wapello County, Iowa" label="Wapello County, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48796696" start="12400" end="12424" title="Marine Aircraft Group 25" label="Marine Aircraft Group 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568110" start="12433" end="12475" title="South Pacific Combat Air Transport Command" label="South Pacific Combat Air Transport Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q163059" start="12507" end="12516" title="Military logistics" label="logistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920892" start="12538" end="12559" title="Pacific Ocean theater of World War II" label="South Pacific theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12567" end="12579" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q457271" start="12624" end="12634" title="Lieutenant (navy)" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139193" start="12684" end="12697" title="Vella Lavella" label="Vella Lavella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12699" end="12711" title="Buin, Papua New Guinea#Japan and the USA during World War II" label="Bougainville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343504" start="12728" end="12741" title="Nissan Island" label="Nissan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q714326" start="12792" end="12800" title="Douglas C-47 Skytrain" label="R4D/C-47"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986122" start="12912" end="12939" title="Commendation Medal" label="Navy Letter of Commendation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986122" start="13008" end="13048" title="Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal" label="Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016749" start="13295" end="13320" title="Naval Air Station Alameda" label="Alameda Naval Air Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q490744" start="13324" end="13343" title="Alameda, California" label="Alameda, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647257" start="13389" end="13410" title="Bureau of Aeronautics" label="Bureau of Aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="13421" end="13433" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q940135" start="13561" end="13582" title="United States Secretary of the Navy" label="Secretary of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983433" start="13877" end="13897" title="Lieutenant commander (United States)" label="lieutenant commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q13543682" start="13986" end="13995" title="Commander (United States)" label="commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q145634" start="14128" end="14142" title="five-card stud" label="five-card stud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618" start="14299" end="14316" title="Charles Lindbergh" label="Charles Lindbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002264" start="14412" end="14457" title="California&amp;#x27;s 12th congressional district" label="California&amp;#x27;s 12th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q344100" start="14529" end="14542" title="Jerry Voorhis" label="Jerry Voorhis"/>
<link wikidata="Q487907" start="14893" end="14908" title="Bank of America" label="Bank of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="15059" end="15068" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q743212" start="15753" end="15769" title="Taft–Hartley Act" label="Taft–Hartley Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889964" start="15862" end="15891" title="United States House Committee on Education and Labor" label="Education and Labor Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q96380952" start="15959" end="15975" title="Herter Committee" label="Herter Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="16204" end="16217" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="16267" end="16305" title="House Un-American Activities Committee" label="House Un-American Activities Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q105273" start="16450" end="16464" title="Gerhard Eisler" label="Gerhard Eisler"/>
<link wikidata="Q71775" start="16480" end="16492" title="Ruth Fischer" label="Ruth Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q263728" start="16672" end="16690" title="Charles J. Kersten" label="Charles J. Kersten"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233873" start="16720" end="16739" title="John Francis Cronin" label="John Francis Cronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006409" start="16912" end="16931" title="William C. Sullivan" label="William C. Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q210435" start="16979" end="16994" title="J. Edgar Hoover" label="J. Edgar Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086097" start="17036" end="17052" title="Mundt–Nixon Bill" label="Mundt–Nixon Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="17186" end="17201" title="CPUSA" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q549966" start="17754" end="17764" title="Alger Hiss" label="Alger Hiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204764" start="17794" end="17812" title="Whittaker Chambers" label="Whittaker Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="17852" end="17868" title="United States Department of State" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="17890" end="17896" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q830450" start="18117" end="18126" title="microfilm" label="microfilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q110647378" start="18254" end="18268" title="Pumpkin papers" label="Pumpkin Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q310229" start="18298" end="18305" title="perjury" label="perjury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188175" start="18402" end="18413" title="cross-filed" label="cross-filed"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="18593" end="18613" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278283" start="18648" end="18663" title="Sheridan Downey" label="Sheridan Downey"/>
<link wikidata="Q116462" start="18762" end="18783" title="Helen Gahagan Douglas" label="Helen Gahagan Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="18928" end="18938" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19062" end="19072" title="United States Senate election in California, 1950#Debut of the Pink Sheet" label="Pink Sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4015105" start="19206" end="19222" title="Vito Marcantonio" label="Vito Marcantonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="19540" end="19549" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189197" start="19639" end="19654" title="Joseph McCarthy" label="Joseph McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="19667" end="19681" title="Anti-communism" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="19724" end="19733" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="19849" end="19864" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="19888" end="19898" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="19927" end="19933" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="19938" end="19944" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="20035" end="20040" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="20045" end="20055" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="20218" end="20238" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545806" start="20422" end="20439" title="smoke-filled room" label="smoke-filled room"/>
<link wikidata="Q519730" start="20758" end="20772" title="Robert A. Taft" label="Robert A. Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q477096" start="20791" end="20806" title="Alfred Driscoll" label="Alfred Driscoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382002" start="20834" end="20849" title="Everett Dirksen" label="Everett Dirksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339406" start="20974" end="20986" title="running mate" label="running mate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15145017" start="21363" end="21369" title="ticket (politics)" label="ticket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030188" start="21470" end="21485" title="Checkers speech" label="Checkers speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q699548" start="22333" end="22354" title="1952 United States presidential election" label="the November election"/>
<link wikidata="Q639738" start="22469" end="22476" title="United States Cabinet" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="22481" end="22506" title="National Security Council (USA)" label="National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="22745" end="22751" title="Ho Chi Minh City" label="Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="22756" end="22761" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="22765" end="22781" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892433" start="23152" end="23166" title="1954 United States elections" label="1954 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q217797" start="23455" end="23511" title="Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q443953" start="23789" end="23804" title="Stephen Ambrose" label="Stephen Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899221" start="24651" end="24672" title="New Hampshire primary" label="New Hampshire primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q699567" start="24833" end="24855" title="1956 United States presidential election" label="November 1956 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3678778" start="24970" end="24994" title="Civil Rights Act of 1957" label="Civil Rights Act of 1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="25215" end="25221" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="25467" end="25480" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335" start="25485" end="25495" title="Montevideo" label="Montevideo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="25676" end="25680" title="Lima" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q270145" start="25773" end="25806" title="National University of San Marcos" label="National University of San Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533" start="26041" end="26048" title="Caracas" label="Caracas"/>
<link wikidata="Q29097890" start="26128" end="26156" title="Attack on Richard Nixon&amp;#x27;s motorcade" label="their limousine was attacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q223677" start="26521" end="26539" title="John Foster Dulles" label="John Foster Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227524" start="26557" end="26589" title="Director of Central Intelligence" label="Director of Central Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q317243" start="26590" end="26602" title="Allen Dulles" label="Allen Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="26685" end="26697" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744568" start="26721" end="26749" title="American National Exhibition" label="American National Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="26844" end="26861" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q856129" start="27033" end="27047" title="Kitchen Debate" label="Kitchen Debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q450984" start="27306" end="27327" title="Henry Cabot Lodge Jr." label="Henry Cabot Lodge Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="27377" end="27392" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241094" start="27524" end="27555" title="Presidency of Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Eisenhower–Nixon administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916432" start="27560" end="27651" title="missile gap" label="allowed the Soviet Union to overtake the U.S. in quantity and quality of ballistic missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610980" start="27756" end="27776" title="1960 United States presidential debates" label="presidential debates"/>
<link wikidata="Q42804" start="27900" end="27924" title="five o&amp;#x27;clock shadow" label="five o&amp;#x27;clock shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q692209" start="28266" end="28277" title="voter fraud" label="voter fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850138" start="28692" end="28702" title="Six Crises" label="Six Crises"/>
<link wikidata="Q724121" start="28975" end="28984" title="Pat Brown" label="Pat Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q887010" start="28989" end="29011" title="governor of California" label="governor of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021250" start="29019" end="29023" title="1962 California gubernatorial election" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994199" start="29653" end="29683" title="Richard Nixon&amp;#x27;s November 1962 press conference" label="an impromptu concession speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260204" start="29964" end="29979" title="Howard K. Smith" label="Howard K. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="29987" end="29995" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q613142" start="30580" end="30594" title="Partner lawyer" label="senior partner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931729" start="30619" end="30662" title="Mudge Rose Guthrie Alexander &amp;amp; Ferdon" label="Nixon, Mudge, Rose, Guthrie &amp;amp; Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="30839" end="30856" title="Assassination of John F. Kennedy" label="his assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314677" start="30935" end="30951" title="1964 Republican Party presidential primaries" label="in the primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571612" start="31171" end="31206" title="1964 Republican National Convention" label="1964 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="31335" end="31350" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q699646" start="31561" end="31582" title="1964 United States presidential election" label="1964 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892439" start="31828" end="31856" title="1966 United States elections" label="1966 congressional elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479500" start="32102" end="32117" title="Leonard Garment" label="Leonard Garment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804801" start="32257" end="32275" title="Time, Inc. v. Hill" label="Time, Inc. v. Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="32289" end="32323" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="33007" end="33018" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543050" start="33153" end="33169" title="Partisan primary" label="primary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q82542" start="33190" end="33203" title="Tet Offensive" label="Tet Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q127698512" start="33252" end="33275" title="Withdrawal of Lyndon B. Johnson from the 1968 United States presidential election" label="withdrew as a candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25310" start="33368" end="33385" title="Robert F. Kennedy" label="Robert F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187550" start="33411" end="33427" title="Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy" label="was assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q520275" start="33561" end="33574" title="George W. Romney" label="George Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237" start="33601" end="33619" title="Nelson Rockefeller" label="Nelson Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="33644" end="33657" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973551" start="33690" end="33709" title="brokered convention" label="brokered convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q324719" start="33891" end="33905" title="Strom Thurmond" label="Strom Thurmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q16017738" start="33910" end="33920" title="Harry S. Dent Sr." label="Harry Dent"/>
<link wikidata="Q203433" start="33952" end="33963" title="Spiro Agnew" label="Spiro Agnew"/>
<link wikidata="Q209989" start="34203" end="34218" title="Hubert Humphrey" label="Hubert Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q83516" start="34241" end="34253" title="1968 Democratic National Convention" label="a convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381720" start="34261" end="34280" title="1968 Democratic National Convention protest activity" label="by violent protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555361" start="34454" end="34469" title="silent majority" label="silent majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="34479" end="34500" title="socially conservative" label="socially conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="34528" end="34549" title="counterculture of the 1960s" label="hippie counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254589" start="34558" end="34566" title="Opposition to the Vietnam War" label="anti-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157478" start="34972" end="34988" title="peace with honor" label="peace with honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637233" start="35520" end="35536" title="October surprise" label="October surprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q545822" start="35792" end="35806" title="Anna Chennault" label="Anna Chennault"/>
<link wikidata="Q465099" start="36060" end="36086" title="American Independent Party" label="American Independent Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q313776" start="36097" end="36111" title="George Wallace" label="George Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968317" start="36527" end="36560" title="Bring Us Together" label="bring the divided nation together"/>
<link wikidata="Q699590" start="36838" end="36854" title="1960 United States presidential election" label="lose a close one"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454200" start="36899" end="36914" title="First inauguration of Richard Nixon" label="was inaugurated"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="36918" end="36927" title="President of the United States" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="36990" end="37003" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q311197" start="37004" end="37015" title="Earl Warren" label="Earl Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q131458" start="37058" end="37064" title="Book of Isaiah" label="Isaiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="37602" end="37617" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="38216" end="38231" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414246" start="38246" end="38271" title="National Security Advisor (United States)" label="national security advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="38283" end="38301" title="United States Secretary of State" label="secretary of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q244932" start="38420" end="38450" title="Sino-Soviet border conflict" label="border clashes between the two"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="38616" end="38639" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708520" start="38646" end="38654" title="Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party" label="chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="38655" end="38665" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048465" start="38714" end="38765" title="Ping-pong diplomacy" label="to visit China and play against top Chinese players"/>
<link wikidata="Q179969" start="39305" end="39318" title="Air Force One" label="Air Force One"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="39355" end="39365" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q223677" start="39455" end="39473" title="John Foster Dulles" label="John Foster Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="39902" end="39912" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q72891" start="40360" end="40384" title="Great Hall of the People" label="Great Hall of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q874682" start="40430" end="40446" title="Shanghai Communiqué" label="joint communique"/>
<link wikidata="Q80290" start="40654" end="40668" title="Forbidden City" label="Forbidden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q41135" start="40674" end="40684" title="Ming tombs" label="Ming tombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="40694" end="40704" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280045" start="40938" end="40956" title="China–United States relations" label="US–China relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q155705" start="41047" end="41054" title="détente" label="détente"/>
<link wikidata="Q64149479" start="41105" end="41125" title="triangular diplomacy" label="triangular diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q174534" start="41751" end="41755" title="Boeing B-52 Stratofortress" label="B-52"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="41804" end="41815" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q683271" start="41877" end="41891" title="Operation Menu" label="Operation Menu"/>
<link wikidata="Q160318" start="41933" end="41949" title="Norodom Sihanouk" label="Norodom Sihanouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="42347" end="42356" title="Viet Cong" label="Viet Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="42401" end="42414" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q313707" start="42477" end="42493" title="Nguyễn Văn Thiệu" label="Nguyễn Văn Thiệu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18917" start="42609" end="42626" title="Army of the Republic of Vietnam" label="Vietnamese troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q927708" start="42643" end="42657" title="Vietnamization" label="Vietnamization"/>
<link wikidata="Q695916" start="42782" end="42799" title="Ho Chi Minh trail" label="Ho Chi Minh trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q39464" start="42954" end="42961" title="Pol Pot" label="Pol Pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q379225" start="42993" end="43002" title="Nuon Chea" label="Nuon Chea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994973" start="43100" end="43127" title="Cambodian campaign" label="ground invasion of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q482635" start="43355" end="43376" title="Kent State shootings" label="Kent State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q83431880" start="43424" end="43469" title="Richard Nixon&amp;#x27;s visit to the Lincoln Memorial" label="an impromptu, early morning meeting with them"/>
<link wikidata="Q213559" start="43477" end="43493" title="Lincoln Memorial" label="Lincoln Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183698" start="43633" end="43648" title="credibility gap" label="credibility gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097061" start="43747" end="43766" title="Operation Freedom Deal" label="bombing of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9724" start="43824" end="43839" title="Pentagon Papers" label="Pentagon Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q431085" start="43872" end="43887" title="Daniel Ellsberg" label="Daniel Ellsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="43913" end="43931" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="43948" end="43967" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014761" start="44357" end="44374" title="New York Times Co. v. United States" label="ruled in favor of"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162775" start="44429" end="44441" title="Conscription in the United States" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q696802" start="44538" end="44557" title="Paris Peace Accords" label="Paris Peace Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936506" start="44739" end="44757" title="North Vietnam Army" label="North Vietnam Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821674" start="44879" end="44924" title="1975 spring offensive" label="North Vietnam conquered South Vietnam in 1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q191721" start="45019" end="45039" title="Bay of Pigs Invasion" label="Bay of Pigs Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="45049" end="45069" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="45161" end="45173" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q289426" start="45265" end="45276" title="Charles Rebozo" label="Bebe Rebozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q190005" start="45708" end="45718" title="Cienfuegos" label="Cienfuegos"/>
<link wikidata="Q440" start="45965" end="45981" title="Salvador Allende" label="Salvador Allende"/>
<link wikidata="Q466956" start="45985" end="46003" title="President of Chile" label="President of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q576" start="46167" end="46183" title="Jorge Alessandri" label="Jorge Alessandri"/>
<link wikidata="Q368" start="46603" end="46619" title="Augusto Pinochet" label="Augusto Pinochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q856670" start="46647" end="46663" title="1973 Chilean coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247522" start="46697" end="46713" title="Death of Salvador Allende" label="dead was Allende"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="47039" end="47054" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="47060" end="47100" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="general secretary of the Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q202770" start="47102" end="47116" title="Alexei Kosygin" label="Alexei Kosygin"/>
<link wikidata="Q462189" start="47122" end="47158" title="Premier of the Soviet Union" label="Chairman of the Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q295781" start="47164" end="47180" title="Nikolai Podgorny" label="Nikolai Podgorny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355240" start="47186" end="47194" title="List of heads of state of the Soviet Union" label="Chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643162" start="47202" end="47233" title="Presidium of the Supreme Soviet" label="Presidium of the Supreme Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q623994" start="47421" end="47427" title="SALT I" label="SALT I"/>
<link wikidata="Q287422" start="47508" end="47537" title="Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty" label="Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q133274" start="47736" end="47743" title="Kremlin" label="Kremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554338" start="47885" end="47892" title="Linkage (policy)" label="linkage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384697" start="48179" end="48197" title="Export–Import Bank of the United States" label="Export-Import Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q363383" start="48261" end="48274" title="Armand Hammer" label="Armand Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013357" start="48282" end="48302" title="Occidental Petroleum" label="Occidental Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="48316" end="48325" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="48378" end="48385" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="48499" end="48505" title="Odessa" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q104036" start="48510" end="48519" title="Ventspils" label="Ventspils"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="48582" end="48587" title="Volga" label="Volga"/>
<link wikidata="Q827518" start="48687" end="48706" title="most favored nation" label="most favored nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627542" start="48775" end="48798" title="Jackson–Vanik amendment" label="Jackson-Vanik Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370087" start="49055" end="49075" title="Grand Kremlin Palace" label="Grand Kremlin Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q128499" start="49116" end="49121" title="Yalta" label="Yalta"/>
<link wikidata="Q521297" start="49189" end="49193" title="MIRV" label="MIRV"/>
<link wikidata="Q494938" start="49443" end="49457" title="Nixon Doctrine" label="Nixon Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="49989" end="50000" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="50492" end="50506" title="Yom Kippur War" label="Yom Kippur War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937038" start="50792" end="50811" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 338" label="negotiating a truce"/>
<link wikidata="Q11695" start="51199" end="51205" title="DEFCON" label="DEFCON"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="51582" end="51597" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799901" start="51950" end="51992" title="List of Middle East peace proposals" label="the stalled Middle East Peace Negotiations"/>
<link wikidata="Q333981" start="52729" end="52739" title="Yahya Khan" label="Yahya Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q99232427" start="52777" end="52786" title="Gary J. Bass" label="Gary Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q371394" start="52891" end="52916" title="Bangladesh Liberation War" label="Bangladesh Liberation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="53171" end="53187" title="Indian subcontinent" label="the subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922071" start="53256" end="53280" title="Third India–Pakistan War" label="Third India–Pakistan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q204342" start="53798" end="53824" title="USS Enterprise (CVN-65)" label="USS &amp;quot;Enterprise&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="53832" end="53845" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191264" start="54001" end="54014" title="Great Society" label="Great Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q113368579" start="55022" end="55036" title="New Federalism" label="New Federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q309202" start="55661" end="55671" title="Camp David" label="Camp David"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577299" start="55879" end="55897" title="Impossible trinity" label="Impossible trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q188532" start="56713" end="56733" title="Bretton Woods system" label="Bretton Woods system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337691" start="57133" end="57147" title="Economic shortage" label="food shortages"/>
<link wikidata="Q113368579" start="57460" end="57474" title="New Federalism" label="New Federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109672" start="57646" end="57682" title="United States Post Office Department" label="United States Post Office Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="57724" end="57752" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088777" start="57789" end="57810" title="conservation movement" label="conservation movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q554211" start="58022" end="58047" title="State of the Union speech" label="State of the Union speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q124473" start="58079" end="58088" title="Earth Day" label="Earth Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="58234" end="58265" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699957" start="58307" end="58322" title="John Ehrlichman" label="John Ehrlichman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978744" start="58483" end="58504" title="Clean Air Act of 1970" label="Clean Air Act of 1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q746186" start="58513" end="58558" title="Occupational Safety and Health Administration" label="Occupational Safety and Health Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972479" start="58575" end="58608" title="National Environmental Policy Act" label="National Environmental Policy Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354340" start="58618" end="58648" title="environmental impact statement" label="environmental impact statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978742" start="58694" end="58709" title="Clean Water Act" label="Clean Water Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007536" start="58886" end="58895" title="impoundment of appropriated funds" label="impounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141363" start="59043" end="59051" title="Medicaid" label="Medicaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q20035455" start="59117" end="59148" title="health maintenance organization" label="health maintenance organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174821" start="59422" end="59434" title="cost sharing" label="cost sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q185517" start="59575" end="59587" title="war on drugs" label="war on drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q185034" start="59769" end="59780" title="sickle-cell disease" label="sickle-cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q475706" start="60007" end="60020" title="war on cancer" label="war on cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="60083" end="60112" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772686" start="60191" end="60202" title="racial integration" label="integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153125" start="60659" end="60668" title="School integration in the United States" label="integrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q313411" start="60766" end="60779" title="George Shultz" label="George Shultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382217" start="61089" end="61095" title="Desegregation busing in the United States" label="busing"/>
<link wikidata="Q48532" start="61402" end="61415" title="Desegregation in the United States" label="desegregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="61511" end="61532" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318430" start="61660" end="61677" title="Philadelphia Plan" label="Philadelphia Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q214244" start="61716" end="61734" title="affirmative action" label="affirmative action"/>
<link wikidata="Q429923" start="61765" end="61787" title="Equal Rights Amendment" label="Equal Rights Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="62263" end="62297" title="Apollo program" label="nearly decade-long national effort"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="62398" end="62407" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615" start="62426" end="62440" title="Neil Armstrong" label="Neil Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252" start="62445" end="62456" title="Buzz Aldrin" label="Buzz Aldrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="62625" end="62670" title="National Aeronautics and Space Administration" label="National Aeronautics and Space Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367762" start="62779" end="62794" title="Thomas O. Paine" label="Thomas O. Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q948200" start="63045" end="63070" title="Manned Orbital Laboratory" label="Manned Orbital Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q466421" start="63105" end="63118" title="spy satellite" label="spy satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q190776" start="63266" end="63272" title="Skylab" label="Skylab"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="63356" end="63369" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q849730" start="63457" end="63477" title="Soviet space program" label="Soviet space program"/>
<link wikidata="Q208759" start="63503" end="63566" title="Apollo–Soyuz Test Project" label="joint mission of an American Apollo and Soviet Soyuz spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306826" start="63738" end="63759" title="political realignment" label="political realignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538559" start="63782" end="63793" title="Solid South" label="Solid South"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="63921" end="63945" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570722" start="64124" end="64141" title="Southern Strategy" label="Southern Strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="64319" end="64340" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131335" start="64383" end="64401" title="Clement Haynsworth" label="Clement Haynsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512264" start="64406" end="64425" title="G. Harrold Carswell" label="G. Harrold Carswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="64735" end="64748" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="64757" end="64768" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="64781" end="64799" title="John F. Kennedy" label="the late president"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822712" start="64862" end="64885" title="Chappaquiddick incident" label="Chappaquiddick incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="64896" end="64901" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q319867" start="64910" end="64923" title="Edmund Muskie" label="Edmund Muskie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="64954" end="64966" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="64975" end="64990" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996329" start="65154" end="65189" title="1972 Republican National Convention" label="1972 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331070" start="65358" end="65373" title="abortion rights" label="abortion rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="65612" end="65620" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176929" start="65629" end="65644" title="Thomas Eagleton" label="Thomas Eagleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q131543" start="65712" end="65734" title="Electroconvulsive therapy" label="electroshock treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="65739" end="65749" title="Major depressive disorder" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602899" start="65854" end="65921" title="List of United States presidential elections by popular vote margin" label="one of the largest landslide election victories in American history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419538" start="66487" end="66504" title="Watergate complex" label="Watergate complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="66550" end="66569" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q319967" start="66610" end="66624" title="Carl Bernstein" label="Carl Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q312782" start="66629" end="66641" title="Bob Woodward" label="Bob Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q301486" start="66680" end="66691" title="Deep Throat (Watergate)" label="Deep Throat"/>
<link wikidata="Q348122" start="66719" end="66728" title="W. Mark Felt" label="Mark Felt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="66756" end="66759" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755212" start="66944" end="66981" title="Committee for the Re-Election of the President" label="Committee to Re-elect President Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296423" start="67084" end="67103" title="White House Counsel" label="White House Counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630448" start="67104" end="67113" title="John Dean" label="John Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668455" start="67217" end="67238" title="Alexander Butterfield" label="Alexander Butterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q310229" start="67249" end="67259" title="Perjury" label="under oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041997" start="67377" end="67388" title="Nixon White House tapes" label="These tapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608642" start="67394" end="67402" title="subpoena" label="subpoena"/>
<link wikidata="Q633113" start="67434" end="67447" title="Archibald Cox" label="Archibald Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419945" start="67530" end="67549" title="executive privilege" label="executive privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q444159" start="67640" end="67663" title="Saturday Night Massacre" label="Saturday Night Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229639" start="67690" end="67703" title="Leon Jaworski" label="Leon Jaworski"/>
<link wikidata="Q178153" start="67838" end="67853" title="Rose Mary Woods" label="Rose Mary Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q311293" start="68721" end="68734" title="John Connally" label="John Connally"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="68784" end="68795" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508632" start="68797" end="68844" title="Minority leader of the United States House of Representatives" label="Minority Leader of the House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="69087" end="69103" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068933" start="69104" end="69119" title="managing editor" label="managing editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131462" start="69482" end="69507" title="U.S. House Committee on the Judiciary" label="House Judiciary Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q115705182" start="69515" end="69526" title="Federal impeachment in the United States" label="impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495462" start="69703" end="69720" title="United States v. Nixon" label="ruled unanimously"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70551" end="70583" title="Watergate tapes#&amp;quot;Smoking Gun&amp;quot; tape" label="the &amp;quot;Smoking Gun Tape&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q467328" start="70773" end="70783" title="Hugh Scott" label="Hugh Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="70793" end="70808" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q444678" start="70836" end="70853" title="John Jacob Rhodes" label="John Jacob Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932404" start="71299" end="71355" title="Richard Nixon&amp;#x27;s resignation speech" label="addressing the nation on television the previous evening"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="71724" end="71742" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122791" start="71768" end="71793" title="Citizenship in a Republic" label="Citizenship in a Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358696" start="71905" end="71915" title="Roger Mudd" label="Roger Mudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="71919" end="71922" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q336444" start="72014" end="72026" title="Conrad Black" label="Conrad Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798672" start="72504" end="72520" title="La Casa Pacifica" label="La Casa Pacifica"/>
<link wikidata="Q675070" start="72524" end="72548" title="San Clemente, California" label="San Clemente, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q332881" start="72579" end="72594" title="Jonathan Aitken" label="Jonathan Aitken"/>
<link wikidata="Q706406" start="72924" end="72935" title="Ron Ziegler" label="Ron Ziegler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423167" start="73644" end="73653" title="phlebitis" label="phlebitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699957" start="73888" end="73903" title="John Ehrlichman" label="John Ehrlichman"/>
<link wikidata="Q705980" start="74048" end="74059" title="John Sirica" label="John Sirica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892442" start="74355" end="74377" title="1974 United States elections" label="1974 midterm elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="74793" end="74804" title="United States Coast Guard" label="Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q380865" start="75315" end="75326" title="David Frost" label="David Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q3800671" start="75384" end="75415" title="Nixon interviews" label="a series of sit-down interviews"/>
<link wikidata="Q289426" start="76189" end="76200" title="Charles Rebozo" label="Bebe Rebozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="76483" end="76490" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="76500" end="76512" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q699693" start="76516" end="76536" title="1976 United States presidential election" label="the general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q315979" start="76673" end="76687" title="Malcolm Fraser" label="Malcolm Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281373" start="76745" end="76754" title="Disbarment" label="disbarred"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014031" start="76762" end="76792" title="New York State Bar Association" label="New York State Bar Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q525302" start="76797" end="76819" title="obstruction of justice" label="obstruction of justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="76995" end="77010" title="James Callaghan" label="James Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="77055" end="77071" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="77076" end="77088" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741536" start="77123" end="77147" title="Leader of the Opposition (United Kingdom)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="77149" end="77166" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q128976" start="77195" end="77204" title="Alec Douglas-Home" label="Lord Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="77213" end="77226" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157937" start="77248" end="77260" title="Oxford Union" label="Oxford Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218845" start="77462" end="77477" title="John A. Farrell" label="John A. Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="77731" end="77744" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q109858" start="78055" end="78067" title="Fifth Avenue" label="Fifth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q562166" start="78120" end="78126" title="housing cooperative" label="co-ops"/>
<link wikidata="Q128245" start="78145" end="78157" title="Mohammed Reza Pahlavi" label="Shah of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q699716" start="78477" end="78481" title="1980 U.S. presidential election" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021551" start="78817" end="78829" title="Saddle River, New Jersey" label="Saddle River"/>
<link wikidata="Q42013" start="79151" end="79162" title="Anwar Sadat" label="Anwar Sadat"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="79588" end="79605" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519223" start="79648" end="79661" title="Gallup&amp;#x27;s most admired man and woman poll" label="a Gallup poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642960" start="79867" end="79883" title="Pundit" label="political pundit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15462923" start="79884" end="79898" title="Elizabeth Drew" label="Elizabeth Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q493518" start="80325" end="80348" title="Yorba Linda, California" label="Yorba Linda, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="80497" end="80514" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q213122" start="80540" end="80545" title="Betty Ford" label="Betty"/>
<link wikidata="Q193426" start="80547" end="80552" title="Nancy Reagan" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190628" start="80558" end="80565" title="Barbara Bush" label="Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044929" start="80641" end="80673" title="Center for the National Interest" label="Center for the National Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q155271" start="80696" end="80706" title="think tank" label="think tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q188605" start="80767" end="80776" title="emphysema" label="emphysema"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="80781" end="80792" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="81057" end="81063" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q253067" start="81128" end="81138" title="Park Ridge, New Jersey" label="Park Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588755" start="81154" end="81164" title="Thrombus" label="blood clot"/>
<link wikidata="Q815819" start="81184" end="81203" title="atrial fibrillation" label="atrial fibrillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36324933" start="81266" end="81276" title="Embolus" label="broken off"/>
<link wikidata="Q975653" start="81321" end="81350" title="NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital" label="NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="81354" end="81363" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q979168" start="81471" end="81485" title="cerebral edema" label="cerebral edema"/>
<link wikidata="Q493518" start="81675" end="81698" title="Yorba Linda, California" label="Yorba Linda, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="81759" end="81771" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="81799" end="81814" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q319079" start="81839" end="81847" title="Bob Dole" label="Bob Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q714909" start="81869" end="81880" title="Pete Wilson" label="Pete Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q213550" start="81899" end="81911" title="Billy Graham" label="Billy Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841119" start="82134" end="82140" title="Tricia Nixon Cox" label="Tricia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770472" start="82145" end="82150" title="Julie Nixon Eisenhower" label="Julie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052001" start="82231" end="82244" title="state funeral" label="state funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q14906318" start="82266" end="82279" title="lie in repose" label="lie in repose"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="82592" end="82596" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637130" start="83188" end="83198" title="Tom Wicker" label="Tom Wicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="83276" end="83294" title="Franklin Roosevelt" label="Franklin Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q889935" start="84087" end="84110" title="The Dallas Morning News" label="The Dallas Morning News"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549244" start="84274" end="84287" title="Russell Baker" label="Russell Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174282" start="84369" end="84381" title="Jeff Koterba" label="Jeff Koterba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089470" start="84395" end="84413" title="Omaha World-Herald" label="Omaha World-Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q219780" start="84662" end="84680" title="Hunter S. Thompson" label="Hunter S. Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="84731" end="84744" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="84832" end="84844" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29372" start="84939" end="84946" title="Grendel" label="Grendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529607" start="85030" end="85051" title="James MacGregor Burns" label="James MacGregor Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241106" start="85183" end="85200" title="Presidency of Richard Nixon" label="of his presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="85743" end="85757" title="Anti-communism" label="anti-Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q874803" start="85982" end="86004" title="historical revisionism" label="historical revisionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="86173" end="86188" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q11345616" start="86513" end="86528" title="Jussi Hanhimäki" label="Jussi Hanhimäki"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="86608" end="86616" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q29071" start="86627" end="86638" title="containment" label="containment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086484" start="86693" end="86711" title="Christopher Andrew (historian)" label="Christopher Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="87311" end="87356" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743374" start="87419" end="87441" title="Endangered Species Act" label="Endangered Species Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="87764" end="87780" title="environmentalism" label="environmentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570722" start="87815" end="87832" title="Southern Strategy" label="Southern Strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="87844" end="87866" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q18631249" start="88140" end="88154" title="Keith W. Olson" label="Keith W. Olson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200400" start="88275" end="88302" title="impeachment of Bill Clinton" label="impeachment of Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="88749" end="88769" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q336444" start="90065" end="90077" title="Conrad Black" label="Conrad Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q179962" start="90346" end="90349" title="Job (biblical figure)" label="Job"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297982" start="90571" end="90580" title="Ray Price (speechwriter)" label="Ray Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q410400" start="90637" end="90645" title="dilantin" label="dilantin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112189" start="90662" end="90674" title="Jack Dreyfus" label="Jack Dreyfus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182252" start="90870" end="90879" title="Apollo 13" label="Apollo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q13472752" start="90957" end="90962" title="valet" label="valet"/>
<link wikidata="Q28935930" start="90963" end="90977" title="Manolo Sanchez (Nixon staff member)" label="Manolo Sanchez"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91016" end="91026" title="David Owen#Selected publications" label="David Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="91043" end="91052" title="alcoholic" label="alcoholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15462923" start="91066" end="91080" title="Elizabeth Drew" label="Elizabeth Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328634" start="91228" end="91242" title="Richard Reeves (American writer)" label="Richard Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q958413" start="91905" end="91919" title="H. R. Haldeman" label="H. R. Haldeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q289426" start="92569" end="92580" title="Bebe Rebozo" label="Bebe Rebozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850138" start="93389" end="93399" title="Six Crises" label="Six Crises"/>
<link wikidata="Q48812958" start="94266" end="94302" title="Cultural depictions of Richard Nixon" label="Cultural depictions of Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834894" start="94305" end="94339" title="Electoral history of Richard Nixon" label="Electoral history of Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35073" start="94342" end="94381" title="List of presidents of the United States" label="List of presidents of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594910" start="94384" end="94446" title="List of presidents of the United States by previous experience" label="List of presidents of the United States by previous experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q839042" start="94449" end="94466" title="Nixon (film)" label="&amp;quot;Nixon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q105580912" start="94481" end="94521" title="Presidential transition of Richard Nixon" label="Presidential transition of Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017488" start="94524" end="94557" title="Timeline of the Watergate scandal" label="Timeline of the Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="95544" end="95550" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
<link wikidata="" start="95564" end="95599" title="American Presidents: Life Portraits" label="American Presidents: Life Portraits"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859101" start="95716" end="95747" title="Miller Center of Public Affairs" label="Miller Center of Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842919" start="95851" end="95870" title="American Experience" label="American Experience"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25475" wikidata="Q160738" url="?curid=25475" title="Role-playing game">
<text>A role-playing game (sometimes spelled roleplaying game, or abbreviated as RPG) is a game in which players assume the roles of characters in a fictional setting. Players take responsibility for acting out these roles within a narrative, either through literal acting or through a process of structured decision-making regarding character development. Actions taken within many games succeed or fail according to a formal system of rules and guidelines.

There are several forms of role-playing games. The original form, sometimes called the tabletop role-playing game (TRPG or TTRPG), is conducted through discussion, whereas in live action role-playing (LARP), players physically perform their characters&#x27; actions. Both forms feature collaborative storytelling. In both TTRPGs and LARPs, often an arranger called a game master (GM) decides on the game system and setting to be used, while acting as a facilitator or referee. Each of the other players takes on the role of a single character in the fiction.

Several varieties of RPG also exist in electronic media, such as multiplayer text-based Multi-User Dungeons (MUDs) and their graphics-based successors, massively multiplayer online role-playing games (MMORPGs).
Role-playing games also include single-player role-playing video games in which the player controls one or more characters who are on a quest.
Role-playing video games may include player capabilities that advance over time using statistical mechanics. These electronic games sometimes share settings and rules with tabletop RPGs, but emphasize character advancement more than collaborative storytelling.

Some RPG-related game forms, such as trading/collectible card games (CCGs) and wargames, may or may not be included under the definition of role-playing games. Although some amount of role-playing activity may be present in such games, it is not the primary focus. 

The term &quot;role-playing game&quot; is also sometimes used to describe other games involving roleplay simulation, such as exercises used in teaching, training, academic research, or therapeutic settings.

==Purpose==

Both authors and major publishers of tabletop role-playing games consider them to be a form of interactive and collaborative storytelling. Events, characters, and narrative structure give a sense of a narrative experience, and the game need not have a strongly-defined storyline. Interactivity is the crucial difference between role-playing games and traditional fiction. Whereas a viewer of a television show is a passive observer, a player in a role-playing game makes choices that affect the story. Such role-playing games extend an older tradition of storytelling games where a small party of friends collaborate to create a story.

While simple forms of role-playing exist in traditional children&#x27;s games of make believe, role-playing games add a level of sophistication and persistence to this basic idea with additions such as game facilitators and rules of interaction. Participants in a role-playing game will generate specific characters and an ongoing plot. A consistent system of rules and a more or less realistic campaign setting in games aids suspension of disbelief. The level of realism in games ranges from just enough internal consistency to set up a believable story or credible challenge up to full-blown simulations of real-world processes.

Tabletop role-playing games may also be used in therapy settings to help individuals develop behavioral, social, and even language skills. Beneficiaries commonly include young people with neurodevelopmental conditions, such as Autism spectrum disorders, attention-deficit hyperactive disorder (ADHD), and dyslexia.

==Varieties==
Role-playing games are played in a wide variety of formats, ranging from discussing character interaction in tabletop form, physically acting out characters in LARP to playing characters virtually in digital media. There is also a great variety of systems of rules and game settings. Games that emphasize plot and character interaction over game mechanics and combat sometimes prefer the name storytelling game. These types of games tend to reduce or eliminate the use of dice and other randomizing elements. Some games are played with characters created before the game by the GM, rather than those created by the players. This type of game is typically played at gaming conventions, or in standalone games that do not form part of a campaign.

===Tabletop===
Tabletop (TTRPG) and &quot;pen-and-paper&quot; (PnP) RPGs are conducted through discussion in a small social gathering. In traditional TTRPGs, a GM describes the game world and its inhabitants. The other players describe the intended actions of their characters, and the GM describes the outcomes. Some outcomes are determined by the game system, and some are chosen by the GM. This is the format in which role-playing games were first popularized. In contrast, many indie role-playing games experiment with different structures of play, such as sharing the responsibility for creating setting details and NPCs among all players.

The first commercially available RPG, &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; (&quot;D&amp;D&quot;), was inspired by fantasy literature and the wargaming hobby and was published in 1974. The popularity of &quot;D&amp;D&quot; led to the birth of the tabletop role-playing game industry, which publishes games with many different themes, rules, and styles of play. 

The popularity of tabletop games decreased in the late 1990s due to competition from online MMO RPGs, role-playing video games, and collectible card games. However, TTRPGs experienced a resurgence in popularity between the mid-2010s and early 2020s due to actual play web series and online play through videoconferencing during the COVID-19 lockdowns.

The tabletop format is often referred to simply as a &quot;role-playing game&quot;. To distinguish this form of RPG from other formats, the retronyms &quot;tabletop role-playing game&quot; or &quot;pen and paper role-playing game&quot; are sometimes used, though neither a table nor pen and paper are strictly necessary.

===Live action===
A LARP is played more like improvisational theatre. Participants act out their characters&#x27; actions instead of describing them, and the real environment is used to represent the imaginary setting of the game world. Players are often costumed as their characters and use appropriate props, and the venue may be decorated to resemble the fictional setting. Some live-action role-playing games use rock paper scissors or comparison of attributes to resolve conflicts symbolically, while other LARPs use physical combat with simulated arms such as airsoft guns or foam weapons.

LARPs vary in size from a handful of players to several thousand, and in duration from a couple of hours to several days. Because the number of players in a LARP is usually larger than in a tabletop role-playing game, and the players may be interacting in separate physical spaces, there is typically less of an emphasis on tightly maintaining a narrative or directly entertaining the players, and game sessions are often managed in a more distributed manner.

===Electronic media===
Tabletop role-playing games have been translated into a variety of electronic formats. As early as 1974, the same year as the release of Dungeons &amp; Dragons, unlicensed versions of it were developed on mainframe university systems under titles such as &quot;dnd&quot; and &quot;Dungeon&quot;. These early computer RPGs influenced all of electronic gaming, as well as spawning the role-playing video game genre. Some authors divide digital role-playing games into two intertwined groups: single-player games using RPG-style mechanics, and multiplayer games incorporating social interaction.

====Single-player====
Single-player role-playing video games form a loosely defined genre of computer and console games with origins in role-playing games such as &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;, on which they base much of their terminology, settings, and game mechanics. This translation changes the experience of the game, providing a visual representation of the world but emphasizing statistical character development over collaborative, interactive storytelling.

====Multiplayer====

Online text-based role-playing games involve many players using some type of text-based interface and an Internet connection to play an RPG. Games played in a real-time way include MUDs, MUSHes, and other varieties of MU*. Games played in a turn-based fashion include play-by-mail games and play-by-post games.

Massively multiplayer online role-playing games (MMORPGs) combine the large-scale social interaction and persistent world of MUDs with graphic interfaces. Most MMORPGs do not actively promote in-character role-playing, however, players can use the games&#x27; communication functions to role-play so long as other players cooperate. The majority of players in MMORPGs do not engage in role-playing in this sense.

Computer-assisted gaming can be used to add elements of computer gaming to in-person tabletop role-playing, where computers are used for record-keeping and sometimes to resolve combat, while the participants generally make decisions concerning character interaction.

==People==
===Gamemaster===

One common feature of many RPGs is the role of a gamemaster (GM), a participant who has special duties to present the fictional setting, arbitrate the results of character actions, and maintain the narrative flow. In tabletop and live-action RPGs the GM performs these duties in person. In video RPGs, many of the functions of a GM are fulfilled by the game engine. However, some multi-player video RPGs also allow for a participant to take on a GM role through a visual interface called a &quot;GM toolkit&quot;, albeit with abilities limited by the available technology.

===Player character===

Another standard concept in RPGs is the player character, a character in the fictional world of the game whose actions the player controls. Typically each player controls a separate player character, sometimes more, each of whom acts as a protagonist in the story.

===Non-player character===

In contrast to player characters, non-player characters (NPCs) are controlled by the gamemaster or game engine, or by people assisting the gamemaster. Non-player characters fill out the population of the fictional setting and can act as antagonists, bystanders, or allies of the player characters.

==See also==
===Types of RPGs===
* Actual play
* Live-action role-playing game
* Online text-based role-playing game
* Play-by-post role-playing game
* Role-playing video game
* Tabletop role-playing game
===Movements and Traditions===
* History of role-playing games
* Indie role-playing games
* Japanese role-playing games
* Nordic LARP
* Old School Renaissance
* Polish role-playing games
* Role-playing game theory
===Parts of Games===
* Adventure
* Campaign setting
* Character creation
* Role-playing game terms
* RPG Statistics
===Lists===
* List of campaign settings
* List of designers of role-playing games
* List of game manufacturers (including role-playing games)
* List of role-playing game artists
* List of role-playing game publishers
* List of role-playing games by name
* List of role-playing game software

===Other===
* Conversation games
* Gaming conventions
* Timeline of role-playing games

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="2" end="19" title="Role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="39" end="55" title="Role-playing game" label="roleplaying game"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="75" end="78" title="Role-playing game" label="RPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062345" start="127" end="136" title="player character" label="character"/>
<link wikidata="Q617332" start="153" end="160" title="Setting (narrative)" label="setting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868661" start="421" end="451" title="role-playing game system" label="system of rules and guidelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643932" start="541" end="567" title="tabletop role-playing game" label="tabletop role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q216749" start="629" end="653" title="live action role-playing game" label="live action role-playing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620492" start="740" end="766" title="collaborative storytelling" label="collaborative storytelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q930701" start="821" end="832" title="game master" label="game master"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426659" start="1079" end="1101" title="Online text-based role-playing game" label="multiplayer text-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q751424" start="1102" end="1128" title="Multi-user dungeon" label="Multi-User Dungeons (MUDs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q175173" start="1166" end="1212" title="massively multiplayer online role-playing game" label="massively multiplayer online role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q744038" start="1271" end="1294" title="role-playing video game" label="role-playing video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q604973" start="1569" end="1590" title="Leveling-up" label="character advancement"/>
<link wikidata="Q734698" start="1667" end="1704" title="trading card game" label="trading/collectible card games (CCGs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501543" start="1709" end="1717" title="wargaming" label="wargames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361181" start="1814" end="1826" title="role-playing" label="role-playing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360661" start="1993" end="2012" title="roleplay simulation" label="roleplay simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179661" start="2082" end="2093" title="Therapy" label="therapeutic"/>
<link wikidata="Q989963" start="2243" end="2255" title="storytelling" label="storytelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620492" start="2673" end="2690" title="storytelling game" label="storytelling game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739181" start="2836" end="2848" title="make believe" label="make believe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4418079" start="3150" end="3166" title="campaign setting" label="campaign setting"/>
<link wikidata="Q951982" start="3181" end="3204" title="suspension of disbelief" label="suspension of disbelief"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="3219" end="3226" title="Realism (arts)" label="realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486141" start="3293" end="3309" title="narrativist" label="believable story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486141" start="3313" end="3331" title="gamist" label="credible challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486141" start="3349" end="3360" title="simulationist" label="simulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643932" start="3387" end="3413" title="Tabletop role-playing game" label="Tabletop role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="3614" end="3629" title="Autism spectrum" label="Autism spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="3641" end="3679" title="ADHD" label="attention-deficit hyperactive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="3681" end="3685" title="ADHD" label="ADHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q132971" start="3692" end="3700" title="dyslexia" label="dyslexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216749" start="3877" end="3881" title="Live action role-playing game" label="LARP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868661" start="3965" end="3981" title="Role-playing game system" label="systems of rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q4418079" start="3986" end="3999" title="Campaign setting" label="game settings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620492" start="4110" end="4127" title="storytelling game" label="storytelling game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070242" start="4382" end="4399" title="gaming convention" label="gaming convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q336522" start="4945" end="4969" title="Indie role-playing game" label="indie role-playing games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="5153" end="5175" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501543" start="5248" end="5257" title="wargaming" label="wargaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q744038" start="5571" end="5595" title="Role-playing video game" label="role-playing video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q124419618" start="5725" end="5736" title="actual play" label="actual play"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="5772" end="5789" title="Videoconference" label="videoconferencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q87866152" start="5801" end="5819" title="COVID-19 lockdowns" label="COVID-19 lockdowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130239" start="5962" end="5970" title="retronym" label="retronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140700" start="6189" end="6212" title="improvisational theatre" label="improvisational theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q106631" start="6561" end="6580" title="rock paper scissors" label="rock paper scissors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142497" start="6710" end="6721" title="airsoft gun" label="airsoft gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102716" start="6726" end="6737" title="foam weapon" label="foam weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q751424" start="8493" end="8496" title="Multi-user dungeon" label="MUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6719091" start="8499" end="8503" title="MUSH" label="MUSH"/>
<link wikidata="Q6719017" start="8530" end="8533" title="MU*" label="MU*"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129581" start="8580" end="8597" title="play-by-mail game" label="play-by-mail game"/>
<link wikidata="Q751838" start="8603" end="8620" title="play-by-post game" label="play-by-post game"/>
<link wikidata="Q736958" start="8729" end="8745" title="persistent world" label="persistent world"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157386" start="9038" end="9062" title="Computer-assisted gaming" label="Computer-assisted gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q193564" start="9688" end="9699" title="game engine" label="game engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q124419618" start="10561" end="10572" title="Actual play" label="Actual play"/>
<link wikidata="Q216749" start="10575" end="10604" title="Live-action role-playing game" label="Live-action role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426659" start="10607" end="10642" title="Online text-based role-playing game" label="Online text-based role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q751838" start="10645" end="10675" title="Play-by-post role-playing game" label="Play-by-post role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q744038" start="10678" end="10701" title="Role-playing video game" label="Role-playing video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643932" start="10704" end="10730" title="Tabletop role-playing game" label="Tabletop role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868661" start="10764" end="10793" title="History of role-playing games" label="History of role-playing games"/>
<link wikidata="Q336522" start="10796" end="10820" title="Indie role-playing games" label="Indie role-playing games"/>
<link wikidata="Q14623846" start="10823" end="10850" title="Japanese role-playing games" label="Japanese role-playing games"/>
<link wikidata="Q130329697" start="10853" end="10864" title="Nordic LARP" label="Nordic LARP"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991289" start="10867" end="10889" title="Old School Renaissance" label="Old School Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210076" start="10892" end="10917" title="Polish role-playing games" label="Polish role-playing games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472433" start="10920" end="10944" title="Role-playing game theory" label="Role-playing game theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000492" start="10968" end="10977" title="Adventure_(role-playing_games)" label="Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4418079" start="10980" end="10996" title="Campaign setting" label="Campaign setting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073735" start="10999" end="11017" title="Character creation" label="Character creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245850" start="11020" end="11043" title="Role-playing game terms" label="Role-playing game terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369904" start="11046" end="11060" title="Statistic_(role-playing_games)" label="RPG Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608720" start="11075" end="11100" title="List of campaign settings" label="List of campaign settings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872393" start="11103" end="11142" title="List of designers of role-playing games" label="List of designers of role-playing games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243226" start="11145" end="11171" title="List of game manufacturers" label="List of game manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636900" start="11205" end="11238" title="List of role-playing game artists" label="List of role-playing game artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q18355766" start="11241" end="11277" title="List of role-playing game publishers" label="List of role-playing game publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213039" start="11280" end="11314" title="List of role-playing games by name" label="List of role-playing games by name"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636897" start="11317" end="11351" title="List of role-playing game software" label="List of role-playing game software"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166413" start="11367" end="11385" title="Conversation games" label="Conversation games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070242" start="11388" end="11405" title="Gaming convention" label="Gaming convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q6432829" start="11409" end="11439" title="Timeline of role-playing games" label="Timeline of role-playing games"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25476" wikidata="Q26520" url="?curid=25476" title="Raised-bed gardening">
<text>Raised-bed gardening is a form of gardening in which the soil is raised above ground level and usually enclosed in some way. Raised bed structures can be made of wood, rock, concrete or other materials, and can be of any size or shape. The soil is usually enriched with compost.

Vegetables are grown in geometric patterns, much closer together than in conventional row gardening. The spacing is such that when the vegetables are fully grown, their leaves just barely touch each other, creating a microclimate in which weed growth is suppressed and moisture is conserved.

==Overview==
Raised beds lend themselves to the development of complex agriculture systems that utilize many of the principles and methods of permaculture. They can be used effectively to control erosion and recycle and conserve water and nutrients by building them along contour lines on slopes. This also makes more space available for intensive crop production. They can be created over large areas with the use of several commonly available tractor-drawn implements and efficiently maintained, planted and harvested using hand tools.

This form of gardening is compatible with square foot gardening and companion planting.

Circular raised beds with a path to the center (a slice of the circle cut out) are called keyhole gardens. Often the center has a chimney of sorts built with sticks and then lined with feedbags or grasses that allows water placed at the center to flow out into the soil and reach the plants&#x27; roots.

A self watering raised bed known as a wicking bed is particularly beneficial in dry climates and are often made by converting Intermediate bulk container (IBC&#x27;s).

===Materials and construction===

Lumber is the most common construction material for making raised beds. If using lumber treated with chromated copper arsenate or CCA (though uncommon since 2004 in the US and Europe), it is recommended to use a plastic liner between the wood and soil if the raised bed is intended for growing edibles.

Another material commonly used are railroad ties, also known as sleepers, joined with steel rods to hold them together. Another approach is to use concrete blocks, although less aesthetically pleasing, they are inexpensive to obtain and easy to use.

On the market are also prefab raised garden bed solutions which are made from long lasting polyethylene that is UV stabilized and food grade so it will not leach undesirable chemicals into the soil or deteriorate in the elements. A double skinned wall provides an air pocket of insulation that minimizes the temperature fluctuations and drying out of the soil in the garden bed. Sometimes raised bed gardens are covered with clear plastic to protect the crops from wind and strong rains. Pre-manufactured raised bed gardening boxes also exist. There are variants of wood, metal, stone and plastic.

==Benefits==
Raised beds produce a variety of benefits: they extend the planting season, they can reduce weeds if designed and planted properly, and they reduce the need to use poor native soil. Since the gardener does not walk on the raised beds, the soil is not compacted and the roots have an easier time growing. Waist-high raised beds enable the elderly and physically disabled to grow vegetables without having to bend over to tend them.

==Gallery==
==Sunken gardens==

A &quot;waffle garden&quot; is the inverse of raised beds and is a gardening method by the Zuni people. In an arid climate, clay walls are built up around the planting area and plants are watered by filling the bed &quot;cells&quot;.

The term &quot;sunken garden&quot; usually refers to a formal traditional English garden where the garden is lower than the surrounding land, and may have multiple terraces around it and steps leading down to the garden.

==See also==

* Keyhole garden
* Kitchen garden
* Square foot gardening
* Therapeutic garden
* Herb spiral
* Waru WaruA traditional Quechua, pre-Inca system involving raised beds
* HügelkulturAnother type of raised bed

==References==
== Bibliography ==
* 

==External links==
* The Synergistic Garden—A video by Emilia Hazelip, which provides practical information on how to garden with raised beds.
* Appeal: Keyhole gardening saves lives in world&#x27;s most eroded land</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q26520" start="0" end="20" title="Raised-bed gardening" label="Raised-bed gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q124946" start="34" end="43" title="gardening" label="gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q212254" start="270" end="277" title="compost" label="compost"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="280" end="289" title="Vegetable" label="Vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q215108" start="497" end="509" title="microclimate" label="microclimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572" start="715" end="727" title="permaculture" label="permaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="769" end="776" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465304" start="1154" end="1175" title="square foot gardening" label="square foot gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935508" start="1180" end="1198" title="companion planting" label="companion planting"/>
<link wikidata="Q23581343" start="1291" end="1305" title="keyhole garden" label="keyhole garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q16937142" start="1544" end="1555" title="wicking bed" label="wicking bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666214" start="1632" end="1659" title="Intermediate bulk container" label="Intermediate bulk container"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625709" start="1797" end="1804" title="Wood preservation" label="treated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864498" start="1810" end="1835" title="chromated copper arsenate" label="chromated copper arsenate"/>
<link wikidata="Q220229" start="2048" end="2060" title="railroad tie" label="railroad tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q766952" start="2160" end="2175" title="Concrete masonry unit" label="concrete blocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q143429" start="2355" end="2367" title="polyethylene" label="polyethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088919" start="2376" end="2389" title="UV stabilizers in plastics" label="UV stabilized"/>
<link wikidata="Q231317" start="3431" end="3442" title="Zuni people" label="Zuni people"/>
<link wikidata="Q12783" start="3649" end="3663" title="English landscape garden" label="English garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q23581343" start="3813" end="3827" title="Keyhole garden" label="Keyhole garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q624114" start="3830" end="3844" title="Kitchen garden" label="Kitchen garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465304" start="3847" end="3868" title="Square foot gardening" label="Square foot gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q25382555" start="3871" end="3889" title="Therapeutic garden" label="Therapeutic garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790592" start="3892" end="3903" title="Herb spiral" label="Herb spiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316868" start="3906" end="3915" title="Waru Waru" label="Waru Waru"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069101" start="3978" end="3989" title="Hügelkultur" label="Hügelkultur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391235" start="4110" end="4124" title="Emilia Hazelip" label="Emilia Hazelip"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25477" wikidata="Q534381" url="?curid=25477" title="Ring">
<text>(The) Ring(s) may refer to:

* Ring (jewellery), a round band, usually made of metal, worn as ornamental jewelry
* To make a sound with a bell, and the sound made by a bell
==Arts, entertainment, and media==
===Film and TV===
* &quot;The Ring&quot; (franchise), a Japanese horror media franchise based on the novel series by Koji Suzuki
** &quot;Ring&quot; (film), or &quot;The Ring&quot;, a 1998 Japanese horror film by Hideo Nakata
*** &quot;The Ring&quot; (2002 film), an American horror film, remake of the 1998 Japanese film
** &quot;Ring&quot; (1995 film), a TV film
** &quot;Rings&quot; (2005 film), a short film by Jonathan Liebesman
** &quot;Rings&quot; (2017 film), an American horror film
* &quot;Ring&quot;, a season 3 episode of &quot;Servant&quot; (TV series)

===Gaming===
* &quot;Ring&quot; (video game), 1998
* Rings (&quot;Sonic the Hedgehog&quot;), a collectible in &quot;Sonic the Hedgehog&quot; games

===Literature===
* &quot;Ring&quot; (Baxter novel), a 1994 science fiction novel
* &quot;Ring&quot; (Alexis novel), a 2021 Canadian novel by André Alexis
* &quot;Ring&quot; (novel series), a Japanese novel series by Koji Suzuki
** &quot;Ring&quot; (Suzuki novel), 1991

===Music===
* Ring (rock band), a 1980s British band
* &quot;Der Ring des Nibelungen&quot;, Wagner&#x27;s epic &quot;Ring cycle&quot;

====Albums====
* &quot;Ring&quot; (The Connells album), 1993
* &quot;Ring&quot; (Gary Burton album), 1974
* &quot;Ring&quot; (Glasser album), 2010
* &quot;Ring&quot; (Miliyah Kato album), 2009
* &quot;Ring&quot; (R album), 2020
* &quot;Ring&quot; (White Reaper song), 2019

====Songs====
* &quot;Ring&quot; (B&#x27;z song), 2000
* &quot;Ring&quot; (Cardi B song), 2018
* &quot;Ring&quot;, song by Phoebe Ryan, 2020
* &quot;Ring&quot; (Selena Gomez song), 2020
* &quot;Ring&quot; (T.I. song), 2020
* &quot;Rings&quot; (song), 1971 song covered by Lonnie Mack, Cymarron, Tompall &amp; the Glaser Brothers, and others
* &quot;Rings&quot; (Aesop Rock song), 2016

==People==
* Ring (surname), including a list of people with the name
* Ring of Sweden, a Swedish monarch or local ruler c. 936
* Frances Rings, Australian dancer and choreographer

==Places==
* Ring, County Waterford, Ireland
* Ring, Wisconsin, United States

==Mathematics==
* Annulus (mathematics), a geometric planar ring
* Ring (mathematics), an algebraic structure
* Ring of sets, a family of subsets closed under certain operations

== Computers and electronics ==
* Protection ring, in computer security
* Ring (data structure), or ring buffer
* Ring (programming language)
* Ring (software), VOIP software
* Ring circuit, an electrical wiring technique
* Ring network, a network topology

== Science ==
* Ring (chemistry), a cyclic molecule
* Ring system, in astronomy, matter orbiting a planet or other stellar body
* Annulus (mycology), or ring, on the stipe of mushrooms
* Ring attached to a bird by bird ringing, for identification

==Sports==
===Apparatus===
* Juggling ring, a popular prop used by jugglers
* Rings (gymnastics), a gymnastics apparatus and its associated event

===Places===
* Boxing ring, the space in which a boxing match occurs
* Wrestling ring, the stage on which a professional wrestling match usually occurs
* Fighting Network Rings, or RINGS, a Japanese combat sport promotion

==Other uses==
* Crime ring, or ring, in organized crime
* Ring (Bulgaria), a Bulgarian sports TV channel
* Ring (company), a home security company, maker of the Ring video doorbell
* Ring (diacritic), that may appear above or below letters
* Ring, a bidders&#x27; pool for collusion in an auction
* Ring, a local club of the International Brotherhood of Magicians
* Ring, a perception of sound caused by tinnitus
* Ring languages, spoken in Cameroon
* Ring road, a type of highway encircling a town or city

==See also==
* 
* Ring of Solomon
* Ringe (disambiguation)
* Ringer (disambiguation)
* Ringing (disambiguation)
* Ringo (disambiguation)
* Ringtone (disambiguation)
* The Ring (disambiguation)
* Ring 0 (disambiguation)
* Ring 1 (disambiguation)
* Ring 2 (disambiguation)
* Ring 3 (disambiguation)
* Ring 4 (disambiguation)
* Ring 5 (disambiguation)
* Ring of Honor (disambiguation)
* Ring Ring (disambiguation)
* Ring Ring Ring (disambiguation)
* Ring Road (disambiguation)
* Ring structure (disambiguation)
* Annulus (disambiguation)
* Brass ring, a grabbable ring on a carousel 
* Cock ring, a ring worn around the penis
* Circle symbol (disambiguation)
* Coffee ring effect
* D-ring, a D-shaped metal ring
* Napkin ring problem, on the volume left after drilling a cylindrical hole through a sphere
* Piston ring, part of an engine
* Ring of bells, a set of bells hung for English full circle ringing
* Storage ring, a type of particle accelerator
* Torus, a doughnut shape</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q534381" start="1" end="4" title="Ring" label="The"/>
<link wikidata="Q534381" start="6" end="10" title="Ring" label="Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q534381" start="11" end="12" title="Ring" label="s"/>
<link wikidata="Q46847" start="31" end="47" title="Ring (jewellery)" label="Ring (jewellery)"/>
<link wikidata="Q101401" start="138" end="142" title="bell" label="bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642328" start="228" end="260" title="The Ring (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;The Ring&amp;quot; (franchise)"/>
<link wikidata="Q531328" start="340" end="363" title="Ring (film)" label="&amp;quot;Ring&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q212804" start="438" end="470" title="The Ring (2002 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Ring&amp;quot; (2002 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4189694" start="533" end="561" title="Ring (1995 film)" label="&amp;quot;Ring&amp;quot; (1995 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936037" start="576" end="605" title="Rings (2005 film)" label="&amp;quot;Rings&amp;quot; (2005 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866947" start="645" end="674" title="Rings (2017 film)" label="&amp;quot;Rings&amp;quot; (2017 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636743" start="742" end="773" title="Servant (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Servant&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196519" start="790" end="819" title="Ring (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Ring&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046812" start="828" end="866" title="Rings (Sonic the Hedgehog)" label="Rings (&amp;quot;Sonic the Hedgehog&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334688" start="942" end="973" title="Ring (Baxter novel)" label="&amp;quot;Ring&amp;quot; (Baxter novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q113395565" start="1006" end="1037" title="Ring (Alexis novel)" label="&amp;quot;Ring&amp;quot; (Alexis novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659466" start="1079" end="1110" title="Ring (novel series)" label="&amp;quot;Ring&amp;quot; (novel series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344207" start="1154" end="1185" title="Ring (Suzuki novel)" label="&amp;quot;Ring&amp;quot; (Suzuki novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334690" start="1207" end="1223" title="Ring (rock band)" label="Ring (rock band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q190237" start="1254" end="1277" title="Der Ring des Nibelungen" label="Der Ring des Nibelungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334689" start="1345" end="1382" title="Ring (The Connells album)" label="&amp;quot;Ring&amp;quot; (The Connells album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334687" start="1391" end="1427" title="Ring (Gary Burton album)" label="&amp;quot;Ring&amp;quot; (Gary Burton album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85797292" start="1436" end="1468" title="Ring (Glasser album)" label="&amp;quot;Ring&amp;quot; (Glasser album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432201" start="1477" end="1514" title="Ring (Miliyah Kato album)" label="&amp;quot;Ring&amp;quot; (Miliyah Kato album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q261764" start="1523" end="1549" title="Ring (R album)" label="&amp;quot;Ring&amp;quot; (R album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85816824" start="1558" end="1594" title="Ring (White Reaper song)" label="&amp;quot;Ring&amp;quot; (White Reaper song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334691" start="1618" end="1650" title="Ring (B&amp;#x27;z song)" label="&amp;quot;Ring&amp;quot; (B&amp;#x27;z song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808375" start="1659" end="1690" title="Ring (Cardi B song)" label="&amp;quot;Ring&amp;quot; (Cardi B song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24450730" start="1725" end="1736" title="Phoebe Ryan" label="Phoebe Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q75997524" start="1745" end="1781" title="Ring (Selena Gomez song)" label="&amp;quot;Ring&amp;quot; (Selena Gomez song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q954468" start="1790" end="1818" title="Ring (T.I. song)" label="&amp;quot;Ring&amp;quot; (T.I. song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334968" start="1827" end="1851" title="Rings (song)" label="&amp;quot;Rings&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25096409" start="1945" end="1980" title="Rings (Aesop Rock song)" label="&amp;quot;Rings&amp;quot; (Aesop Rock song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16882093" start="2001" end="2015" title="Ring (surname)" label="Ring (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038586" start="2060" end="2074" title="Ring of Sweden" label="Ring of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478912" start="2118" end="2131" title="Frances Rings" label="Frances Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q798788" start="2183" end="2205" title="Ring, County Waterford" label="Ring, County Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710383" start="2217" end="2232" title="Ring, Wisconsin" label="Ring, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45926" start="2267" end="2288" title="Annulus (mathematics)" label="Annulus (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="2316" end="2334" title="Ring (mathematics)" label="Ring (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064647" start="2361" end="2373" title="Ring of sets" label="Ring of sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198514" start="2462" end="2477" title="Protection ring" label="Protection ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224994" start="2502" end="2523" title="Ring (data structure)" label="Ring (data structure)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25462748" start="2542" end="2569" title="Ring (programming language)" label="Ring (programming language)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459508" start="2572" end="2587" title="Ring (software)" label="Ring (software)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153489" start="2605" end="2617" title="Ring circuit" label="Ring circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q719775" start="2652" end="2664" title="Ring network" label="Ring network"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351438" start="2702" end="2718" title="Ring (chemistry)" label="Ring (chemistry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28951811" start="2740" end="2751" title="Ring system" label="Ring system"/>
<link wikidata="Q567401" start="2816" end="2834" title="Annulus (mycology)" label="Annulus (mycology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q319436" start="2900" end="2912" title="bird ringing" label="bird ringing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851403" start="2963" end="2976" title="Juggling ring" label="Juggling ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q655318" start="3012" end="3030" title="Rings (gymnastics)" label="Rings (gymnastics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290113" start="3096" end="3107" title="Boxing ring" label="Boxing ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763849" start="3152" end="3166" title="Wrestling ring" label="Wrestling ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q733307" start="3235" end="3257" title="Fighting Network Rings" label="Fighting Network Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="3321" end="3331" title="Crime ring" label="Crime ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276799" start="3363" end="3378" title="Ring (Bulgaria)" label="Ring (Bulgaria)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297222" start="3412" end="3426" title="Ring (company)" label="Ring (company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143866" start="3488" end="3504" title="Ring (diacritic)" label="Ring (diacritic)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3594" end="3601" title="Auction#Collusion" label="auction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666393" start="3630" end="3668" title="International Brotherhood of Magicians" label="International Brotherhood of Magicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q192309" start="3709" end="3717" title="tinnitus" label="tinnitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269051" start="3720" end="3734" title="Ring languages" label="Ring languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q510662" start="3757" end="3766" title="Ring road" label="Ring road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594210" start="3831" end="3846" title="Ring of Solomon" label="Ring of Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q342036" start="3849" end="3871" title="Ringe (disambiguation)" label="Ringe (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q281533" start="3874" end="3897" title="Ringer (disambiguation)" label="Ringer (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334894" start="3900" end="3924" title="Ringing (disambiguation)" label="Ringing (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154031" start="3927" end="3949" title="Ringo (disambiguation)" label="Ringo (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18230552" start="3952" end="3977" title="Ringtone (disambiguation)" label="Ringtone (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354100" start="3980" end="4005" title="The Ring (disambiguation)" label="The Ring (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110652265" start="4008" end="4031" title="Ring 0 (disambiguation)" label="Ring 0 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153486" start="4034" end="4057" title="Ring 1 (disambiguation)" label="Ring 1 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365875" start="4060" end="4083" title="Ring 2 (disambiguation)" label="Ring 2 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q345988" start="4086" end="4109" title="Ring 3 (disambiguation)" label="Ring 3 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110652267" start="4112" end="4135" title="Ring 4 (disambiguation)" label="Ring 4 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q113536190" start="4138" end="4161" title="Ring 5 (disambiguation)" label="Ring 5 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334799" start="4164" end="4194" title="Ring of Honor (disambiguation)" label="Ring of Honor (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q410165" start="4197" end="4223" title="Ring Ring (disambiguation)" label="Ring Ring (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110637867" start="4226" end="4257" title="Ring Ring Ring (disambiguation)" label="Ring Ring Ring (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347726" start="4260" end="4286" title="Ring Road (disambiguation)" label="Ring Road (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17989353" start="4289" end="4320" title="Ring structure (disambiguation)" label="Ring structure (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q341376" start="4323" end="4347" title="Annulus (disambiguation)" label="Annulus (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957896" start="4350" end="4360" title="Brass ring" label="Brass ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q10807" start="4396" end="4405" title="Cock ring" label="Cock ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q108472505" start="4438" end="4468" title="Circle symbol (disambiguation)" label="Circle symbol (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516851" start="4471" end="4489" title="Coffee ring effect" label="Coffee ring effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151317" start="4492" end="4498" title="D-ring" label="D-ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964957" start="4524" end="4543" title="Napkin ring problem" label="Napkin ring problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127214" start="4617" end="4628" title="Piston ring" label="Piston ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334807" start="4650" end="4663" title="Ring of bells" label="Ring of bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q919917" start="4719" end="4731" title="Storage ring" label="Storage ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q12510" start="4766" end="4771" title="Torus" label="Torus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25479" wikidata="Q225834" url="?curid=25479" title="Miniature">
<text>A miniature is a small-scale reproduction, or a small version. It may refer to:

* Portrait miniature, a miniature portrait painting
* Miniature art, miniature painting, engraving and sculpture
* Miniature food, small edible or inedible versions of food
* Miniature (chess), a short chess game, typically with no more than 25 moves.

* Miniature (illuminated manuscript), a small painting in an illuminated text
** Arabic miniature, a small painting in an illuminated text
** Armenian miniature, a small painting in an illuminated text
** Persian miniature, a small painting in an illuminated text or album
** Ottoman miniature, a small painting in an illuminated text or album
*** Contemporary Turkish miniature, painting
** Mughal miniature, a small painting in an illuminated text or album
* Scale model
** Room box
** Figurine
** Miniature figure (gaming), a small figurine used in role playing games and tabletop wargames
* Miniature (alcohol), a very small bottle of an alcoholic drink
* Miniature rose
* Miniature candy, smaller variations of candy bars and candy
* Miniature effect, a physical model of a larger object used to represent it in filmmaking
* Miniature horse, a very small breed of horse
* Miniature poodle, a smaller breed of poodle (dog)
* &quot;Mini ature&quot;, a species of frog

==Entertainment==
* &quot;Miniatures&quot; (Alog album), 2005
* &quot;Miniatures&quot; (Nekropolis album), 1989
* &quot;Miniatures&quot; (video game), 2024
* &quot;Miniature&quot; (album), a 1988 album by Tim Berne
* &quot;Miniature&quot; (&quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;), a 1963 episode of &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q225834" start="2" end="11" title="Miniature" label="miniature"/>
<link wikidata="Q131208654" start="83" end="101" title="Portrait miniature" label="Portrait miniature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575414" start="135" end="148" title="Miniature art" label="Miniature art"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324560" start="196" end="210" title="Miniature food" label="Miniature food"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="256" end="273" title="Glossary_of_chess#miniature" label="Miniature (chess)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8362" start="336" end="370" title="Miniature (illuminated manuscript)" label="Miniature (illuminated manuscript)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48732691" start="415" end="431" title="Arabic miniature" label="Arabic miniature"/>
<link wikidata="Q683729" start="476" end="494" title="Armenian miniature" label="Armenian miniature"/>
<link wikidata="Q678664" start="539" end="556" title="Persian miniature" label="Persian miniature"/>
<link wikidata="Q268639" start="610" end="627" title="Ottoman miniature" label="Ottoman miniature"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608353" start="682" end="712" title="Contemporary Turkish miniature" label="Contemporary Turkish miniature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049336" start="726" end="742" title="Mughal miniature" label="Mughal miniature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498959" start="795" end="806" title="Scale model" label="Scale model"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366280" start="810" end="818" title="Room box" label="Room box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066288" start="822" end="830" title="Figurine" label="Figurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053894" start="834" end="859" title="Miniature figure (gaming)" label="Miniature figure (gaming)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23524" start="929" end="948" title="Miniature (alcohol)" label="Miniature (alcohol)"/>
<link wikidata="Q64140922" start="994" end="1008" title="Miniature rose" label="Miniature rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q11312555" start="1050" end="1059" title="candy bar" label="candy bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q185583" start="1065" end="1070" title="candy" label="candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8357" start="1073" end="1089" title="Miniature effect" label="Miniature effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169710" start="1164" end="1179" title="Miniature horse" label="Miniature horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q38904" start="1211" end="1227" title="Miniature poodle" label="Miniature poodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q63208617" start="1269" end="1279" title="Mini ature" label="Mini ature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789792" start="1326" end="1361" title="Miniatures (Alog album)" label="&amp;quot;Miniatures&amp;quot; (Alog album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865167" start="1370" end="1411" title="Miniatures (Nekropolis album)" label="&amp;quot;Miniatures&amp;quot; (Nekropolis album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q131607298" start="1420" end="1455" title="Miniatures (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Miniatures&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390712" start="1464" end="1493" title="Miniature (album)" label="&amp;quot;Miniature&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725982" start="1523" end="1576" title="Miniature (The Twilight Zone)" label="&amp;quot;Miniature&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Twilight Zone&amp;quot;)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25480" wikidata="Q355130" url="?curid=25480" title="Richard Petty">
<text>Richard Lee Petty (born July 2, 1937), nicknamed &quot;the King&quot;, is an American former stock car racing driver who competed from 1958 to 1992 in the former NASCAR Grand National and Winston Cup Series (now called the NASCAR Cup Series), most notably driving the No. 43 Plymouth/Pontiac for Petty Enterprises. He is one of the members of the Petty racing family. He was the first driver to win the Cup Series championship seven times (a record now tied with Dale Earnhardt and Jimmie Johnson), while also winning a record 200 races during his career. This included winning the Daytona 500 a record seven times and winning a record 27 races in one season (1967). Petty is widely regarded as one of the greatest drivers in NASCAR history.

Petty was inducted into the inaugural class of the NASCAR Hall of Fame in 2010. He is also statistically the most accomplished driver in the history of NASCAR, having racked up most wins (200), most poles (123), tied for most championships (seven), most wins in a season (27), most Daytona 500 wins (seven), most consecutive wins (10) and most starts (1,185).

He earns broad respect in motorsport where beyond driving, he remains very active as both a team ambassador (Legacy Motor Club) in the Cup Series and owner of Petty&#x27;s Garage (a car restoration and modification shop) in Level Cross, North Carolina. During his 35-year career, Petty collected a record number of poles (123) and over 700 top 10 finishes in a record 1,184 starts, including 513 consecutive starts from 1971 to 1989. Petty was the first driver to win in his 500th race start, being joined by Matt Kenseth in 2013. 

The Richard Petty Museum was formerly in nearby Randleman, North Carolina, but moved back to its original location in Level Cross in March 2014. Petty has also voiced a role in Disney/Pixar&#x27;s animated films &quot;Cars&quot; and &quot;Cars 3&quot;, playing Strip &quot;The King&quot; Weathers, a character partially based on himself.

== Personal life ==
Petty is a second-generation driver. His father, Lee Petty, won the first Daytona 500 in 1959 and was also a three-time NASCAR champion. In 1958, Petty married Lynda Owens, who would die of cancer on March 25, 2014, at her home in Level Cross, North Carolina at age 72. Lynda&#x27;s brother Randy Owens was a member of Petty&#x27;s pit crew and killed at age 19 during a pit road accident when a water tank exploded during the 1975 Winston 500. Richard and Lynda had four children, including Kyle Petty. The family resides in Petty&#x27;s home town of Level Cross, North Carolina.

Petty&#x27;s son Kyle is also a former NASCAR driver. His grandson, Adam (Kyle&#x27;s son), was killed in a practice crash at New Hampshire Motor Speedway on May 12, 2000, five weeks after the death of Lee Petty. Adam&#x27;s brother Austin is Emeritus Chairman and Founder of Victory Junction, a SeriousFun Children&#x27;s Network camp established by the Pettys after Adam&#x27;s death.

== Racing career ==

Petty was born in Level Cross, North Carolina, the son of Elizabeth Petty (née Toomes) and Lee Arnold Petty, also a NASCAR driver, and the older brother of NASCAR personality Maurice Petty. He was educated in Randleman, North Carolina and attended Randleman High School, where he was an All-Conference guard on the football team. After his 1955 graduation, he took a business course at Greensboro Junior College, then began work for his father&#x27;s racing company, Petty Enterprises. He began his NASCAR career on July 18, 1958, 16 days after his 21st birthday. His first race was held at CNE Stadium in Toronto, Ontario, Canada (the site of BMO Field and the Honda Indy Toronto currently). In 1959, he was named NASCAR Rookie of the Year, after he produced 9 top 10 finishes, including six Top 5 finishes. That year, he had participated in the inaugural Daytona 500 at the new Daytona International Speedway, but after his day ended due to engine trouble, he joined his father Lee&#x27;s pit crew, who won the race. In Lakewood, Georgia in 1959, Petty won his first race, but his father Lee protested, complaining of a scoring error on the officials&#x27; part. Hours later, Lee was awarded the win.

=== First championship rides (1960-1970) ===

In 1960, he finished 2nd in the NASCAR Grand National Points Race, and got his first career win at the Charlotte Fairgrounds Speedway. 1963 was his breakout year, winning at tracks like Martinsville and Bridgehampton. In 1964, driving a potent Plymouth with a new Hemi engine, Petty led 184 of the 200 laps to capture his first Daytona 500, en route to 9 victories, earning over $114,000 and his first Grand National championship.

Joining in the Chrysler boycott of NASCAR due to the organizing body&#x27;s ban of the Hemi engine, Petty spent much of 1965 competing as a drag racer. Petty Enterprises installed the Hemi in the new compact Barracuda and lettered &quot;OUTLAWED&quot; on the door. He crashed this car at Southeastern Dragway, in Dallas, Georgia, on February 28, 1965, killing an eight-year-old boy and injuring seven others. Petty, his father Lee, and Chrysler Corporation faced lawsuits totaling more than $1 million, though Petty and his team came to settlements with the lawsuits within 1 month of the suits being filed. Afterwards, a second Hemi Barracuda was built, this time with an altered wheelbase and eventually with Hilborn fuel injection. This car was lettered with a large &quot;43 JR&quot; on the door. The car was very successful, winning its class at the Bristol Spring Nationals and competing in many match races against well-known racers such as Ronnie Sox, Don Nicholson, Phil Bonner, Huston Platt, Hubert Platt and Dave Strickler. Even after returning to NASCAR once the Hemi was reinstated, Richard continued drag racing the 43 JR until early 1966.
On February 27, 1966, Richard Petty overcame a 2-lap deficit to win his second Daytona 500 when the race was stopped on lap 198 of 200 because of a thunderstorm. This made him the first driver to win the event twice. In 1966, he won the first ever race at Middle Georgia Raceway (Morelock 200). Petty broke the half-mile NASCAR record for half-mile tracks with an average speed of 82.023 miles per hour during the 100-mile (160 km) event. He would end up recording 4 wins there in his career, including one in 1970 in which he was very ill before the race. 1967 was a milestone year. In that year, Petty won 27 of the 48 races he entered, including a record 10 wins in a row (between August 12 and October 1, 1967). He won his second Grand National Championship. One of the 27 victories was the Southern 500 at Darlington, which would be his only Southern 500 victory. His dominance in this season earned him the nickname &quot;King Richard&quot;. He had previously been known as &quot;the Randleman Rocket&quot;.

In 1968, Petty won 16 races including the last ever race at Occoneechee Speedway.

In 1969 Ford significantly ratcheted up their factory involvement in NASCAR when they introduced the Ford Torino Talladega. The Talladega was specifically designed to give Ford a competitive race advantage by being more aerodynamic and thus faster, especially on super-speedway tracks more than a mile long. Petty switched brands to Ford, due to his belief the Plymouth was not competitive on super-speedways; he wanted a slippery Dodge Daytona but Chrysler executives insisted he stay with Plymouth. He would win 10 races and finish second in points. He won in 1970 in the sleek new Plymouth Superbird with a shark nose and towel rack wing, Petty returned to Plymouth for the 1970 season. This is the car in which Petty is cast in the Pixar film &quot;Cars&quot; (2006), in which Richard and Lynda had voice roles.

=== The 1970s ===

On February 14, 1971, Petty won his third Daytona 500, driving a brand-new (for 1971) Plymouth Road Runner and beating Buddy Baker, by little more than a car length en route to another historic year, making him the first driver to win the race 3 times. He won 20 more races (which would make him become the first driver to earn more than $1 million in career earnings) and claimed his 3rd Grand National Championship. At the end of the 1971 season, Chrysler told the Pettys they no longer would receive direct factory funding support; this caused the Petty team great concern. In 1972, STP began what would turn into a successful 28-year sponsorship arrangement with Petty, however, it marked the end of his famous all &quot;Petty Blue&quot; paint job. STP previously insisted on an all STP orangish-red color for the cars, but Petty balked and after an all-night negotiation session, the familiar STP orange/&quot;Petty blue&quot; paint scheme was agreed to as a compromise that would later become part of STP&#x27;s motorsport paint schemes, most notably Gordon Johncock&#x27;s win in the 1982 Indianapolis 500 (where the car had a primarily &quot;Petty Blue&quot; scheme). Thanks to his 28 Top 10 finishes (25 Top 5 finishes and 8 victories), Petty went on to win his 4th NASCAR Cup Series championship. 1972 was a year of change in other ways, as it was the last year where Petty would campaign a Plymouth-based race car; as in the middle of the year, he debuted to drive a newly built 1972 Dodge Charger in a few races (winning one of them), as he believed that the car would have a slight aero advantage over the Plymouth body style. In a driver&#x27;s duel on February 18, 1973, Petty, in a newly built 1973 Dodge Charger (a body style he would use exclusively until the end of 1977), outlasted Baker (now with the K&amp;K Insurance Dodge race team) to win his 4th Daytona 500 after Baker&#x27;s engine gave out with 6 laps to go. A year later, Petty won the Daytona &quot;450&quot; (shortened 20 laps {50 mi/80 km} due to the energy crisis) for the fifth time en route to his 5th Winston Cup Championship.

1975 was another historic year for Petty, as he won the World 600 for the first time in his career, one of 13 victories en route to his 6th Winston Cup. The 13 victories is a modern (1972–present) NASCAR record for victories in a season and was tied in 1998 by Jeff Gordon, although Gordon won 13 out of 33 races, compared to Petty&#x27;s 13 out of 30 races. In 1976, Petty was involved in one of the most famous finishes in NASCAR history. Petty and David Pearson were racing on the last lap out of turn 4 in the Daytona 500. As Petty tried to pass Pearson, at the exit of turn 4, Petty&#x27;s right rear bumper hit Pearson&#x27;s left front bumper. Pearson and Petty both spun and hit the front stretch wall. Petty&#x27;s car came to rest just yards from the finish line, but his engine stalled. Pearson&#x27;s car had hit the front stretch wall and clipped another car, but his engine was running. Members of Petty&#x27;s pit crew came out onto the track and tried to push the car to the finish line, but ultimately failed. Pearson was able to drive his car toward the finish line, while Petty&#x27;s car would not restart. Pearson passed Petty on the infield grass and won the Daytona 500. Petty was given credit for second place.

Oddly, 1978 will stand out as the one year during his prime that Petty did not visit the winner&#x27;s circle. The Petty Enterprises Team could not get the new 1978 Dodge Magnum to handle properly, even though much time, effort, and faith were spent massaging the cars. Unhappy with the seven top-five and eleven top-ten finishes (including three-second places), Petty decided that his longtime relationship with Chrysler could not continue and he instead began racing a secondhand 1974 Chevrolet Monte Carlo at the fall race at Michigan. Returning to the General Motors fold proved successful as Petty recorded six top-ten finishes in the final ten races of the 1978 season and finished sixth in the final standings. He would go on to even better results in 1979. Petty won the Daytona 500 in an Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme in the &quot;Famous Finish&quot; and ran most of the remaining races in a Chevrolet, winning four additional races and taking the NASCAR championship for the seventh, and last, time by 11 points which was the closest points margin in NASCAR history until 1992.

=== Twilight years (1980–1991) ===

Petty won two more Daytona 500s in 1979 and 1981. In 1979, he snapped a 45-race drought, winning his sixth Daytona 500, the first to be televised live flag-to-flag; it would become notorious for a fistfight between competitors following the controversial finish. Petty won the race as the first and second place cars of Donnie Allison and Cale Yarborough crashed on the last lap. Petty held off Darrell Waltrip and A. J. Foyt. The race is also regarded as being the genesis of the current surge in NASCAR&#x27;s popularity. The East Coast was snowed in by a blizzard, giving CBS a captive audience. The win was part of Petty&#x27;s seventh and last NASCAR Winston Cup Championship. He was able to hold off Waltrip to win the title in 1979.

In 1980, Petty won two races early in the year at North Wilkesboro and Nashville but a violent crash at Pocono in July ended his championship hopes. He finished 4th in points. For 1981, NASCAR dictated that all teams had to show up with the new downsized cars of 110&quot; wheel-base, that Detroit had been building since 1979. Though Petty had been successful with the Chevrolet and Oldsmobile cars he had been running, he wanted to get back to his Mopar roots. After taking a phone call from Lee Iacocca (who personally asked Petty to campaign a Dodge for 1981), the Petty team built a stunning 1981 Dodge Mirada and took it to Daytona in January 1981 for high speed tests. Petty&#x27;s fans were also in a large part fans of his Dodges, so when word got out about the Mirada testing, 15,000 or so showed up on January 17, 1981, at Daytona Speedway to watch Petty put the Dodge through its paces. Sadly for the fans, the car could do no better than 186 miles per hour, about eight miles per hour slower than the GM and Ford cars. Petty gave up on returning to Dodge knowing that for the superspeedways the Mirada would not be competitive, and bought a Buick Regal for the Daytona race. In the 1981 Daytona 500, Petty used a &quot;fuel only&quot; for his last pit stop, with 25 laps to go, to outfox Bobby Allison and grab his seventh and final Daytona 500 win. This win marked a large change in Petty&#x27;s racing team. Dale Inman, Petty&#x27;s longtime crew chief, left the team after the Daytona victory (Inman would win an eighth championship as crew chief in 1984 with Terry Labonte).

While the 1981 season gave Petty 3 wins, he felt the season was a failure, and the Regals being ill-handling and poor in reliability. For 1982, he made the move to the Pontiac Grand Prix, with the promise of substantial factory support from Pontiac. 1982 was a repeat of 1978, and no victories were to be had. At first, the Grand Prix behaved much like the Dodge Magnum of 1978, with handling and speed problems. Toward the end of 1982 things improved with several top-10 finishes, which opened the door to a successful 1983 season with three victories, and several top-5 and top-10 finishes. In 1983, he broke his 43-race winless streak from 1982 with a win in the 1983 Carolina 500, barely edging out a young Bill Elliott. After a controversial win at Charlotte in October 1983 (recognised by NASCAR as win No. 198), Petty left the race team his father founded for the 1984 season. He spent &#x27;84 and &#x27;85 driving for Mike Curb before returning to Petty Enterprises in 1986.

Because of the 1971 Myers Brothers 250 combination race in 1971 that Petty finished second in a Grand National Car while winner Bobby Allison drove a Grand American car, there is a technical dispute regarding which race is credited as his 200th win. NASCAR did not credit Petty with a class win, which was a dispute that affected two other drivers, Elmo Langley and Charlie Glotzbach, both of whom drove in combination races that season, finishing second to Grand American cars. Under modern NASCAR combination race rules for various series, Petty would be credited with that would be recognized as his 135th win. On May 20, 1984, Petty won what under modern regulations would be recognized as his 200th Cup class win, the Budweiser 500 at Dover International Speedway, when the Winston-Salem class win is recognized.

On July 4, 1984, Petty won his officially-recognized 200th (and what would turn out to be his final victory) race at the Firecracker 400 at Daytona International Speedway. The race was memorable: On lap 158, Doug Heveron crashed, bringing out the yellow caution flag, essentially turning lap 158 into the last lap as the two drivers battled back to the start-finish line. Petty and Cale Yarborough diced it out on that lap, with Yarborough drafting and taking an early lead before Petty managed to cross the start/finish line only a fender-length ahead. President Ronald Reagan was in attendance, the first sitting president to attend a NASCAR race. Reagan celebrated the milestone with Petty and his family in victory lane.

In early 1988, Petty traveled to Australia to help promote a NASCAR exhibition race at the then new Calder Park Thunderdome, the first NASCAR race outside of North America. While he did not compete in the track&#x27;s inaugural race, the Goodyear NASCAR 500 (though his son Kyle did), Richard Petty, in testing at the 1.119 mi (1.801 km) track which owner Bob Jane had modeled on the Charlotte Motor Speedway, set an unofficial lap record of 28.2 seconds (142.85 mp/h). This would have in fact landed him on pole position for the race, as the fastest time in official qualifying was by Alabama Gang member Neil Bonnett, who recorded a 28.829-second lap (139.734 mp/h) in his Pontiac Grand Prix.

=== Petty&#x27;s final ride (1992) ===

On October 1, 1991, Petty announced he would retire after the 1992 season. Petty&#x27;s final top ten finish came at the 1991 Budweiser at the Glen which was the same race J. D. McDuffie was killed in a fifth lap accident. Petty chose to run the entire 1992 season, not just selected events as other drivers have done before retirement. His year-long Fan Appreciation Tour took him around the country, participating in special events, awards ceremonies, and fan-related meetings. Racing Champions ran a promotional line of diecast cars for every race in Petty&#x27;s Farewell Tour.

At the 1992 Pepsi 400 on July 4, Petty qualified on the front row for the first time since 1986. Before the start of the race, he was honored with a gift ceremony which included a visit from President George H. W. Bush. When the green flag dropped, Petty led the opening five laps as the holiday crowd cheered wildly. Unfortunately, the oppressive heat forced him to drop out after completing just 84 laps.

Despite the busy appearance schedule and mediocre race results, Petty managed to qualify for all 29 races in 1992. On his final visit to each track, Petty would lead the field on the pace lap to salute the fans. Petty&#x27;s final race, the season-ending Hooters 500 at Atlanta Motor Speedway, which also marked the start of Jeff Gordon&#x27;s NASCAR career and the second-closest points championship in NASCAR history, with six drivers mathematically eligible to win the championship, is hailed to this day as the greatest race in NASCAR history. A record 160,000 spectators attended the race and celebrated Petty&#x27;s farewell. In the intense title race, the championship contender, Davey Allison, got mixed up in a crash with Ernie Irvan, dashing his title hopes. Long-shot contenders Mark Martin, Kyle Petty and Harry Gant fell behind in the long run, which left Bill Elliott and Alan Kulwicki to compete for the title. The race went down to the final lap with Elliott winning and Kulwicki taking the championship by 10 points because he had led the most laps, one more than Elliott, which gave him a five-point bonus.

Facing intense pressure, Petty barely managed to qualify at Atlanta, posting the 39th fastest speed out of 41 cars. He would not have been eligible for the provisional starting position, and had to qualify on speed. On the 94th lap, Petty became tangled up in an accident, and his car caught fire. Petty pulled the car off the track, and climbed out of the burning machine uninjured. His pit crew worked diligently with less than 20 laps to go to get the car running again, and with two laps to go, Petty pulled out of the pits and was credited as running at the finish in his final race. He took his final checkered flag, finishing in 35th position. After the race, Petty circled the track to salute the fans one final time in his trademark STP Pontiac.

Thereafter he made a few public show appearances at racetracks. On August 18, 1993, NASCAR participated in a tire test at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, in preparations for the 1994 Brickyard 400. Petty drove several laps around the track, and then donated his car to the Speedway&#x27;s museum. He would again step into a racecar in 2003 on the week of the final race under the Winston banner at Homestead-Miami Speedway, where he took a solo lap honoring his seven Winston Cup Championships for Winston&#x27;s salute to the champions. In 2009 at the Coke Zero 400 in Daytona, for the 25th anniversary of his final, 200th victory in 1984, Petty drove one of his 1980s Pontiac racecars during the pace laps, leading the field for the first one. The field split him and he followed it for one more pace lap before he pulled his car in. Finally, at the 2017 Southern 500 at Darlington, Petty led the field through several pace laps in his Plymouth Belvedere. He apparently stayed out a lap longer than expected and was humorously black flagged by the starter. Petty followed the pace car down pit road at the start of the race.

=== Petty as an owner ===

In later years of his career, Petty developed the career of crew leader Robbie Loomis, who was at the helm of Petty Enterprises as crew chief in the 1990s and won three races—the 1996 Checker Auto Parts 500 at Phoenix, the 1997 ACDelco 400 at North Carolina Speedway, both with Bobby Hamilton driving, and the 1999 Goody&#x27;s Body Pain 500 at Martinsville Speedway, with John Andretti driving. Petty remained as operating owner until his son Kyle Petty took over day-to-day operations a decade later.

However, in 2008, Kyle Petty was released by Petty Enterprises, and, because of lack of sponsorship, Petty Enterprises was bought out by Gillett-Evernham Motorsports. The name was originally going to stay the same, but when Evernham left the team, it was renamed Richard Petty Motorsports, despite George Gillett continuing to own the majority.

In November 2010, an investment group including Medallion Financial Corp., Douglas G. Bergeron and Petty, signed and closed sale on racing assets of Richard Petty Motorsports. Andrew M. Murstein, president of Medallion, had been seeking a sports investment since 2008 when he formed a special-purpose acquisition company together with Hank Aaron, a Medallion board member, and others.

=== Petty as a broadcaster ===
In 1995, Petty moved to the television broadcast booth, joining CBS as a color commentator.

=== Sponsorship ===
Petty promised his mother not to accept alcohol sponsorship. Therefore, he never collected purses for the Bud Pole Award, and he competed at the Busch Clash only once, in 1980.

=== Close calls ===
As well as his numerous victories, Petty is remembered for three of the many disastrous crashes that he survived:
* In the 1970 Rebel 400 at Darlington, Petty was injured when his Plymouth Road Runner cut a tire and slammed hard into the wall separating the track from the pit area. The car flipped several times before coming to rest on its side. This accident injured Petty&#x27;s shoulder and helped Bobby Isaac to win the 1970 Grand National Championship. During the accident, Petty&#x27;s head hit the track pavement several times, a mishap that, along with Joe Weatherly&#x27;s fatal crash six years earlier, led NASCAR to mandate the installation of the Petty-developed safety net that covers the driver&#x27;s side window.
* In a 1980 race at Pocono, Petty slammed the Turn 2 wall, nearly flipping the car. He barely escaped, breaking his neck in the wreck, but still raced the next Sunday at Talladega Superspeedway. This is unlikely to happen now because of modern NASCAR rules requiring an official series medical liaison to clear a driver after a crash.
* In the 1988 Daytona 500, on Lap 106, Petty got turned by Phil Barkdoll out of turn 4. Petty&#x27;s car went aloft, tumbled many times, rode along the catch fence, and hurled parts all over the front stretch at the Daytona International Speedway. After several flips, Petty was t-boned by Brett Bodine before coming to a stop. Petty walked away with no serious injuries, except for temporary sight loss due to excessive g-forces. The crash was similar to the accident suffered by Bobby Allison during the 1987 Winston 500 at Talladega Superspeedway and Carl Edwards&#x27;s 2009 Talladega crash in that, in all three cases, the racers&#x27; cars became airborne after turning sideways and damaged the spectator fencing (though much less in Petty&#x27;s case). Petty&#x27;s car became airborne despite the use of the carburetor restrictor plate, which was mandated by NASCAR for races at Talladega Superspeedway and Daytona International Speedway just before the start of the 1988 season.

=== Career awards ===

* Petty was inducted into the first class of the NASCAR Hall of Fame on May 23, 2010.
* In 1997, he was inducted into the International Motorsports Hall of Fame.
* He was named one of NASCAR&#x27;s 50 Greatest Drivers in 1998.
* He was sole stock car representative in the first class inducted into the Motorsports Hall of Fame of America in 1989.
* He was awarded the Medal of Freedom by President George Bush in 1992, the first motorsports athlete ever to be honored with this award.

==Politics==
In 1978, Petty was elected to the Randolph County Commission as a Republican. In 1980 he endorsed John Connally for the Republican nomination for president. According to Petty, it was a &quot;tossup&quot; between Connally and Ronald Reagan, but he chose Connally &quot;basically on personality. And Connally&#x27;s been there in Washington a lot of times doing a lot of things. He knows the system better.&quot; He was reelected to the county commission in 1982, 1986, and 1990. During his 1992 retirement tour, Petty took a parade lap before every race with the exception of the Southern 500, where Democratic presidential candidate Bill Clinton served as grand marshal. In 1993, Petty formed a political action committee to support Republican candidates. He was the Republican nominee in the 1996 North Carolina Secretary of State election, but was defeated by Democratic state senator Elaine Marshall. Petty was mistakenly seen as a shoo-in, and his campaigning was sporadic. Following his loss, Petty stated, &quot;If I had known I wasn&#x27;t going to win, I wouldn&#x27;t have run.&quot; In June 2016, he made an appearance on stage with Donald Trump.

== Life after racing ==

Petty is currently a spokesman for Liberty Medical, Cheerios and the GlaxoSmithKline products Nicorette and Goody&#x27;s Headache Powder. His portrait was featured on Brawny paper towels during a limited time when the company replaced their image with several &quot;real Brawny men&quot;. General Mills created a Petty-themed packaged cereal, &quot;43&#x27;s,&quot; its boxes featuring his image and story. Petty also played himself in the 2008 film &quot;Swing Vote&quot;, where he commends the film&#x27;s protagonist by allowing him to briefly drive his famous &quot;43&quot; Plymouth.

For public benefit, Petty and his son Kyle have lent their talent to host &quot;Lifting It Right&quot;, an automotive lift safety training DVD produced and distributed by the Automotive Lift Institute (ALI); it is used in high school vocational programs and community colleges. He has recorded public service announcements for Civitan International, a nonprofit organization of which he is a former member. He has also established a summer camp known as &quot;Victory Junction&quot;, which is intended to give seriously ill children an outdoors, summer-camp experience and has medical staff on hand around the clock in case of emergencies.

In May 2011, Petty was chosen to be the Grand Marshal for the 2011 STP 400 of the Sprint Cup Series. In public, he is usually seen wearing his trademark sunglasses and a Charlie 1 Horse cowboy hat, with a large snakeskin hat band and a plume of rooster feathers at the front.

After retirement, Petty purchased a 90-acre (36 ha) ranch south of Jackson, Wyoming.

== Motorsports career results ==

=== NASCAR ===
() (Bold – Pole position awarded by qualifying time. &quot;Italics&quot; – Pole position earned by points standings or practice time. * – Most laps led.)

====Grand National Series====
==== Winston Cup Series ====
=====Daytona 500=====
=== International Race of Champions ===
() (Bold – Pole position. * – Most laps led.)
== Film and TV appearances ==

* In 2011, Petty was featured in the show Modern HotrodZ. Petty&#x27;s Garage now builds Custom cars for the general public, most of which are Limited Edition.
* He appeared as himself in the movie &quot;Swing Vote&quot; driving in his famous blue No. 43 car, and letting Bud drive his car to Air Force One to meet the President.
* Petty voiced Strip Weathers (a fictionalized version of himself), also known as &quot;The King&quot;, in the Disney/Pixar animated movie &quot;Cars&quot; (2006). His car, the Road Runner Superbird with the distinctive &quot;Petty Blue&quot; tint and the number 43, is also the model used for the car in the movie. He is hoping to get one more victory in him before he can retire from racing on the Piston Cup circuit. Though The King&#x27;s accident caused by his longtime running rival Chick Hicks at the end of the film was a re-creation of Rusty Wallace&#x27;s real-life Winston 500 accident in 1993, the bit in which rookie racer Lightning McQueen assists him to the finish line is based on the 1976 incident, albeit by the pit crew. Petty&#x27;s wife Lynda voiced The King&#x27;s wife, a 1976 Chrysler Town &amp; Country station-wagon (based on Petty&#x27;s family car), in that movie as well. Petty&#x27;s character did not appear in &quot;Cars 2&quot; (2011), but did return in &quot;Cars 3&quot; (2017), in which Petty voiced his character as the crew chief of his nephew and new Dinoco racer Cal Weathers, who was voiced by Kyle Petty, who is Petty&#x27;s son.
* Petty appeared in the Tom Cruise movie &quot;Days of Thunder&quot; (1990).
* He appeared in the Burt Reynolds movie &quot;Stroker Ace&quot; (1983) as himself.
* Petty appeared as himself in the movie &quot;43: The Richard Petty Story&quot; (1972) (a Victory Lane Production, released by Video Gems, distributed by United American Video in 1986).
* In 1989, Petty appeared as himself in the movie &quot;Speed Zone&quot;, driving in his famous blue No. 43 car.
* In 1967, Petty appeared in the opening credits of the Elvis Presley movie &quot;Speedway&quot; that was shot and filmed at the Charlotte Motor Speedway in Concord, North Carolina. This movie was released in 1968.
* He was in &quot;Petty Blue&quot;, a documentary by NASCAR.
* Petty guest-starred in the &quot;Alley Oop&quot; daily comic strip from June 7 to June 20, 1994, in which he drove a pickup truck to help corral an escaped dinosaur (that had been transported to the 20th century).
* Petty appeared as himself in the (1965) Howard Hawks film &quot;Red Line 7000&quot;.

==References==
== External links ==
* 
* Richard Petty Gives a Tour of Petty Enterprises
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q355130" start="0" end="17" title="Richard Petty" label="Richard Lee Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q355130" start="55" end="63" title="Richard Petty" label="the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758324" start="93" end="109" title="stock car racing" label="stock car racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="223" end="240" title="NASCAR Cup Series" label="NASCAR Cup Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124857" start="275" end="283" title="Plymouth (automobile)" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q40990" start="284" end="291" title="Pontiac (automobile)" label="Pontiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q752090" start="296" end="313" title="Petty Enterprises" label="Petty Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q355420" start="463" end="477" title="Dale Earnhardt" label="Dale Earnhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q217238" start="482" end="496" title="Jimmie Johnson" label="Jimmie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q107128487" start="527" end="536" title="List of NASCAR race wins by Richard Petty" label="200 races"/>
<link wikidata="Q841738" start="582" end="593" title="Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443089" start="794" end="813" title="NASCAR Hall of Fame" label="NASCAR Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q116443580" start="1213" end="1230" title="Legacy Motor Club" label="Legacy Motor Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535028" start="1328" end="1355" title="Level Cross, Randolph County, North Carolina" label="Level Cross, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q588596" start="1419" end="1424" title="Pole position" label="poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q468436" start="1613" end="1625" title="Matt Kenseth" label="Matt Kenseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984106" start="1641" end="1661" title="Richard Petty Museum" label="Richard Petty Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029479" start="1685" end="1710" title="Randleman, North Carolina" label="Randleman, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q182153" start="1855" end="1859" title="Cars (film)" label="Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q21079862" start="1876" end="1882" title="Cars 3" label="Cars 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q719215" start="2045" end="2054" title="Lee Petty" label="Lee Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q841738" start="2070" end="2081" title="Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569610" start="2085" end="2089" title="1959 Daytona 500" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535028" start="2227" end="2254" title="Level Cross, Randolph County, North Carolina" label="Level Cross, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576848" start="2423" end="2439" title="1975 Winston 500" label="1975 Winston 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795060" start="2488" end="2498" title="Kyle Petty" label="Kyle Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q350619" start="2646" end="2650" title="Adam Petty" label="Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815356" start="2704" end="2732" title="New Hampshire Motor Speedway" label="New Hampshire Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251780" start="2874" end="2908" title="SeriousFun Children&amp;#x27;s Network" label="SeriousFun Children&amp;#x27;s Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535028" start="3005" end="3032" title="Level Cross, Randolph County, North Carolina" label="Level Cross, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q20455914" start="3062" end="3065" title="married and maiden names" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q719215" start="3078" end="3094" title="Lee Petty" label="Lee Arnold Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q16105183" start="3162" end="3175" title="Maurice Petty" label="Maurice Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029479" start="3196" end="3221" title="Randleman, North Carolina" label="Randleman, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291749" start="3235" end="3256" title="Randleman High School" label="Randleman High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383747" start="3578" end="3589" title="CNE Stadium" label="CNE Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="3593" end="3600" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q796351" start="3631" end="3640" title="BMO Field" label="BMO Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626609" start="3649" end="3667" title="Honda Indy Toronto" label="Honda Indy Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959800" start="3702" end="3727" title="NASCAR Rookie of the Year" label="NASCAR Rookie of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569610" start="3834" end="3855" title="1959 Daytona 500" label="inaugural Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179250" start="3867" end="3897" title="Daytona International Speedway" label="Daytona International Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815381" start="4423" end="4435" title="Martinsville Speedway" label="Martinsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925171" start="4440" end="4453" title="Bridgehampton" label="Bridgehampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124857" start="4481" end="4489" title="Plymouth (automobile)" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q13635778" start="4501" end="4505" title="Hemispherical combustion chamber" label="Hemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q841738" start="4565" end="4576" title="Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q719215" start="5096" end="5099" title="Lee Petty" label="Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678302" start="6079" end="6101" title="Middle Georgia Raceway" label="Middle Georgia Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="6144" end="6150" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505841" start="6618" end="6630" title="Southern 500" label="Southern 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166378" start="6634" end="6644" title="Darlington Raceway" label="Darlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411203" start="6898" end="6918" title="Occoneechee Speedway" label="Occoneechee Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467973" start="7022" end="7043" title="Ford Torino Talladega" label="Ford Torino Talladega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234165" start="7352" end="7365" title="Dodge Charger Daytona" label="Dodge Daytona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081628" start="7505" end="7523" title="Plymouth Superbird" label="Plymouth Superbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q127552" start="7657" end="7662" title="Pixar" label="Pixar"/>
<link wikidata="Q182153" start="7674" end="7678" title="Cars (film)" label="Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q645026" start="7843" end="7863" title="Plymouth Road Runner" label="Plymouth Road Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q369796" start="7876" end="7887" title="Buddy Baker" label="Buddy Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="8206" end="8214" title="Chrysler" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q752706" start="8343" end="8346" title="STP (motor oil company)" label="STP"/>
<link wikidata="Q302098" start="8814" end="8829" title="Gordon Johncock" label="Gordon Johncock"/>
<link wikidata="Q931533" start="8848" end="8869" title="1982 Indianapolis 500" label="1982 Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="9032" end="9049" title="NASCAR Cup Series" label="NASCAR Cup Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q669856" start="9252" end="9265" title="Dodge Charger" label="Dodge Charger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6322397" start="9579" end="9596" title="K&amp;amp;K Insurance" label="K&amp;amp;K Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341376" start="9791" end="9804" title="energy crisis" label="energy crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104915" start="9928" end="9937" title="World 600" label="World 600"/>
<link wikidata="Q313565" start="10133" end="10144" title="Jeff Gordon" label="Jeff Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q946583" start="10323" end="10336" title="David Pearson (racing driver)" label="David Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234289" start="11273" end="11285" title="Dodge Magnum" label="Dodge Magnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q594120" start="11595" end="11616" title="Chevrolet Monte Carlo" label="Chevrolet Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018871" start="11905" end="11931" title="Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme" label="Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578676" start="11945" end="11958" title="1979 Daytona 500" label="Famous Finish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241964" start="12550" end="12564" title="Donnie Allison" label="Donnie Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q946161" start="12569" end="12584" title="Cale Yarborough" label="Cale Yarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q946220" start="12625" end="12640" title="Darrell Waltrip" label="Darrell Waltrip"/>
<link wikidata="Q173228" start="12645" end="12655" title="A. J. Foyt" label="A. J. Foyt"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="12805" end="12808" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445287" start="13021" end="13037" title="North Wilkesboro Speedway" label="North Wilkesboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q841675" start="13042" end="13051" title="Fairgrounds Speedway" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813430" start="13075" end="13081" title="Pocono Raceway" label="Pocono"/>
<link wikidata="Q281847" start="13465" end="13476" title="Lee Iacocca" label="Lee Iacocca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234275" start="13573" end="13585" title="Dodge Mirada" label="Dodge Mirada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002872" start="14125" end="14136" title="Buick Regal" label="Buick Regal"/>
<link wikidata="Q888441" start="14272" end="14285" title="Bobby Allison" label="Bobby Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210489" start="14394" end="14404" title="Dale Inman" label="Dale Inman"/>
<link wikidata="Q204845" start="14547" end="14560" title="Terry Labonte" label="Terry Labonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234289" start="14921" end="14933" title="Dodge Magnum" label="Dodge Magnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="15318" end="15327" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q669266" start="15491" end="15500" title="Mike Curb" label="Mike Curb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574565" start="15564" end="15587" title="1971 Myers Brothers 250" label="1971 Myers Brothers 250"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333040" start="15898" end="15910" title="Elmo Langley" label="Elmo Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084921" start="15915" end="15932" title="Charlie Glotzbach" label="Charlie Glotzbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252953" start="16289" end="16317" title="Dover International Speedway" label="Dover International Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581671" start="16489" end="16504" title="1984 Firecracker 400" label="Firecracker 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179250" start="16508" end="16538" title="Daytona International Speedway" label="Daytona International Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300561" start="16576" end="16588" title="Doug Heveron" label="Doug Heveron"/>
<link wikidata="Q946161" start="16750" end="16765" title="Cale Yarborough" label="Cale Yarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="16932" end="16945" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009456" start="17194" end="17217" title="Calder Park Thunderdome" label="Calder Park Thunderdome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584459" start="17332" end="17351" title="1988 Goodyear NASCAR 500" label="Goodyear NASCAR 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795060" start="17368" end="17372" title="Kyle Petty" label="Kyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932923" start="17450" end="17458" title="Bob Jane" label="Bob Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067286" start="17478" end="17502" title="Charlotte Motor Speedway" label="Charlotte Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705254" start="17680" end="17692" title="Alabama Gang" label="Alabama Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984154" start="17700" end="17712" title="Neil Bonnett" label="Neil Bonnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586741" start="17951" end="17977" title="1991 Budweiser at the Glen" label="1991 Budweiser at the Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105290" start="18002" end="18016" title="J. D. McDuffie" label="J. D. McDuffie"/>
<link wikidata="Q85797995" start="18310" end="18326" title="Racing Champions" label="Racing Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094440" start="18425" end="18434" title="Pepsi 400" label="Pepsi 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="18614" end="18631" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587692" start="19062" end="19087" title="1992 Hooters 500" label="season-ending Hooters 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q374058" start="19091" end="19113" title="Atlanta Motor Speedway" label="Atlanta Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q313565" start="19146" end="19157" title="Jeff Gordon" label="Jeff Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683169" start="19508" end="19521" title="Davey Allison" label="Davey Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q862090" start="19690" end="19702" title="Bill Elliott" label="Bill Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375059" start="19707" end="19720" title="Alan Kulwicki" label="Alan Kulwicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q172732" start="20829" end="20856" title="Indianapolis Motor Speedway" label="Indianapolis Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589259" start="20882" end="20900" title="1994 Brickyard 400" label="1994 Brickyard 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626077" start="21102" end="21126" title="Homestead-Miami Speedway" label="Homestead-Miami Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340937" start="21931" end="21944" title="Robbie Loomis" label="Robbie Loomis"/>
<link wikidata="Q752090" start="21969" end="21986" title="Petty Enterprises" label="Petty Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307796" start="22043" end="22065" title="Checker Auto Parts 500" label="Checker Auto Parts 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803538" start="22069" end="22076" title="Phoenix International Raceway" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q749941" start="22087" end="22098" title="Subway 400" label="ACDelco 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033478" start="22102" end="22125" title="North Carolina Speedway" label="North Carolina Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905500" start="22137" end="22151" title="Bobby Hamilton" label="Bobby Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q116135" start="22174" end="22200" title="Goody&amp;#x27;s Body Pain 500" label="Goody&amp;#x27;s Body Pain 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815381" start="22204" end="22225" title="Martinsville Speedway" label="Martinsville Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q377197" start="22232" end="22245" title="John Andretti" label="John Andretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q752090" start="22408" end="22425" title="Petty Enterprises" label="Petty Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q16040249" start="22626" end="22651" title="Evernham Motorsports" label="Richard Petty Motorsports"/>
<link wikidata="Q738449" start="22661" end="22675" title="George N. Gillett, Jr." label="George Gillett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301493" start="22784" end="22803" title="Douglas G. Bergeron" label="Douglas G. Bergeron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757828" start="22885" end="22903" title="Andrew M. Murstein" label="Andrew M. Murstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308203" start="22994" end="23029" title="special-purpose acquisition company" label="special-purpose acquisition company"/>
<link wikidata="Q215777" start="23044" end="23054" title="Hank Aaron" label="Hank Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336168" start="23190" end="23193" title="NASCAR on CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772637" start="23279" end="23298" title="alcohol sponsorship" label="alcohol sponsorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001620" start="23384" end="23395" title="Busch Clash" label="Busch Clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q9697654" start="23565" end="23574" title="Rebel 400" label="Rebel 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q645026" start="23617" end="23637" title="Plymouth Road Runner" label="Plymouth Road Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q524301" start="23840" end="23851" title="Bobby Isaac" label="Bobby Isaac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374572" start="24000" end="24013" title="Joe Weatherly" label="Joe Weatherly"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="24056" end="24062" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813430" start="24188" end="24194" title="Pocono Raceway" label="Pocono"/>
<link wikidata="Q841738" start="24517" end="24528" title="Daytona 500" label="Daytona 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181681" start="24562" end="24575" title="Phil Barkdoll" label="Phil Barkdoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179250" start="24719" end="24749" title="Daytona International Speedway" label="Daytona International Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4962083" start="24793" end="24805" title="Brett Bodine" label="Brett Bodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q284602" start="24924" end="24932" title="g-forces" label="g-forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q888441" start="24984" end="24997" title="Bobby Allison" label="Bobby Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q303039" start="25014" end="25025" title="Aaron&amp;#x27;s 499" label="Winston 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547320" start="25029" end="25052" title="Talladega Superspeedway" label="Talladega Superspeedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q165435" start="25319" end="25329" title="carburetor" label="carburetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667249" start="25330" end="25346" title="restrictor plate" label="restrictor plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="25370" end="25376" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685774" start="25478" end="25489" title="1988 NASCAR Winston Cup Series" label="1988 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443089" start="25564" end="25583" title="NASCAR Hall of Fame" label="NASCAR Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638644" start="25637" end="25675" title="International Motorsports Hall of Fame" label="International Motorsports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540872" start="25699" end="25732" title="NASCAR&amp;#x27;s 50 Greatest Drivers" label="NASCAR&amp;#x27;s 50 Greatest Drivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949998" start="25818" end="25853" title="Motorsports Hall of Fame of America" label="Motorsports Hall of Fame of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="25884" end="25900" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q507943" start="26049" end="26075" title="Randolph County, North Carolina" label="Randolph County Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="26081" end="26091" title="Republican (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q311293" start="26113" end="26126" title="John Connally" label="John Connally"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="26241" end="26254" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505841" start="26595" end="26607" title="Southern 500" label="Southern 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="26649" end="26661" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101438" start="26711" end="26737" title="political action committee" label="political action committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="26783" end="26793" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q131935022" start="26809" end="26856" title="1996 North Carolina Secretary of State election" label="1996 North Carolina Secretary of State election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324820" start="26903" end="26918" title="Elaine Marshall" label="Elaine Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="27159" end="27171" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541872" start="27234" end="27249" title="Liberty Medical" label="Liberty Medical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425291" start="27251" end="27259" title="Cheerios" label="Cheerios"/>
<link wikidata="Q212322" start="27268" end="27283" title="GlaxoSmithKline" label="GlaxoSmithKline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566669" start="27293" end="27302" title="Nicorette" label="Nicorette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583737" start="27307" end="27335" title="Goody&amp;#x27;s Powder" label="Goody&amp;#x27;s Headache Powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509282" start="27366" end="27384" title="Brawny (brand)" label="Brawny paper towel"/>
<link wikidata="Q629998" start="27488" end="27501" title="General Mills" label="General Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q11928" start="27655" end="27665" title="Swing Vote (2008 film)" label="Swing Vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q272882" start="27896" end="27911" title="Jack (device)" label="automotive lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196567" start="28083" end="28110" title="public service announcement" label="public service announcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q250841" start="28116" end="28137" title="Civitan International" label="Civitan International"/>
<link wikidata="Q4622294" start="28492" end="28504" title="2011 STP 400" label="2011 STP 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q871285" start="28774" end="28790" title="Jackson, Wyoming" label="Jackson, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q11928" start="29399" end="29409" title="Swing Vote (2008 film)" label="Swing Vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q179969" start="29488" end="29501" title="Air Force One" label="Air Force One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060986" start="29540" end="29554" title="The King (Cars)" label="Strip Weathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q191224" start="29636" end="29642" title="Walt Disney Pictures" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q127552" start="29643" end="29648" title="Pixar Animation Studios" label="Pixar"/>
<link wikidata="Q182153" start="29670" end="29674" title="Cars (film)" label="Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q303039" start="30101" end="30112" title="Jack Link&amp;#x27;s 500" label="Winston 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588862" start="30125" end="30129" title="1993 Winston 500" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q864418" start="30161" end="30178" title="Lightning McQueen" label="Lightning McQueen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577133" start="30226" end="30230" title="1976 Daytona 500" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q11212731" start="30320" end="30352" title="Chrysler Town &amp;amp; Country (1941–1988)" label="1976 Chrysler Town &amp;amp; Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q192212" start="30473" end="30479" title="Cars 2" label="Cars 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q21079862" start="30518" end="30524" title="Cars 3" label="Cars 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795060" start="30660" end="30670" title="Kyle Petty" label="Kyle Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q37079" start="30721" end="30731" title="Tom Cruise" label="Tom Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q603696" start="30744" end="30759" title="Days of Thunder" label="Days of Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q202148" start="30795" end="30808" title="Burt Reynolds" label="Burt Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q655487" start="30821" end="30832" title="Stroker Ace" label="Stroker Ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033497" start="31101" end="31111" title="Speed Zone" label="Speed Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q605374" start="31240" end="31248" title="Speedway (1968 film)" label="Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650420" start="31469" end="31478" title="Alley Oop" label="Alley Oop"/>
<link wikidata="Q247609" start="31716" end="31729" title="Red Line 7000" label="Red Line 7000"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25481" wikidata="Q225229" url="?curid=25481" title="Reduction">
<text>Reduction, reduced, or reduce may refer to:

== Science and technology ==
=== Chemistry ===
* Reduction (chemistry), part of a reduction-oxidation (redox) reaction in which atoms have their oxidation state changed.
** Organic redox reaction, a redox reaction that takes place with organic compounds
** Ore reduction: see smelting

=== Computing and algorithms ===

* Reduction (complexity), a transformation of one problem into another problem
* Reduction (recursion theory), given sets A and B of natural numbers, is it possible to effectively convert a method for deciding membership in B into a method for deciding membership in A?
* Bit Rate Reduction, an audio compression method
* Data reduction, simplifying data in order to facilitate analysis
* Graph reduction, an efficient version of non-strict evaluation
* L-reduction, a transformation of optimization problems which keeps the approximability features
* Partial order reduction, a technique for reducing the size of the state-space to be searched by a model checking algorithm
* Strength reduction, a compiler optimization where a function of some systematically changing variable is calculated more efficiently by using previous values of the function
* Reduce (computer algebra system), a general-purpose computer algebra system geared towards applications in physics
* Reduce (higher-order function), in functional programming, a family of higher-order functions that process a data structure in some order and build up a return value
* Reduced instruction set computing, a CPU design philosophy favoring an instruction set reduced in size and complexity of addressing, to simplify implementation, instruction level parallelism, and compiling

=== Pure mathematics and statistics ===

* Reducible as the opposite of irreducible (mathematics)
* Reduction (mathematics), the rewriting of an expression into a simpler form
* Beta reduction, the rewriting of an expression from lambda calculus into a simpler form
* Dimension reduction, the process of reducing the number of random variables under consideration
* Lattice reduction, given an integer lattice basis as input, to find a basis with short, nearly orthogonal vectors
* Subject reduction or preservation, a rewrite of an expression that does not change its type
* Reduction of order, a technique for solving second-order ordinary differential equations
* Reduction of the structure group, for a formula_1-bundle formula_2 and a map formula_3 an formula_4-bundle formula_5 such that the pushout formula_6 is isomorphic to formula_2
* Reduction system, reduction strategy, the application of rewriting systems to eliminate reducible expressions
* Reduced form, in statistics, an equation which relates the endogenous variable X to all the available exogenous variables, both those included in the regression of interest (W) and the instruments (Z)
* Reduced homology, a minor modification made to homology theory in algebraic topology, designed to make a point have all its homology groups zero
* Reduced product, a construction that generalizes both direct product and ultraproduct
* Reduced residue system, a set of φ(n) integers such that each integer is relatively prime to n and no two are congruent modulo n
* Reduced ring, a ring with no non-zero nilpotent elements
* Reduced row echelon form, a certain reduced row echelon form of a matrix which completely and uniquely determines its row space
* Reduced word, in a free group, a word with no adjacent generator-inverse pairs
* Variance reduction, a procedure used to increase the precision of the estimates that can be obtained for a given number of iterations

=== Medicine ===
==== Medical procedures ====
* Lung volume reduction surgery, a treatment for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
* Selective reduction (or fetal reduction), the practice of reducing the number of fetuses in a multifetal pregnancy
* Reduction (orthopedic surgery), a medical procedure to restore a fracture or dislocation to the correct alignment
* Ventricular reduction, a type of operation in cardiac surgery
* Cosmetic surgery:
** Breast reduction
** Jaw reduction

==== Other uses in medicine ====
* Weight loss
* In epidemiology:
** Relative risk reduction, the absolute risk reduction by the control event rate
** Absolute risk reduction, the decrease in risk of a given activity or treatment in relation to a control activity or treatment
* Urea reduction ratio (URR), a dimensionless number used to quantify hemodialysis treatment adequacy

=== Physics ===
* Dimensional reduction, the limit of a compactified theory where the size of the compact dimension goes to zero
* Reduction criterion, in quantum information theory, a necessary condition a mixed state must satisfy in order for it to be separable
* Reduced mass, the &quot;effective&quot; inertial mass appearing in the two-body problem of Newtonian mechanics
* Reduced properties (pressure, temperature, or volume) of a fluid, defined based on the fluid&#x27;s critical point

=== Other uses in science and technology ===
* Lithic reduction, in Stone Age toolmaking, to detach lithic flakes from a lump of tool stone
* Noise reduction, in acoustic or signal processing
* Reduction drive, a mechanical device to shift rotational speed

==Arts and media==
* &quot;Reducing&quot; (film), a 1931 American film
* Reduction (music), music arranged for smaller resources (piano) for easier analysis or performance

== Linguistics ==
* Accent reduction, modifying one&#x27;s foreign accent towards that of a native speaker
* Vowel reduction, any change in vowel quality perceived as &quot;weakening&quot;
** Vowel reduction in English
* Relaxed pronunciation, slurring of syllables of common words
* Definite article reduction, use of vowel-less forms of the English definite article in Northern England

== Philosophy ==
* Reductionism, a range of philosophical systems
* Reductio ad absurdum, a form of argument in which a proposition is disproven by following its implications to an absurd consequence
* Eidetic reduction, a technique in the study of essences in phenomenology whose goal is to identify the basic components of phenomena
* Intertheoretic reduction, in philosophy of science, one theory makes predictions that perfectly or almost perfectly match the predictions of a second theory

== Settlements ==
* Reductions, settlements in Spanish America intended to control and Christianize Indians
* Indian reductions in the Andes, settlements in the Andes to control and Christianize Indians

== Other uses ==
* Reduction (cooking), the process of thickening or intensifying the flavor of a liquid mixture such as a soup, sauce, wine, or juice by evaporation
* Reduction (military), the siege and capture of a fortified place
* Reduction (Sweden), a return to the Crown of fiefs that had been granted to the Swedish nobility
* Reduce (waste), practices of minimizing waste
* Reduction, Pennsylvania, unincorporated community, United States
* Reduction in rank, in military law
* Reduction to practice, in United States patent law, the embodiment of the concept of an invention
* Ego reduction, predicated on the use of Sigmund Freud&#x27;s concept of the ego
* Reductions, resettlement of indigenous peoples during the Spanish colonization of the Americas

== See also ==
* Prevention (disambiguation)
* Risk reduction (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q225229" start="0" end="9" title="Reduction" label="Reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q225229" start="11" end="18" title="Reduction" label="reduced"/>
<link wikidata="Q225229" start="23" end="29" title="Reduction" label="reduce"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="94" end="115" title="Reduction (chemistry)" label="Reduction (chemistry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161141" start="218" end="240" title="Organic redox reaction" label="Organic redox reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748405" start="321" end="329" title="smelting" label="smelting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197709" start="367" end="389" title="Reduction (complexity)" label="Reduction (complexity)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306360" start="446" end="474" title="Reduction (recursion theory)" label="Reduction (recursion theory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918704" start="637" end="655" title="Bit Rate Reduction" label="Bit Rate Reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227343" start="687" end="701" title="Data reduction" label="Data reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597097" start="754" end="769" title="Graph reduction" label="Graph reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366944" start="819" end="830" title="L-reduction" label="L-reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140378" start="917" end="940" title="Partial order reduction" label="Partial order reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4371846" start="1042" end="1060" title="Strength reduction" label="Strength reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857633" start="1218" end="1250" title="Reduce (computer algebra system)" label="Reduce (computer algebra system)"/>
<link wikidata="Q951651" start="1335" end="1365" title="Reduce (higher-order function)" label="Reduce (higher-order function)"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="1503" end="1536" title="Reduced instruction set computing" label="Reduced instruction set computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827342" start="1782" end="1807" title="irreducible (mathematics)" label="irreducible (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454686" start="1810" end="1833" title="Reduction (mathematics)" label="Reduction (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q242028" start="1888" end="1902" title="Beta reduction" label="Beta reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000077" start="1978" end="1997" title="Dimension reduction" label="Dimension reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497132" start="2076" end="2093" title="Lattice reduction" label="Lattice reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631400" start="2192" end="2209" title="Subject reduction" label="Subject reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430365" start="2286" end="2304" title="Reduction of order" label="Reduction of order"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511959" start="2377" end="2409" title="Reduction of the structure group" label="Reduction of the structure group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668499" start="2555" end="2571" title="Reduction system" label="Reduction system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306328" start="2667" end="2679" title="Reduced form" label="Reduced form"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306331" start="2870" end="2886" title="Reduced homology" label="Reduced homology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306336" start="3017" end="3032" title="Reduced product" label="Reduced product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246629" start="3105" end="3127" title="Reduced residue system" label="Reduced residue system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423024" start="3236" end="3248" title="Reduced ring" label="Reduced ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091296" start="3295" end="3319" title="Reduced row echelon form" label="Reduced row echelon form"/>
<link wikidata="Q10944557" start="3425" end="3437" title="Reduced word" label="Reduced word"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454689" start="3506" end="3524" title="Variance reduction" label="Variance reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964004" start="3689" end="3718" title="Lung volume reduction surgery" label="Lung volume reduction surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153583" start="3776" end="3795" title="Selective reduction" label="Selective reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145130" start="3893" end="3923" title="Reduction (orthopedic surgery)" label="Reduction (orthopedic surgery)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920321" start="4009" end="4030" title="Ventricular reduction" label="Ventricular reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q994557" start="4094" end="4110" title="Breast reduction" label="Breast reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6165857" start="4114" end="4127" title="Jaw reduction" label="Jaw reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q718113" start="4164" end="4175" title="Weight loss" label="Weight loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310800" start="4198" end="4221" title="Relative risk reduction" label="Relative risk reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138790" start="4280" end="4303" title="Absolute risk reduction" label="Absolute risk reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q935336" start="4408" end="4428" title="Urea reduction ratio" label="Urea reduction ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092131" start="4527" end="4548" title="Dimensional reduction" label="Dimensional reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306359" start="4640" end="4659" title="Reduction criterion" label="Reduction criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q550046" start="4775" end="4787" title="Reduced mass" label="Reduced mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136424" start="4888" end="4906" title="Reduced properties" label="Reduced properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142470" start="5051" end="5067" title="Lithic reduction" label="Lithic reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q581861" start="5146" end="5161" title="Noise reduction" label="Noise reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998736" start="5198" end="5213" title="Reduction drive" label="Reduction drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636517" start="5283" end="5310" title="Reducing (film)" label="&amp;quot;Reducing&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425997" start="5335" end="5352" title="Reduction (music)" label="Reduction (music)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672330" start="5455" end="5471" title="Accent reduction" label="Accent reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412778" start="5544" end="5559" title="Vowel reduction" label="Vowel reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q179349" start="5627" end="5653" title="Vowel reduction in English" label="Vowel reduction in English"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5656" end="5677" title="Relaxed pronunciation" label="Relaxed pronunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251589" start="5719" end="5745" title="Definite article reduction" label="Definite article reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q206829" start="5843" end="5855" title="Reductionism" label="Reductionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q14402006" start="5892" end="5912" title="Reductio ad absurdum" label="Reductio ad absurdum"/>
<link wikidata="Q267741" start="6026" end="6043" title="Eidetic reduction" label="Eidetic reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057209" start="6161" end="6185" title="Intertheoretic reduction" label="Intertheoretic reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q350735" start="6339" end="6349" title="Reductions" label="Reductions"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242351" start="6429" end="6459" title="Indian reductions in the Andes" label="Indian reductions in the Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971485" start="6542" end="6561" title="Reduction (cooking)" label="Reduction (cooking)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25203164" start="6691" end="6711" title="Reduction (military)" label="Reduction (military)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150730" start="6758" end="6776" title="Reduction (Sweden)" label="Reduction (Sweden)"/>
<link wikidata="Q319970" start="6857" end="6871" title="Reduce (waste)" label="Reduce (waste)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30595945" start="6905" end="6928" title="Reduction, Pennsylvania" label="Reduction, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306364" start="6972" end="6989" title="Reduction in rank" label="Reduction in rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306374" start="7009" end="7030" title="Reduction to practice" label="Reduction to practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348172" start="7109" end="7122" title="Ego reduction" label="Ego reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q350735" start="7191" end="7201" title="Reductions" label="Reductions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047607" start="7249" end="7285" title="Spanish colonization of the Americas" label="Spanish colonization of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611828" start="7304" end="7331" title="Prevention (disambiguation)" label="Prevention (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7336297" start="7334" end="7365" title="Risk reduction (disambiguation)" label="Risk reduction (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25484" wikidata="Q102240169" url="?curid=25484" title="Rosemary">
<text>Salvia rosmarinus (), commonly known as rosemary, is a shrub with fragrant, evergreen, needle-like leaves and white, pink, purple, or blue flowers. It is a member of the sage family, Lamiaceae.

The species is native to the Mediterranean region, as well as Portugal and Spain. It has a number of cultivars and its leaves are commonly used as a flavoring.

==Description==
Rosemary has a fibrous root system. It forms an aromatic evergreen shrub with leaves similar to &quot;Tsuga&quot; needles. Forms range from upright to trailing; the upright forms can reach between tall. The leaves are evergreen, long and broad, green above, and white below, with dense, short, woolly hair.

The plant flowers in spring and summer in temperate climates, but the plants can be in constant bloom in warm climates; flowers are white, pink, purple or deep blue. The branches are dotted with groups of 2 to 3 flowers down its length. Rosemary also has a tendency to flower outside its normal flowering season; it has been known to flower as late as early December, and as early as mid-February (in the Northern Hemisphere). The plant can live as long as 35 years.

=== Similar species ===
&quot;Salvia jordanii&quot; (formerly &quot;Rosmarinus eriocalyx&quot;) is a closely related species native to Iberia and the Maghreb of Africa.

==Taxonomy==

&quot;Salvia rosmarinus&quot; is now considered one of many hundreds of species in the genus &quot;Salvia&quot;. Formerly it was placed in a much smaller genus, &quot;Rosmarinus&quot;, which contained only two to four species including &quot;Rosmarinus&quot; &quot;officinalis (),&quot;&quot;&quot; which is now considered a synonym. Both the original and current genus names of the species were applied by the 18th-century naturalist and founding taxonomist Carl Linnaeus.

=== Etymology ===
Elizabeth Kent noted in her &quot;Flora Domestica&quot; (1823), &quot;The botanical name of this plant is compounded of two Latin words [], signifying Sea-dew; and indeed Rosemary thrives best by the sea.&quot;

==Distribution and habitat==

It is native to the Mediterranean region, as well as Portugal and northwestern Spain. It was first mentioned on cuneiform stone tablets as early as 5000 BCE. The herb was naturalized in China as early as 220 CE, during the late Han dynasty.

Rosemary came to England at an unknown date, though it is likely that the Romans brought it when they invaded Britain in 43 CE. Even so, there are no viable records containing rosemary in Britain until the 8th century CE. This mention was in a document which was later credited to Charlemagne, who promoted the general usage of herbs and ordered rosemary specifically to be grown in monastic gardens and farms.

There are no records of rosemary being properly naturalized in Britain until 1338, when cuttings were sent to Queen Philippa by her mother, Countess Joan of Hainault. It was then planted in the garden of the old palace of Westminster. Since then, rosemary can be found in most English herbal texts. 

Rosemary finally arrived in the Americas with early European settlers in the beginning of the 17th century, and was soon spread to South America and distributed globally.

It is reasonably hardy in cool climates. Special cultivars like &#x27;Arp&#x27; can withstand winter temperatures down to about . It can withstand droughts, surviving a severe lack of water for lengthy periods. It is considered a potentially invasive species and its seeds are often difficult to start, with a low germination rate.

== Cultivation ==
Since it is attractive and drought-tolerant, rosemary is used as an ornamental plant in gardens and for xeriscape landscaping, especially in regions of Mediterranean climate. It is considered easy to grow and pest-resistant. Rosemary can grow quite large and retain attractiveness for many years, can be pruned into formal shapes and low hedges, and has been used for topiary. It is easily grown in pots. The groundcover cultivars spread widely, with a dense and durable texture.

In order to harvest from the plant, the bush should be matured 2–3 years to ensure it is large enough to withstand it. The amount harvested should not exceed 20% of the growth in order to preserve the plant.

=== Cultivars ===

Numerous cultivars have been selected for garden use.
* &#x27;Albus&#x27; – white flowers
* &#x27;Arp&#x27; – leaves light green, lemon-scented and especially cold-hardy
* &#x27;Aureus&#x27; – leaves speckled yellow
* &#x27;Benenden Blue&#x27; – leaves narrow, dark green
* &#x27;Blue Boy&#x27; – dwarf, small leaves
* &#x27;Blue Rain&#x27; – pink flowers
* &#x27;Golden Rain&#x27; – leaves green, with yellow streaks
* &#x27;Gold Dust&#x27; – dark green leaves, with golden streaks but stronger than &#x27;Golden Rain&#x27;
* &#x27;Haifa&#x27; – low and small, white flowers
* &#x27;Irene&#x27; – low and lax, trailing, intense blue flowers
* &#x27;Lockwood de Forest&#x27; – procumbent selection from &#x27;Tuscan Blue&#x27;
* &#x27;Ken Taylor&#x27; – shrubby
* &#x27;Majorica Pink&#x27; – pink flowers
* &#x27;Miss Jessopp&#x27;s Upright&#x27; – distinctive tall form, with wider leaves.
* &#x27;Pinkie&#x27; – pink flowers
* &#x27;Prostratus&#x27; – lower groundcover
* &#x27;Pyramidalis&#x27; (or &#x27;Erectus&#x27;) – fastigiate form, pale blue flowers
* &#x27;Remembrance&#x27; (or &#x27;Gallipoli&#x27;) – taken from the Gallipoli Peninsula
* &#x27;Roseus&#x27; – pink flowers
* &#x27;Salem&#x27; – pale blue flowers, cold-hardy similar to &#x27;Arp&#x27;
* &#x27;Severn Sea&#x27; – spreading, low-growing, with arching branches, flowers deep violet
* &#x27;Sudbury Blue&#x27; – blue flowers
* &#x27;Tuscan Blue&#x27; – traditional robust upright form
* &#x27;Wilma&#x27;s Gold&#x27; – yellow leaves

The following cultivars have gained the Royal Horticultural Society&#x27;s Award of Garden Merit:
* &#x27;Benenden Blue&#x27;
* &#x27;Miss Jessopp&#x27;s Upright&#x27;
* &#x27;Severn Sea&#x27;
* &#x27;Sissinghurst Blue&#x27;

== Uses ==
Aside from its usage in the fragrance industry, rosemary is not only used as a decorative plant in gardens, but also cultivated for practical applications, such as medicine and cooking. When the plant is fully grown, the leaves, twigs, and flowering apices are often extracted for use in these areas. The leaves are used to flavor various foods, such as stuffing and roasted meats. Rosemary, along with holly and ivy, was commonly used for Christmas decorations in the 17th century.

===Culinary===

Rosemary leaves are used as a flavoring in foods, such as stuffing and roasted lamb, pork, chicken, and turkey. Fresh or dried leaves are used in traditional Mediterranean cuisine. They have a bitter, astringent taste and a characteristic aroma which complements many cooked foods. Herbal tea can be made from the leaves. When roasted with meats or vegetables, the leaves impart a mustard-like aroma with an additional fragrance of charred wood that goes well with barbecued foods.

In amounts typically used to flavor foods, such as one teaspoon (1 gram), rosemary provides no nutritional value. Rosemary extract has been shown to improve the shelf life and heat stability of omega 3-rich oils which are prone to rancidity. Rosemary is also an effective antimicrobial herb.

===Fragrance===
Hungary water, which dates to the 14th century, was one of the first alcohol-based perfumes in Europe, and was primarily made from distilled rosemary.
Rosemary oil is used for purposes of fragrant bodily perfumes or to emit an aroma into a room; it is also burnt as incense, and used in shampoos and cleaning products.

===Phytochemicals===
Rosemary contains a number of phytochemicals, including rosmarinic acid, camphor, caffeic acid, ursolic acid, betulinic acid, carnosic acid, and carnosol. Rosemary essential oil contains 10–20% camphor.

Rosemary extract, specifically the type mainly consisting of carnosic acid and carnosol, is approved as a food antioxidant preservative in several countries. The E number is E392.

===For hair growth===
Some research shows that rosemary oil may help stimulate hair growth in some cases. One of the studies investigating the clinical efficacy of rosemary oil in the treatment of androgenetic alopecia and comparing its effects with minoxidil 2% (a current standard of care medication), found no significant difference between study groups using either rosemary oil or minoxidil regarding hair count, either at month 3 or month 6 of treatment. The frequencies of dry hair, greasy hair, and dandruff were not found to be significantly different from baseline at either month 3 or month 6 trial in the groups. The frequency of scalp itching at the 3- and 6-month trial points was significantly higher compared with baseline in both groups, however, it was more frequent in the minoxidil group at both assessed endpoints.

== In culture ==
Rosemary was considered sacred to ancient Egyptians, Romans, and Greeks. In &quot;Don Quixote&quot; (Part One, Chapter XVII), the fictional hero uses rosemary in his recipe for balm of fierabras. It was written about by Pliny the Elder (23–79 CE) and Pedanius Dioscorides (c. 40 CE to c. 90 CE), a Greek botanist (amongst other things). The latter talked about rosemary in his most famous writing, &quot;De Materia Medica&quot;, one of the most influential herbal books in history.

The plant has been used as a symbol for remembrance during war commemorations and funerals in Europe and Australia. Mourners would throw it into graves as a symbol of remembrance for the dead.
In Australia, sprigs of rosemary are worn on ANZAC Day and sometimes Remembrance Day to signify remembrance; the herb grows wild on the Gallipoli Peninsula, where many Australians died during World War I.

Several Shakespeare plays refer to the use of rosemary in burial or memorial rites. In Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Hamlet&quot;, Ophelia says, &quot;There&#x27;s rosemary, that&#x27;s for remembrance. Pray you, love, remember.&quot; It likewise appears in Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Winter&#x27;s Tale&quot; in Act 4 Scene 4, where Perdita talks about &quot;Rosemary and Rue&quot;. In Act 4 Scene 5 of &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot;, Friar Lawrence admonishes the Capulet household to &quot;stick your rosemary on this fair corse, and as the custom is, and in her best array, bear her to church.&quot; It is also said that &quot;In the language of flowers it means &#x27;fidelity in love.&#x27;&quot;

Rosemary is one of the four herbs mentioned in the refrain of the folk song &quot;Scarborough Fair.&quot;

In the Spanish fairy tale The Sprig of Rosemary, the heroine touches the hero with the titular sprig of rosemary in order to restore his magically lost memory.

Rosemary is very important in Danube Swabian culture being used for christenings, weddings, burials and festivals; for example, an apple with a sprig of rosemary in it is present at Kirchweih celebrations.

==See also==
* Four thieves vinegar
==References==
==External links==

* Rosemary List of Chemicals (Dr. Duke&#x27;s)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q102240169" start="40" end="48" title="Rosemary" label="rosemary"/>
<link wikidata="Q190489" start="76" end="85" title="evergreen" label="evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q53476" start="183" end="192" title="Lamiaceae" label="Lamiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q169480" start="210" end="216" title="Native plant" label="native"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="224" end="244" title="Mediterranean Region" label="Mediterranean region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426303" start="387" end="406" title="fibrous root system" label="fibrous root system"/>
<link wikidata="Q190489" start="429" end="438" title="evergreen" label="evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q739430" start="474" end="479" title="Tsuga" label="Tsuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="722" end="739" title="temperate climate" label="temperate climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q90595367" start="1178" end="1193" title="Salvia jordanii" label="Salvia jordanii"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="1283" end="1289" title="Iberia" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="1298" end="1305" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="1309" end="1315" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q157151" start="1431" end="1437" title="Salvia" label="Salvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q90595061" start="1499" end="1509" title="Rosmarinus" label="Rosmarinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040689" start="1657" end="1664" title="Synonym (taxonomy)" label="synonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="1756" end="1766" title="naturalist" label="naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="1791" end="1804" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18528590" start="1825" end="1839" title="Elizabeth Kent (writer)" label="Elizabeth Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1949" end="1954" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q169480" start="2073" end="2079" title="Native plant" label="native"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="2087" end="2107" title="Mediterranean Region" label="Mediterranean region"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="2179" end="2188" title="cuneiform" label="cuneiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="2220" end="2223" title="BCE" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="2295" end="2306" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258062" start="2411" end="2426" title="Roman conquest of Britain" label="invaded Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="2590" end="2601" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q229279" start="2831" end="2845" title="Philippa of Hainault" label="Queen Philippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q916305" start="2861" end="2886" title="Joan of Valois, Countess of Hainaut" label="Countess Joan of Hainault"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="3436" end="3452" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706851" start="3649" end="3658" title="xeriscape" label="xeriscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="3697" end="3718" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437791" start="3913" end="3920" title="topiary" label="topiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q889491" start="3954" end="3965" title="groundcover" label="groundcover"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="4263" end="4272" title="cultivars" label="cultivars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032739" start="5804" end="5831" title="Royal Horticultural Society" label="Royal Horticultural Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501416" start="5839" end="5860" title="Award of Garden Merit" label="Award of Garden Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2686542" start="5870" end="5878" title="Benenden" label="Benenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q15063189" start="5965" end="5977" title="Sissinghurst" label="Sissinghurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q745361" start="6355" end="6363" title="stuffing" label="stuffing"/>
<link wikidata="Q934309" start="6659" end="6680" title="Mediterranean cuisine" label="Mediterranean cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q378705" start="6702" end="6712" title="astringent" label="astringent"/>
<link wikidata="Q485537" start="6740" end="6745" title="odor" label="aroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q379932" start="6783" end="6793" title="Herbal tea" label="Herbal tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q131748" start="6882" end="6889" title="Mustard (condiment)" label="mustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086659" start="6933" end="6940" title="charred" label="charred"/>
<link wikidata="Q461696" start="6966" end="6974" title="barbecue" label="barbecue"/>
<link wikidata="Q216425" start="7039" end="7047" title="teaspoon" label="teaspoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138622" start="7079" end="7090" title="nutritional" label="nutritional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259977" start="7107" end="7114" title="extract" label="extract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689021" start="7145" end="7155" title="shelf life" label="shelf life"/>
<link wikidata="Q191756" start="7178" end="7185" title="omega 3" label="omega 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q859029" start="7215" end="7224" title="rancidity" label="rancidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041695" start="7293" end="7306" title="Hungary water" label="Hungary water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639139" start="7664" end="7677" title="phytochemical" label="phytochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q50380051" start="7690" end="7705" title="rosmarinic acid" label="rosmarinic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q181559" start="7707" end="7714" title="camphor" label="camphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q414116" start="7716" end="7728" title="caffeic acid" label="caffeic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q416260" start="7730" end="7742" title="ursolic acid" label="ursolic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q384111" start="7744" end="7758" title="betulinic acid" label="betulinic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q412827" start="7760" end="7773" title="carnosic acid" label="carnosic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q16634054" start="7779" end="7787" title="carnosol" label="carnosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q133948" start="7949" end="7960" title="antioxidant" label="antioxidant"/>
<link wikidata="Q207810" start="8000" end="8008" title="E number" label="E number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276095" start="8216" end="8237" title="androgenetic alopecia" label="androgenetic alopecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q480" start="8955" end="8966" title="Don Quixote" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q766739" start="9050" end="9067" title="fierabras" label="balm of fierabras"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="9093" end="9108" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q297776" start="9124" end="9144" title="Pedanius Dioscorides" label="Pedanius Dioscorides"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704131" start="9277" end="9294" title="De Materia Medica" label="De Materia Medica"/>
<link wikidata="Q295859" start="9594" end="9603" title="ANZAC Day" label="ANZAC Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q27631" start="9618" end="9633" title="Remembrance Day" label="Remembrance Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q192860" start="9685" end="9704" title="Gallipoli Peninsula" label="Gallipoli Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="9842" end="9860" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="9867" end="9873" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800888" start="9881" end="9888" title="Ophelia (character)" label="Ophelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q743194" start="10027" end="10057" title="The Winter&amp;#x27;s Tale" label="&amp;quot;Winter&amp;#x27;s Tale&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q83186" start="10158" end="10174" title="Romeo and Juliet" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053575" start="10532" end="10548" title="Scarborough Fair (ballad)" label="Scarborough Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766057" start="10583" end="10604" title="The Sprig of Rosemary" label="The Sprig of Rosemary"/>
<link wikidata="Q699958" start="10748" end="10762" title="Danube Swabians" label="Danube Swabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26260261" start="10900" end="10909" title="Kirchweih" label="Kirchweih"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327377" start="10940" end="10960" title="Four thieves vinegar" label="Four thieves vinegar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25486" wikidata="Q21895" url="?curid=25486" title="Rosales">
<text>Rosales (, ) are an order of flowering plants. Well-known members of Rosales include: roses, strawberries, blackberries and raspberries, apples and pears, plums, peaches and apricots, almonds, rowan and hawthorn, jujube, elms, banyans, figs, mulberries, breadfruit, nettles, hops, and cannabis.

Rosales contain about 7,700 species, distributed into nine families and about 260 genera. Their type family is the rose family, Rosaceae. The largest families are Rosaceae (91/4828) and Urticaceae (53/2625). 

==Taxonomy==
The order Rosales is strongly supported as monophyletic in phylogenetic analyses of DNA sequences, such as those carried out by members of the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group. In their APG III system of plant classification, they defined Rosales as consisting of the nine families:
* Cannabaceae (hemp family)
* Dirachmaceae
* Elaeagnaceae (oleaster/Russian olive family)
* Moraceae (mulberry family)
* Rhamnaceae (buckthorn family)
* Rosaceae (rose family)
* Ulmaceae (elm family)
* Urticaceae (nettle family)
In the older classification system of Dahlgren the Rosales were in the superorder Rosiflorae (also called Rosanae). In the obsolete Cronquist system, the order Rosales was many times polyphyletic. It consisted of the family Rosaceae and 23 other families that are now placed in various other orders. These families and their placement in the APG III system are:

* Alseuosmiaceae (Asterales)
* Anisophylleaceae (Cucurbitales)
* Brunelliaceae (Oxalidales)
* Bruniaceae (Bruniales)
* Byblidaceae (Lamiales)
* Cephalotaceae (Oxalidales)
* Chrysobalanaceae (Malpighiales)
* Columelliaceae (Bruniales)
* Connaraceae (Oxalidales)
* Crassulaceae (Saxifragales)
* Crossosomataceae (Crossosomatales)
* Cunoniaceae (Oxalidales)
* Davidsoniaceae (Cunoniaceae, Oxalidales)
* Dialypetalanthaceae (Rubiaceae, Gentianales)
* Eucryphiaceae (Cunoniaceae, Oxalidales)
* Greyiaceae (Melianthaceae, Geraniales)
* Grossulariaceae (Saxifragales)
* Hydrangeaceae (Cornales)
* Neuradaceae (Malvales)
* Pittosporaceae (Apiales)
* Rhabdodendraceae (Caryophyllales)
* Rosaceae 
* Saxifragaceae (Saxifragales)
* Surianaceae (Fabales)

==Phylogeny==
The relationships of Rosales families were resolved in a molecular phylogenetic study based on two nuclear genes and ten chloroplast genes:

The order Rosales is divided into three clades that have never been assigned a taxonomic rank. The basal clade consists of the family Rosaceae; another clade consists of four families, including Rhamnaceae; and the third clade consists of the four urticalean families.

The order is a sister to a clade consisting of Fagales and Cucurbitales. 
== Distribution ==
Different plants that fall under the order Rosales grow in many different parts of the world. They can be found in the mountains, the tropics and the arctic. Even though you can find a member of the order Rosales nearly anywhere, the specific families grow in different specific geographical locations. Wind-pollination is the way that the majority of the families that fall under the order Rosales (including Moraceae, Ulmaceae, and Urticaceae etc.) pollinate.

== Importance ==
Within the order Rosales is the family Rosaceae, which includes numerous species that are cultivated for their fruit, making this one of the most economically important families of plants. Fruit produced by members of this family include apples, pears, plums, peaches, cherries, almonds, strawberries, blackberries and raspberries. Many ornamental species of plant are also in the family Rosaceae, including the rose after which the family and order were named. The rose, considered a symbol of love in many cultures, is featured prominently in poetry and literature. Modern garden varieties of roses such as hybrid teas, floribunda, and grandifora, originated from complex hybrids of several separate wild species native to different regions of Eurasia.

The Moraceae also produce important fruits, such as mulberries, figs, jackfruits, and breadfruits, and the leaves of the mulberry provide food for the silkworms used in commercial silk production.

The wood from the black cherry (&quot;Prunus serotina&quot;) and sweet cherry (&quot;P. avium&quot;) is used to make high quality furniture due to its color and ability to be bent. The Cannabis plant has been highly prized for millennia for its hemp, which has numerous uses. Other varieties of &quot;Cannabis&quot; are grown as a drug.

Plants in the order Rosales were used in the traditional medicines of many cultures. Medical cannabis has been recognized for its pharmaceutical use. The latex of some species of fig trees contains the enzyme ficin, which is effective in killing roundworms that infect the intestinal tracts of animals.

== References ==
==External links==
* 
* Rosales At: Trees At: Angiosperm Phylogeny Website At: Missouri Botanical Garden Website
*Rosales – Plant Life Forms</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21895" start="0" end="7" title="Rosales" label="Rosales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="20" end="25" title="Order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="29" end="44" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q34687" start="86" end="90" title="rose" label="rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q13158" start="93" end="105" title="strawberry" label="strawberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q19842373" start="107" end="119" title="blackberry" label="blackberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13179" start="124" end="135" title="raspberry" label="raspberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="137" end="142" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q434" start="148" end="152" title="pear" label="pear"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372598" start="155" end="159" title="plum" label="plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189" start="162" end="167" title="peach" label="peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3733836" start="174" end="181" title="apricot" label="apricot"/>
<link wikidata="Q15545507" start="184" end="190" title="almond" label="almond"/>
<link wikidata="Q12646464" start="193" end="198" title="rowan" label="rowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q132557" start="203" end="211" title="Crataegus" label="hawthorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11181633" start="213" end="219" title="jujube" label="jujube"/>
<link wikidata="Q131113" start="221" end="224" title="elm" label="elm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5678886" start="227" end="233" title="banyan" label="banyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q59798" start="236" end="240" title="ficus" label="figs"/>
<link wikidata="Q44789" start="242" end="252" title="Morus (plant)" label="mulberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q14677" start="254" end="264" title="breadfruit" label="breadfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q121671" start="266" end="272" title="Urtica" label="nettle"/>
<link wikidata="Q104212" start="275" end="279" title="Humulus lupulus" label="hops"/>
<link wikidata="Q79817" start="285" end="293" title="cannabis" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="324" end="331" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="355" end="363" title="family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="378" end="384" title="genera" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="392" end="396" title="Type (biology)" label="type"/>
<link wikidata="Q46299" start="424" end="432" title="Rosaceae" label="Rosaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q46299" start="459" end="467" title="Rosaceae" label="Rosaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156332" start="482" end="492" title="Urticaceae" label="Urticaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170431" start="549" end="558" title="Resampling (statistics)" label="supported"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="562" end="574" title="monophyletic" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="578" end="590" title="phylogenetic" label="phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q863908" start="603" end="615" title="DNA sequence" label="DNA sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q539818" start="662" end="688" title="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group" label="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q156982" start="699" end="713" title="APG III system" label="APG III system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868368" start="717" end="737" title="History of plant systematics" label="plant classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121761" start="744" end="751" title="Circumscription (taxonomy)" label="defined"/>
<link wikidata="Q156338" start="798" end="809" title="Cannabaceae" label="Cannabaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="811" end="815" title="hemp" label="hemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q131667" start="826" end="838" title="Dirachmaceae" label="Dirachmaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156326" start="841" end="853" title="Elaeagnaceae" label="Elaeagnaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086016" start="855" end="863" title="oleaster" label="oleaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q157969" start="864" end="877" title="Russian olive" label="Russian olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q156579" start="888" end="896" title="Moraceae" label="Moraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q44789" start="898" end="906" title="mulberry" label="mulberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q156083" start="917" end="927" title="Rhamnaceae" label="Rhamnaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q79190" start="929" end="938" title="buckthorn" label="buckthorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q46299" start="949" end="957" title="Rosaceae" label="Rosaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q34687" start="959" end="963" title="rose" label="rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q156311" start="974" end="982" title="Ulmaceae" label="Ulmaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131113" start="984" end="987" title="elm" label="elm"/>
<link wikidata="Q156332" start="998" end="1008" title="Urticaceae" label="Urticaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q121671" start="1010" end="1016" title="Urtica" label="nettle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049579" start="1063" end="1071" title="Rolf Dahlgren" label="Dahlgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="1096" end="1106" title="superorder" label="superorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q213094" start="1157" end="1173" title="Cronquist system" label="Cronquist system"/>
<link wikidata="Q217743" start="1208" end="1220" title="polyphyletic" label="polyphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q156982" start="1367" end="1381" title="APG III system" label="APG III system"/>
<link wikidata="Q131963" start="1390" end="1404" title="Alseuosmiaceae" label="Alseuosmiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21730" start="1406" end="1415" title="Asterales" label="Asterales"/>
<link wikidata="Q131739" start="1419" end="1435" title="Anisophylleaceae" label="Anisophylleaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21875" start="1437" end="1449" title="Cucurbitales" label="Cucurbitales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049919" start="1453" end="1466" title="Brunelliaceae" label="Brunelliaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21891" start="1468" end="1478" title="Oxalidales" label="Oxalidales"/>
<link wikidata="Q131988" start="1482" end="1492" title="Bruniaceae" label="Bruniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132694" start="1494" end="1503" title="Bruniales" label="Bruniales"/>
<link wikidata="Q840423" start="1507" end="1518" title="Byblidaceae" label="Byblidaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21742" start="1520" end="1528" title="Lamiales" label="Lamiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181577" start="1532" end="1545" title="Cephalotaceae" label="Cephalotaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21891" start="1547" end="1557" title="Oxalidales" label="Oxalidales"/>
<link wikidata="Q614604" start="1561" end="1577" title="Chrysobalanaceae" label="Chrysobalanaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21887" start="1579" end="1591" title="Malpighiales" label="Malpighiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q131978" start="1595" end="1609" title="Columelliaceae" label="Columelliaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131661" start="1624" end="1635" title="Connaraceae" label="Connaraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21891" start="1637" end="1647" title="Oxalidales" label="Oxalidales"/>
<link wikidata="Q155938" start="1651" end="1663" title="Crassulaceae" label="Crassulaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21855" start="1665" end="1677" title="Saxifragales" label="Saxifragales"/>
<link wikidata="Q134660" start="1681" end="1697" title="Crossosomataceae" label="Crossosomataceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21860" start="1699" end="1714" title="Crossosomatales" label="Crossosomatales"/>
<link wikidata="Q131764" start="1718" end="1729" title="Cunoniaceae" label="Cunoniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21891" start="1731" end="1741" title="Oxalidales" label="Oxalidales"/>
<link wikidata="Q131764" start="1761" end="1772" title="Cunoniaceae" label="Cunoniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21891" start="1774" end="1784" title="Oxalidales" label="Oxalidales"/>
<link wikidata="Q156569" start="1809" end="1818" title="Rubiaceae" label="Rubiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21754" start="1820" end="1831" title="Gentianales" label="Gentianales"/>
<link wikidata="Q131764" start="1850" end="1861" title="Cunoniaceae" label="Cunoniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21891" start="1863" end="1873" title="Oxalidales" label="Oxalidales"/>
<link wikidata="Q134414" start="1889" end="1902" title="Melianthaceae" label="Melianthaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q14272" start="1904" end="1914" title="Geraniales" label="Geraniales"/>
<link wikidata="Q22691" start="1918" end="1933" title="Grossulariaceae" label="Grossulariaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21855" start="1935" end="1947" title="Saxifragales" label="Saxifragales"/>
<link wikidata="Q156609" start="1951" end="1964" title="Hydrangeaceae" label="Hydrangeaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21769" start="1966" end="1974" title="Cornales" label="Cornales"/>
<link wikidata="Q132615" start="1978" end="1989" title="Neuradaceae" label="Neuradaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21908" start="1991" end="1999" title="Malvales" label="Malvales"/>
<link wikidata="Q161261" start="2003" end="2017" title="Pittosporaceae" label="Pittosporaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21138" start="2019" end="2026" title="Apiales" label="Apiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q132955" start="2030" end="2046" title="Rhabdodendraceae" label="Rhabdodendraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21808" start="2048" end="2062" title="Caryophyllales" label="Caryophyllales"/>
<link wikidata="Q46299" start="2066" end="2074" title="Rosaceae" label="Rosaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543932" start="2078" end="2091" title="Saxifragaceae" label="Saxifragaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21855" start="2093" end="2105" title="Saxifragales" label="Saxifragales"/>
<link wikidata="Q131362" start="2109" end="2120" title="Surianaceae" label="Surianaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21878" start="2122" end="2129" title="Fabales" label="Fabales"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="2150" end="2163" title="phylogenetic tree" label="relationships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="2203" end="2225" title="molecular phylogenetic" label="molecular phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42240" start="2226" end="2231" title="Research" label="study"/>
<link wikidata="Q40260" start="2245" end="2252" title="Cell nucleus" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="2253" end="2257" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q47263" start="2267" end="2278" title="chloroplast" label="chloroplast"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="2327" end="2332" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="2366" end="2380" title="taxonomic rank" label="taxonomic rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q379061" start="2386" end="2391" title="Basal (phylogenetics)" label="basal"/>
<link wikidata="Q156083" start="2482" end="2492" title="Rhamnaceae" label="Rhamnaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q670109" start="2535" end="2545" title="Urticales" label="urticalean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="2572" end="2578" title="sister taxon" label="sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="2584" end="2589" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q21881" start="2604" end="2611" title="Fagales" label="Fagales"/>
<link wikidata="Q21875" start="2616" end="2628" title="Cucurbitales" label="Cucurbitales"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="2765" end="2778" title="Mountain" label="the mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="2780" end="2791" title="Tropics" label="the tropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="2796" end="2807" title="Arctic" label="the arctic."/>
<link wikidata="Q1071" start="2929" end="2951" title="Geography" label="geographical locations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047706" start="2953" end="2969" title="Anemophily" label="Wind-pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q156579" start="3060" end="3068" title="Moraceae" label="Moraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156311" start="3070" end="3078" title="Ulmaceae" label="Ulmaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156332" start="3084" end="3094" title="Urticaceae" label="Urticaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q46299" start="3169" end="3177" title="Rosaceae" label="Rosaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q34687" start="3596" end="3600" title="rose" label="rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="3686" end="3696" title="literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q156579" start="3890" end="3898" title="Moraceae" label="Moraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q44789" start="3938" end="3948" title="mulberries" label="mulberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q36146" start="3950" end="3954" title="figs" label="figs"/>
<link wikidata="Q45757" start="3956" end="3965" title="jackfruit" label="jackfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q14677" start="3972" end="3983" title="breadfruits" label="breadfruits"/>
<link wikidata="Q158987" start="4122" end="4137" title="Prunus serotina" label="Prunus serotina"/>
<link wikidata="Q165137" start="4169" end="4177" title="Prunus avium" label="P. avium"/>
<link wikidata="Q79817" start="4269" end="4277" title="Cannabis" label="Cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="4329" end="4333" title="hemp" label="hemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="4404" end="4419" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="grown as a drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="4479" end="4488" title="medication" label="medicines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033379" start="4507" end="4523" title="Medical cannabis" label="Medical cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071401" start="4631" end="4636" title="ficin" label="ficin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25488" wikidata="Q1410600" url="?curid=25488" title="Rebuttal">
<text>In law, rebuttal is a form of evidence that is presented to contradict or nullify other evidence that has been presented by an adverse party. By analogy the same term is used in politics and public affairs to refer to the informal process by which statements, designed to refute or negate specific arguments (see Counterclaim) put forward by opponents, are deployed in the media.

In law, special rules apply to rebuttal; rebuttal evidence or rebuttal witnesses must be confined solely to the subject matter of the evidence rebutted. New evidence on other subjects may not be brought in rebuttal. However, rebuttal is one of the few vehicles whereby a party may introduce surprise evidence or witnesses. The basic process is as follows: both sides of a controversy are obliged to declare in advance of trial what witnesses they plan to call, and what each witness is expected to testify to. When either a plaintiff (or prosecutor) or defendant brings direct evidence or testimony which was not anticipated, the other side may be granted a specific opportunity to rebut it. In rebuttal, the rebutting party may generally bring witnesses and evidence which were never before declared, so long as they serve to rebut the prior evidence.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="3" end="6" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410600" start="8" end="16" title="Rebuttal" label="rebuttal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176763" start="30" end="38" title="evidence (law)" label="evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="178" end="186" title="politics" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="191" end="205" title="Public administration" label="public affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190815" start="313" end="325" title="Counterclaim" label="Counterclaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q196939" start="452" end="459" title="witness" label="witness"/>
<link wikidata="Q468489" start="905" end="914" title="plaintiff" label="plaintiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q600751" start="919" end="929" title="prosecutor" label="prosecutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q159394" start="934" end="943" title="defendant" label="defendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196258" start="970" end="979" title="testimony" label="testimony"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25489" wikidata="Q2904075" url="?curid=25489" title="Res ipsa loquitur">
<text>Res ipsa loquitur (Latin: &quot;the thing speaks for itself&quot;) is a doctrine in common law and Roman-Dutch law jurisdictions under which a court can infer negligence from the very nature of an accident or injury in the absence of direct evidence on how any defendant behaved in the context of tort litigation. 

The crux of &quot;res ipsa loquitur&quot; is circumstantial inference. Although specific criteria differ by jurisdiction, an action typically must satisfy the following elements of negligence: the existence of a duty of care, breach of appropriate standard of care, causation, and injury. In &quot;res ipsa loquitur&quot;, the existence of the first three elements is inferred from the existence of injury that does not ordinarily occur without negligence.

==History==
The term comes from Latin and is literally translated &quot;the thing itself speaks&quot;, but the sense is well conveyed in the more common translation, &quot;the thing speaks for itself&quot;. The earliest known use of the phrase was by Cicero in his defense speech &quot;Pro Milone&quot;. The circumstances of the genesis of the phrase and application by Cicero in Roman legal trials has led to questions whether it reflects on the quality of &quot;res ipsa loquitur&quot; as a legal doctrine subsequent to 52 BC, some 1915 years before the English case &quot;Byrne v Boadle&quot; and the question whether Charles Edward Pollock might have taken direct inspiration from Cicero&#x27;s application of the maxim in writing his judgment in that case.

==Elements==

#The injury is of the kind that does not ordinarily occur without negligence or is uncommon in the course and nature of said act.
#The injury is caused by an agency or instrumentality within the exclusive control of the defendant.
#The injury-causing accident is not by any voluntary action or contribution on the part of the plaintiff.
#The defendant&#x27;s non-negligent explanation does not completely explain plaintiff&#x27;s injury.

The first element may be satisfied in one of three ways:

The second element is discussed further in the section below. The third element requires the absence of contributory negligence from the plaintiff. The fourth element emphasizes that defendant may defeat a &quot;res ipsa loquitur&quot; claim by producing evidence of a non-negligent scenario that would completely explain plaintiff&#x27;s injury and negate all possible inferences that negligence could have occurred.

==Exclusive control requirement==
The common law traditionally required &quot;the instrumentality or agent which caused the accident was under the exclusive control of the defendant&quot;. See e.g., &quot;Eaton v. Eaton&quot;, 575 A2d 858 (NJ 1990). However, in the United States the second and the third versions of the Restatement of Torts eliminated the strict requirement because it can be difficult to prove &quot;exclusive control&quot;. Accordingly, the element has largely given way in modern American cases to a less rigid formulation: the evidence must eliminate, to a sufficient degree, other responsible causes (including the conduct of the plaintiff and third parties). For example, in New York State, the defendant&#x27;s exclusivity of control must be such that the likelihood of injury was more likely than not, the result of the defendant&#x27;s negligence. The likelihood of other possibilities does not need to be eliminated altogether but must be so reduced that the greater probability lies with the defendant.

Here is a fictitious example:

*John Doe is injured when an elevator he has entered plunges several floors and stops abruptly.
*Jane&#x27;s Corporation built and is responsible for maintaining the elevator.
*John sues Jane. Jane claims that his complaint should be dismissed because he has never proved or even offered a theory as to why the elevator functioned incorrectly. Therefore, she argues that there is no evidence that they were at fault.
*The court holds that John does not have to prove anything beyond the fall itself.
**The elevator evidently malfunctioned (it was not intended to fall, and that is not a proper function of a correctly-functioning elevator).
**Jane was responsible for the elevator in every respect.
** Therefore, Jane&#x27;s Corporation is responsible for the fall.
*The thing speaks for itself: no further explanation is needed to establish the &quot;prima facie&quot; case.

In some cases, a closed group of people may be held in breach of a duty of care under the rule of &quot;res ipsa loquitur&quot;. In &quot;Ybarra v. Spangard&quot;, a patient undergoing surgery experienced back complications as a result of the surgery, but it could not be determined the specific member of the surgical team who had breached the duty so it was held that they had all breached, as it was certain that at least one of them was the only person who was in exclusive control of the instrumentality of harm.

In jurisdictions that employ this less rigid formulation of exclusive control, the element subsumes the element that the plaintiff did not contribute to his injury. In modern case law, contributory negligence is compared to the injury caused by the other. For example, if the negligence of the other is 95% of the cause of the plaintiff&#x27;s injury, and the plaintiff is 5% responsible, the plaintiff&#x27;s slight fault cannot negate the negligence of the other. The new type of split liability is commonly called &quot;comparative negligence&quot;.

==Typical in medical malpractice==

&quot;Res ipsa loquitur&quot; often arises in the &quot;scalpel left behind&quot; variety of case. For example, a person goes to a doctor with abdominal pains after having his appendix removed. X-rays show the patient has a metal object the size and shape of a scalpel in his abdomen. It requires no further explanation to show the surgeon who removed the appendix was negligent, as there is no legitimate reason for a doctor to leave a scalpel in a body at the end of an appendectomy.

==Examples by jurisdictions==

=== Canada ===
In Canada the doctrine of &quot;res ipsa loquitur&quot; has been largely overturned by the Supreme Court. In case of &quot;Fontaine v. British Columbia (Official Administrator)&quot; the Court rejected the use of &quot;res ipsa loquitur&quot; and instead proposed the rule that once the plaintiff has proven that the harm was under exclusive control of the defendant and that they were not contributorily negligent a tactical burden is placed on the defendant in which the judge has the discretion to infer negligence unless the defendant can produce evidence to the contrary.

=== Hong Kong ===
Hong Kong is one of the common law jurisdictions that use the doctrine of &quot;res ipsa loquitur&quot;.

Some lawyers prefer to avoid the expression &quot;res ipsa loquitur&quot; (for example, Hobhouse LJ in &quot;Radcliff v. Plymouth&quot;). But other lawyers (and judges too) still find the expression a convenient one (for example, see the judgement of Mr Justice Bokhary, a Permanent Judge of the Court of Final Appeal of Hong Kong, in &quot;Sanfield Building Contractors Ltd v. Li Kai Cheong&quot;).

The expression &quot;res ipsa loquitur&quot; is not a doctrine but a &quot;mode of inferential reasoning&quot; and applies only to accidents of &quot;unknown cause&quot;. &quot;Res ipsa loquitur&quot; comes into play where an accident of unknown cause is one that would not normally happen without negligence on the part of the defendant in control of the object or activity which injured the plaintiff or damaged his property. In such a situation the court is able to infer negligence on the defendant&#x27;s part unless he offers an acceptable explanation consistent with his having taken reasonable care.

=== Ireland===

The Irish courts have applied the doctrine. In &quot;Hanrahan v. Merck, Sharp &amp; Dohme (Ireland) Ltd.&quot; [1988] ILRM 629 the supreme court held that in cases of nuisance the burden of proof could be shifted to the defendant where it would be palpably unfair for the plaintiff to have to prove something beyond their reach. The facts concerned poisoning of farm animals downwind of a chemical plant.

In &quot;Rothwell v. The Motor Insurers Bureau of Ireland&quot; [2003] 1 IR 268 the supreme court held the burden of proof would shift when the knowledge is exclusive to the defendant, but also where it is &quot;especially within the range&quot; of the defendant&#x27;s capacity to probe the facts.

===South Africa===
In South African law (which is modelled on Roman Dutch law), there is no doctrine of &quot;res ipsa loquitur&quot;, although the phrase is used regularly to mean the &quot;facts speak for themselves&quot;. &quot;Res ipsa loquitur&quot; does not shift any burden of proof or onus from one party to the other. The phrase is merely a handy phrase used by lawyers.

===United Kingdom===
The doctrine exists in both English law and Scots law.

====England and Wales====
In English tort law, the effect of &quot;res ipsa loquitur&quot; is a strong inference in favour of the claimant that negligence has taken place. It does not however fully reverse the burden of proof (&quot;Ng Chun Pui v. Li Chuen Tat&quot;, 1988).

The requirement of control is important in English law. This requirement was not satisfied in &quot;Easson v. LNE Ry&quot; [1944] 2 KB 421, where a small child fell off a train several miles after it had left the station. It was considered that the door of the train was not sufficiently under control of the railway company after the train started moving and could have been opened by somebody for whom the company was not responsible. This case was distinguished from the earlier &quot;Gee v. Metropolitan Ry&quot; where the plaintiff fell from the train immediately after it left the station, when the door through which he fell could still be considered to be fully controlled by the railway company.

The requirement that the exact cause of the accident must be unknown is illustrated by the case of &quot;Barkway v. South Wales Transport&quot;. In this case a bus veered across the road and it was known that the accident was caused by a flat tyre. In this case, the plaintiff could not be assisted by &quot;res ipsa loquitur&quot; and had to go on to prove that the flat tyre was caused by the transport company&#x27;s negligence.

====Scotland====
The doctrine exists in the Scots law of &quot;delict&quot;. The leading case is that of &quot;Scott v London &amp; Catherine Dock Co&quot;. This case laid down 3 requirements for the doctrine to apply:
#There must be reasonable evidence of negligence
#The circumstances must be under the direct control of the defender or his servants
#The accident must be of such a type that would not occur without negligence.

In &quot;Scott&quot;, the court held that sacks of sugar do not fall out of warehouses and crush passers-by without somebody having been negligent along the way, so the plaintiff did not need to show how it happened.

Recent examples in Scotland are &quot;McDyer v Celtic Football Club&quot; and &quot;McQueen v The Glasgow Garden Festival 1988 Ltd&quot;.

=== United States ===
Under United States common law, &quot;res ipsa loquitur&quot; has the following requirements:
#The event does not normally occur unless someone has acted negligently;
#The evidence rules out the possibility that the actions of the plaintiff or a third party caused the injury; and
#The type of negligence in question falls within the scope of the defendant&#x27;s duty to the plaintiff.

Most American courts recognize &quot;res ipsa loquitur&quot;. The Restatement (Second) of Torts, § 328D describes a two-step process for establishing &quot;res ipsa loquitur&quot;. The first step is whether the accident is the kind usually caused by negligence, and the second is whether or not the defendant had exclusive control over the instrumentality that caused the accident. If found, &quot;res ipsa loquitur&quot; creates an inference of negligence, although in most cases it does not necessarily result in a directed verdict. The Restatement (Third) of Torts, § 17, adopts a similar test, although it eschews the exclusive control element.

The doctrine was not initially welcome in medical malpractice cases. In &quot;Gray v. Wright&quot;, a seven-inch hemostat was left in Mrs. Gray during gallbladder surgery in June 1947, and despite her chronic complaints about stomach pain over the years, the device was not found until an X-ray in March 1953, when it was removed. Her $12,000 award was reversed by the Supreme Court of West Virginia because she was outside the statute of limitations when she filed and could not prove that the doctor concealed knowledge of his error. This &quot;guilty knowledge&quot; requirement disappeared over the years, and the &quot;discovery rule&quot; by which statutes of limitation run from the date of discovery of the wrongdoing rather than the date of the occurrence has become the rule in most states.

Forty years later, leaving a medical device in a patient was medical malpractice, provable without expert testimony, in almost every jurisdiction. Virginia has limited the rule. The Virginia Supreme Court stated in 1996: &quot;Almost 60 years ago, this Court, discussing res ipsa loquitur, said: &#x27;In Virginia the doctrine, if not entirely abolished, has been limited and restricted to a very material extent.&#x27; &quot;City of Richmond v. Hood Rubber Products Co.&quot;, 168 Va. 11, 17, 190 S.E. 95, 98 (1937). ... It may be utilized only when the circumstances of the incident, without further proof, are such that, in the ordinary course of events, the incident could not have happened except on the theory of negligence.&quot;

A contention of &quot;res ipsa loquitur&quot; commonly is made in cases of commercial airplane accidents. It was part of the commentary in a train collision in California in 2008: &quot;If two trains are in the same place at the same time, somebody&#x27;s made a terrible mistake.&quot;

In some states, the doctrine of &quot;res ipsa loquitur&quot; is also used as a method of proving the intent or &quot;mens rea&quot; element of the inchoate crime of attempt. Under the Model Penal Code, &quot;the behavior in question is thought to corroborate the defendant&#x27;s criminal purpose&quot;, for example:
====Criticism====
Some US tort scholars have criticized the doctrine as an unnecessarily cumbersome way to state the simple proposition that negligence may be proved by circumstantial evidence. In their view, the doctrine does not promote clarity in courts&#x27; reasoning.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="84" end="94" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395172" start="99" end="114" title="Roman-Dutch law" label="Roman-Dutch law"/>
<link wikidata="Q159394" start="261" end="270" title="defendant" label="defendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q158970" start="297" end="301" title="tort" label="tort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904075" start="361" end="385" title="Res ipsa loquitur" label="circumstantial inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q160070" start="497" end="507" title="negligence" label="negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144694" start="528" end="540" title="duty of care" label="duty of care"/>
<link wikidata="Q87248" start="806" end="811" title="List of Latin phrases" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="1025" end="1031" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q656577" start="1060" end="1070" title="Pro Milone" label="Pro Milone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="1330" end="1337" title="English law" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004262" start="1349" end="1363" title="Byrne v Boadle" label="Byrne v Boadle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666387" start="1395" end="1417" title="Charles Edward Pollock" label="Charles Edward Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q841917" start="2788" end="2808" title="Restatement of Torts" label="Restatement of Torts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115028" start="3134" end="3147" title="third party beneficiary" label="third parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="3166" end="3180" title="New York State" label="New York State"/>
<link wikidata="Q302057" start="3532" end="3540" title="John Doe" label="John Doe"/>
<link wikidata="Q132911" start="3560" end="3568" title="elevator" label="elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q837138" start="4383" end="4394" title="prima facie" label="prima facie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050689" start="4546" end="4564" title="Ybarra v. Spangard" label="Ybarra v. Spangard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11022655" start="5102" end="5110" title="case law" label="case law"/>
<link wikidata="Q847212" start="5112" end="5135" title="contributory negligence" label="contributory negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911357" start="5450" end="5472" title="comparative negligence" label="comparative negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q207172" start="5573" end="5580" title="scalpel" label="scalpel"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="6141" end="6154" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012745" start="6467" end="6482" title="Legal burden of proof" label="tactical burden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386822" start="7003" end="7021" title="Kemal Bokhary" label="Mr Justice Bokhary"/>
<link wikidata="Q837636" start="7048" end="7082" title="Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal" label="Court of Final Appeal of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q117850" start="7207" end="7215" title="doctrine" label="doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q160070" start="7451" end="7461" title="negligence" label="negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q159394" start="7481" end="7490" title="defendant" label="defendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q468489" start="7546" end="7555" title="plaintiff" label="plaintiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q41487" start="7605" end="7610" title="court" label="court"/>
<link wikidata="Q160070" start="7628" end="7638" title="negligence" label="negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q159394" start="7646" end="7655" title="defendant" label="defendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144694" start="7744" end="7759" title="reasonable care" label="reasonable care"/>
<link wikidata="Q376811" start="8506" end="8523" title="South African law" label="South African law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="8914" end="8925" title="English law" label="English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="8930" end="8939" title="Scots law" label="Scots law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579315" start="8971" end="8987" title="English tort law" label="English tort law"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012745" start="9152" end="9167" title="legal burden of proof" label="burden of proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184244" start="10420" end="10426" title="delict" label="delict"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316074" start="11621" end="11650" title="Restatement of Torts, Second" label="Restatement (Second) of Torts"/>
<link wikidata="Q707806" start="12318" end="12326" title="hemostat" label="hemostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="13154" end="13162" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="13905" end="13915" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q677393" start="14135" end="14141" title="intent (law)" label="intent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048403" start="14151" end="14159" title="mens rea" label="mens rea"/>
<link wikidata="Q578241" start="14181" end="14195" title="inchoate crime" label="inchoate crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q29142" start="14199" end="14206" title="attempt" label="attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941807" start="14218" end="14234" title="Model Penal Code" label="Model Penal Code"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25491" wikidata="Q751921" url="?curid=25491" title="The Rocky Horror Picture Show">
<text>The Rocky Horror Picture Show is a 1975 independent musical comedy horror film produced by Lou Adler and Michael White, directed by Jim Sharman, and distributed by 20th Century Fox. The screenplay was written by Sharman and Richard O&#x27;Brien, who also played the supporting role Riff Raff. The film is based on the 1973 musical stage production &quot;The Rocky Horror Show&quot;, with music, book, and lyrics by O&#x27;Brien. The production is a tribute to the science fiction and horror B movies of the 1930s through to the early 1960s. The film stars Tim Curry in his debut, Susan Sarandon, and Barry Bostwick. The film is narrated by Charles Gray, with cast members from the original Royal Court Theatre, Roxy Theatre, and Belasco Theatre productions, including Nell Campbell and Patricia Quinn.

The story centres on a young engaged couple whose car breaks down in the rain near a castle, where they search for help. The castle is occupied by strangers in elaborate costumes holding a party. They then meet the head of the house, Dr. Frank-N-Furter, an apparently mad scientist and alien transvestite from the planet Transsexual in the galaxy of Transylvania, who creates a living muscle man named Rocky.

The film was shot in the United Kingdom at Bray Studios and on location at an old country estate named Oakley Court, best known for its earlier use by Hammer Film Productions. A number of props and set pieces were reused from the Hammer horror films. Although the film is both a parody of and tribute to many kitsch science fiction and horror films, costume designer Sue Blane conducted no research for her designs. Blane has claimed that her creations for the film directly affected the development of punk rock fashion trends, such as torn fishnet stockings and colourfully dyed hair.

Initial reception was extremely negative, but it soon became a hit as a midnight movie, when audiences began participating with the film at the Waverly Theater in New York City in 1976. Audience members returned to the cinemas frequently and talked back to the screen and began dressing as the characters, spawning similar performance groups across the United States. At almost the same time, fans in costume began performing alongside the film. This &quot;shadow cast&quot; mimed the actions on screen, above and behind them, while lip-synching their characters&#x27; lines.

Still in limited release in 2025, some years after its premiere, it is the longest-running theatrical release in film history. In many cities, live amateur shadow-casts act out the film as it is being shown and heavily draw upon a tradition of audience participation. The film is most often shown close to Halloween. Today, the film has a large international cult following and has been considered by many as one of the greatest musical films of all time. In 2005, it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.&quot;

==Plot==
The film begins with a pair of floating disembodied lips welcoming the audience to a science fiction double feature (&quot;Science Fiction/Double Feature&quot;). Throughout the film, a criminologist from an unspecified point in the future narrates and provides commentary on the events.

Following the wedding of their friends, a naïve young couple, Brad Majors and Janet Weiss, get engaged and decide to celebrate with their high school science teacher Dr. Scott, who taught the class where they first met (&quot;Dammit Janet&quot;). En route to Scott&#x27;s house on a dark and rainy night, they get lost and suffer a flat tyre. Seeking a telephone to call for help, the couple walks to a nearby castle (&quot;Over at the Frankenstein Place&quot;) where a party is being held. They are accepted in by the strangely dressed inhabitants, led by the butler Riff Raff, the maid Magenta, and a groupie named Columbia, who dance to &quot;The Time Warp&quot;. Dr. Frank-N-Furter, a transvestite mad scientist, introduces himself and invites them to stay for the night (&quot;Sweet Transvestite&quot;).

With the help of Riff Raff, Frank brings to life a tall, muscular, handsome blond man named Rocky (&quot;The Sword of Damocles&quot;). As Frank vows he can improve Rocky into an ideal man in a week (&quot;I Can Make You a Man&quot;), Eddie, a motorcyclist with a bandaged head, breaks out of a deep freeze (&quot;Hot Patootie – Bless My Soul&quot;). Frank kills Eddie with an ice axe, justifying it as a &quot;mercy killing&quot;. Rocky and Frank depart for the bridal suite (&quot;I Can Make You a Man (Reprise)&quot;).

Brad and Janet are shown to separate bedrooms, where each is visited and seduced by Frank. Meanwhile, Riff Raff and Magenta torment Rocky, who flees the suite. Janet, having learned of Brad&#x27;s dalliance with Frank, discovers Rocky cowering in his birth tank. While tending to his wounds, Janet seduces Rocky as Magenta and Columbia watch from their bedroom monitor (&quot;Touch-a, Touch-a, Touch-a, Touch Me&quot;).

Dr. Scott, now a government investigator of UFOs, comes to the castle in search of his nephew Eddie, who sent him a letter implying part of his brain was removed by aliens. Everyone discovers Janet and Rocky together, enraging Frank. Magenta summons everyone to an uncomfortable dinner, which they soon realise has been prepared from Eddie&#x27;s mutilated remains (&quot;Eddie&quot;). In the chaos, Janet runs screaming into Rocky&#x27;s arms, provoking a jealous Frank to chase her through the halls to the lab, where he uses his Medusa Transducer to turn Dr. Scott, Brad, Janet, Rocky, and Columbia into nude statues (&quot;Planet Schmanet Janet/Wise Up Janet Weiss&quot;/&quot;Planet Hotdog&quot;).

After dressing the statues in cabaret costumes, Frank &quot;unfreezes&quot; them and leads them in a live cabaret floor show, complete with an RKO tower and a swimming pool (&quot;Rose Tint My World&quot;/&quot;Don&#x27;t Dream It, Be It&quot;/&quot;Wild and Untamed Thing&quot;). Riff Raff and Magenta interrupt and announce that due to Frank&#x27;s extravagance, they are declaring mutiny and returning to their home planet of Transsexual, Transylvania. Frank makes a desperate final plea (&quot;I&#x27;m Going Home&quot;), but is ignored as Riff Raff kills both him and Columbia with a laser. An enraged Rocky climbs the tower with Frank&#x27;s body, and, after several shots from the laser, plunges to his death. The castle lifts off into space, and Brad, Janet, and Dr. Scott are left crawling in the smog and dirt as the criminologist concludes that the human race is equivalent to insects crawling on the planet&#x27;s surface: &quot;lost in time, and lost in space ... and meaning&quot; (&quot;Super Heroes&quot;).

==Cast==

Jeremy Newson and Hilary Labow play Brad and Janet&#x27;s newlywed friends Ralph and Betty Hapschatt. The guests at both the Hapschatt wedding and Frank&#x27;s convention consist of Perry Bedden, Christopher Biggins, Gaye Brown, Ishaq Bux, Stephen Calcutt, Hugh Cecil, Imogen Claire, Tony Cowan, Sadie Corré, Fran Fullenwider, Lindsay Ingram, Peggy Ledger, Annabel Leventon, Anthony Milner, Pamela Obermeyer, Tony Then, Kimi Wong, and Henry Woolf, as well as an uncredited Rufus Collins.

==Production==

===Concept and development===
Richard O&#x27;Brien was living as an unemployed actor in London during the early 1970s. He wrote most of &quot;The Rocky Horror Show&quot; during one winter just to occupy himself. Since his youth, O&#x27;Brien had loved science fiction and B horror movies. He wanted to combine elements of the unintentional humour of B horror movies, portentous dialogue of schlock-horror, Steve Reeves muscle flicks, and fifties rock and roll into his musical. O&#x27;Brien conceived and wrote the play set against the backdrop of the glam era that had manifested itself in British popular culture in the 1970s. Allowing his concept to come into being, O&#x27;Brien states &quot;glam rock allowed me to be myself more&quot;.

O&#x27;Brien showed a portion of the unfinished script to Australian director Jim Sharman, who decided to direct it at the small experimental space Upstairs at the Royal Court Theatre in Sloane Square, Chelsea, London, which was used as a project space for new work. O&#x27;Brien had appeared briefly in a stage production of Andrew Lloyd Webber&#x27;s &quot;Jesus Christ Superstar&quot;, directed by Sharman, and the two also worked together in Sam Shepard&#x27;s &quot;The Unseen Hand&quot;. Sharman would bring in production designer Brian Thomson. The original creative team was then rounded out by costume designer Sue Blane, musical director Richard Hartley, and stage producer Michael White, who was brought in to produce. As the musical went into rehearsal, the working title, &quot;They Came from Denton High&quot;, was changed just before previews at the suggestion of Sharman to &quot;The Rocky Horror Show&quot;.

Having premiered in the small 60-seat Royal Court Theatre, it quickly moved to larger venues in London, transferring to the 230-seat Chelsea Classic Cinema on King&#x27;s Road on 14 August 1973, before finding a quasi-permanent home at the 500-seat King&#x27;s Road Theatre from 3 November that year, running for six years. The musical made its U.S. debut in Los Angeles in 1974 before playing in New York City as well as other cities. Producer and Ode Records owner Lou Adler attended the London production in the winter of 1973, escorted by friend Britt Ekland. He immediately decided to purchase the U.S. theatrical rights. His production would be staged at his Roxy Theatre in L.A. In 1975, &quot;The Rocky Horror Show&quot; premiered on Broadway at the 1,000-seat Belasco Theatre.

===Filming and locations===
Set in the fictional town of Denton, the film was shot at Bray Studios and Oakley Court, a country house near Maidenhead, Berkshire, England, and at Elstree Studios for post-production, from 21 October to 19 December 1974. Oakley Court, built in 1857 in the Victorian Gothic style, is known for a number of Hammer films. Much of the location shooting took place there, although at the time the manor was not in good condition. Most of the cast were from the original London stage production, including Tim Curry, who had decided that Dr Frank N. Furter should speak like the Queen of the United Kingdom, extravagantly posh. Fox insisted on casting the two characters of Brad and Janet with American actors, Barry Bostwick and Susan Sarandon. Filming took place during autumn, which made conditions worse. During filming, Sarandon fell ill with pneumonia. Filming of the laboratory scene and the title character&#x27;s creation occurred on 30 October 1974.

The film is both a parody and tribute to many of the science fiction and horror movies from the 1930s up to the 1970s. The film production retains many aspects from the stage version, such as production design and music, but adds new scenes not featured in the original stage play. The film&#x27;s plot, setting, and style echo those of the Hammer horror films, which had their own instantly recognisable style (just as Universal Studios&#x27; horror films did). The originally proposed opening sequence was to contain clips of various films mentioned in the lyrics, as well as the first few sequences shot in black and white, but this was deemed too expensive and scrapped.

===Costumes, make-up, and props===
In the stage productions, actors generally did their own make-up; however, for the film, the producers chose Pierre La Roche, who had previously been a make-up artist for Mick Jagger and David Bowie, to redesign the make-up for each character. Production stills were taken by rock photographer Mick Rock, who has published a number of books from his work. In &quot;Rocky Horror: From Concept to Cult&quot;, designer Sue Blane discusses the &quot;Rocky Horror&quot; costumes&#x27; influence on punk music style, opining &quot;[It was a] big part of the build-up [to punk].&quot; She states that ripped fishnet stockings, glitter, and coloured hair were directly attributable to &quot;Rocky Horror&quot;.

Some of the costumes from the film had been originally used in the stage production. Props and set pieces were reused from old Hammer Horror productions and others. The tank and dummy used for Rocky&#x27;s birth originally appeared in &quot;The Revenge of Frankenstein&quot; (1958). These references to earlier productions, in addition to cutting costs, enhanced the cult status of the film.

Costume designer Sue Blane was not keen on working for the film, until she became aware that Curry, an old friend, was committed to the project. Curry and Blane had worked together in Glasgow&#x27;s Citizens Theatre in a production of &quot;The Maids&quot;, for which Curry had worn a woman&#x27;s corset. Blane arranged for the theatre to loan her the corset from the other production for &quot;Rocky Horror&quot;. Blane admits that she did not conduct research for her designing, had never seen a science fiction film, and is acutely aware that her costumes for Brad and Janet may have been generalisations.

The budget for the film was US$1,600,000, far more than the stage production budget, but having to double up on costumes for the film production was expensive. For filming, corsets for the finale had to be doubled for the pool scene, with one version drying while the other was worn on set. While many of the costumes are exact replicas from the stage productions, other costumes were new to filming, such as Columbia&#x27;s gold sequined swallow-tail coat and top hat and Magenta&#x27;s maid&#x27;s uniform.

Blane was amazed by the recreation and understanding of her designs by fans. When she first heard that people were dressing up, she thought it would be tacky, but was surprised to see the depth to which the fans went to recreate her designs. &quot;Rocky Horror&quot; fan Mina Credeur, who designs costumes and performed as Columbia for Houston&#x27;s performance group, states that &quot;the best part is when everyone leaves with a big smile on their face,&quot; noting that there&#x27;s &quot;such a kitschiness and campiness that it seems to be winking at you.&quot; The film still plays at many theatre locations and &quot;Rocky Horror&quot; costumes are often made for Halloween, although many require much time and effort to make.

===Title sequence===
The film starts with the screen fading to black and oversized, disembodied female lips appear overdubbed with a male voice, establishing the theme of androgyny to be repeated as the film unfolds. The opening scene and song, &quot;Science Fiction/Double Feature&quot;, consists of the lips of Patricia Quinn (who appears in the film later as the character Magenta and as &#x27;Trixie the Usherette&#x27; in the original London production, where she also sings the song) but has the vocals of actor and &quot;Rocky Horror&quot; creator, Richard O&#x27;Brien (who appears as Magenta&#x27;s brother Riff Raff). The lyrics refer to science fiction and horror films of the past and list several film titles from the 1930s to the 1960s, including &quot;The Day the Earth Stood Still&quot; (1951), &quot;Flash Gordon&quot; (1936), &quot;The Invisible Man&quot; (1933), &quot;King Kong&quot; (1933), &quot;It Came from Outer Space&quot; (1953), &quot;Doctor X&quot; (1932), &quot;Forbidden Planet&quot; (1956), &quot;Tarantula&quot; (1955), &quot;The Day of the Triffids&quot; (1962), &quot;Curse of the Demon&quot; (1957), and &quot;When Worlds Collide&quot; (1951).

==Music==

The soundtrack was released in 1975 by Ode Records and produced by English composer Richard Hartley. The album peaked at No. 49 on the U.S. &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 in 1978. It reached No. 12 on the Australian albums chart and No. 11 on the New Zealand albums chart. The album is described as the &quot;definitive version of the [&quot;Rocky Horror&quot;] score&quot;.
# &quot;Science Fiction/Double Feature&quot; – The Lips (those of Patricia Quinn; voice of Richard O&#x27;Brien)
# &quot;Dammit Janet&quot; – Brad, Janet, and Chorus
# &quot;Over at the Frankenstein Place&quot; – Janet, Brad, Riff Raff, and Chorus
# &quot;The Time Warp&quot; – Riff Raff, Magenta, The Criminologist, Columbia, and Transylvanians
# &quot;Sweet Transvestite&quot; – Frank with spoken lyrics by Brad and Janet
# &quot;The Sword of Damocles&quot; – Rocky and Transylvanians
# &quot;I Can Make You a Man&quot; – Frank and Transylvanians
# &quot;Hot Patootie – Bless My Soul&quot; – Eddie and Transylvanians
# &quot;I Can Make You a Man (Reprise)&quot; – Frank, Janet, and Transylvanians
# &quot;Touch-a, Touch-a, Touch-a, Touch Me&quot; – Janet with Magenta, Columbia, Rocky, Brad, Frank, and Riff Raff
# &quot;Once in a While&quot; (&quot;deleted scene&quot;) – Brad
# &quot;Eddie&quot; – Dr. Scott, The Criminologist, Janet, Columbia, and Frank
# &quot;Planet Schmanet Janet (Wise Up Janet Weiss)&quot; – Frank with one line by Janet
# &quot;Planet Hot Dog&quot; – Frank, Brad, Dr. Scott, and Janet
# &quot;Rose Tint My World&quot; – Columbia, Rocky, Brad, and Janet
# &quot;Fanfare/Don&#x27;t Dream It, Be It&quot; – Frank with Dr. Scott, Brad, and Janet
# &quot;Wild and Untamed Thing&quot; – Frank with Brad, Janet, Rocky, Columbia, and Riff Raff
# &quot;I&#x27;m Going Home&quot; – Frank and Chorus
# &quot;Super Heroes&quot; (&quot;only present in full in the original UK release&quot;) – Brad, Janet, The Criminologist, and Chorus
# &quot;[Science Fiction/Double Feature (Reprise)&quot; – The Lips
==Release==

The film opened in the United Kingdom at the Rialto Theatre in London on 14 August 1975 and in the United States on 26 September at the UA Westwood in Los Angeles. It did well at that location, but not elsewhere. Before the midnight screenings&#x27; success, the film was withdrawn from its eight opening cities due to very small audiences, and its planned New York City opening on Halloween night was cancelled. Fox re-released the film around college campuses on a double-bill with another rock music film parody, Brian De Palma&#x27;s &quot;Phantom of the Paradise&quot; (1974), but again it drew small audiences.
A second film poster was created using a set of red lipstick-painted lips with the tagline &quot;A Different Set of Jaws&quot;, a spoof of the poster for the film &quot;Jaws&quot; (which was also released in 1975). The lips of former &quot;Playboy&quot; model Lorelei Shark are featured on the poster.

With &quot;Pink Flamingos&quot; (1972) and &quot;Reefer Madness&quot; (1936) making money in midnight showings nationwide, a Fox executive, Tim Deegan, was able to talk distributors into midnight screenings, starting in New York City on April Fools&#x27; Day of 1976. It was the &quot;Secret&quot; film, on 20 May, in the first Seattle International Film Festival. The cult following started shortly after the film began its midnight run at the Waverly Theater in New York City, then spread to other counties in New York, and to Uniondale, Long Island. &quot;Rocky Horror&quot; was not only found in the larger cities but throughout the United States, where many attendees would get in free if they arrived in costume. The western division of the film&#x27;s release included the U.A. Cinemas in Fresno and Merced, the Cinema J. in Sacramento, the UC Theatre in Berkeley and the Covell in Modesto. In New Orleans, an early organised performance group was active with the release there, as well as in such cities as Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and Chicago (at the Biograph Theater). Before long, nearly every screening of the film was accompanied by a live fan cast.

&quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot; is considered to be the longest-running release in film history. It benefited from a 20th Century Fox policy that made archival films available to theatres at any time. Having never been pulled by 20th Century Fox from its original 1975 release, it continues to play in cinemas. After The Walt Disney Company acquired 20th Century Fox in 2019 and began withdrawing archival Fox movies from theatres to be placed into the Disney Vault, the company made an exception in the case of &quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot; to allow the traditional midnight screenings to continue.

===Home media===
A Super 8 version of selected scenes of the film was made available. In 1983, Ode Records released &quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show, Audience Par-Tic-I-Pation Album&quot;, recorded at the 8th Street Playhouse. The recording consisted of the film&#x27;s audio and the standardised call-backs from the audience.

A home video release was made available in 1987 in the UK. In the US, the film (including documentary footage and extras) was released on VHS on 8 November 1990, retailing for $89.95.

The film was released on DVD on 23 October 2000 for the film&#x27;s 25th anniversary. This one is a THX certified two-disc set that features the original theatrical version and an extended version. A 35th anniversary edition Blu-ray was released by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment in the US on 19 October 2010. The disc includes a newly created 7.1 surround sound mix, the original theatrical mono sound mix, and a 4K/2K image transfer from the original camera negative. In addition, new content featuring karaoke and a fan performance were included. A 45th anniversary edition Blu-ray was released in September 2020 by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment under the 20th Century Home Entertainment label.

In October 2021, the film was added to Disney+ on the Star hub for users in locations such as the UK, Ireland and Canada.

==Reception==

&quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot; critic Roger Ebert noted that when first released, &quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot; was &quot;ignored by pretty much everyone, including the future fanatics who would eventually count the hundreds of times they&#x27;d seen it&quot;. He considered it more a &quot;long-running social phenomenon&quot; than a movie, rating it 2.5 out of 4 stars and describing Curry as &quot;the best thing in the movie, maybe because he seems to be having the most fun&quot; but thinking the story would work better performed on stage for a live audience. Bill Henkin noted that &quot;Variety&quot; thought that the &quot;campy hijinks&quot; of the film seemed &quot;labored&quot;, and also mentioned that the &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot; John Wasserman, who had liked the stage play in London, found the film &quot;lacking both charm and dramatic impact&quot;. &quot;Newsweek&quot;, in 1978, called the film &quot;tasteless, plotless and pointless&quot;.

Review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a rating of 80% based on 49 reviews, and an average grade of 6.9/10, with the critical consensus reading &quot;&quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot; brings its quirky characters in tight, but it&#x27;s the narrative thrust that really drives audiences insane and keeps &#x27;em doing the time warp again&quot;. A number of contemporary critics find it compelling and enjoyable because of its offbeat and bizarre qualities; the BBC summarised: &quot;for those willing to experiment with something a little bit different, a little bit outré, &quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot; has a lot to offer.&quot; &quot;The New York Times&quot; called it a &quot;low-budget freak show/cult classic/cultural institution&quot; with &quot;catchy&quot; songs. Geoff Andrew, of &quot;Time Out&quot;, noted that the &quot;string of hummable songs gives it momentum, Gray&#x27;s admirably straight-faced narrator holds it together, and a run on black lingerie takes care of almost everything else&quot;, rating it 4 out of 5 stars. On the other hand, Dave Kehr of the &quot;Chicago Reader&quot; considered the wit to be &quot;too weak to sustain a film&quot; and thought that the &quot;songs all sound the same&quot;.

In 2005, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant&quot;.

==Cult following==
===Origins===

&quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot; helped shape conditions of cult film&#x27;s transition from art-house to exploitation style. The film developed a cult following in 1976 at the Waverly Theatre in New York, which developed into a standardised ritual. According to J. Hoberman, author of &quot;Midnight Movies&quot;, it was after five months into the film&#x27;s midnight run when lines began to be shouted by the audience. Louis Farese Jr., a normally quiet teacher, upon seeing the character Janet place a newspaper over her head to protect herself from rain, yelled, &quot;Buy an umbrella, you cheap bitch.&quot; Originally, Louis and other &quot;Rocky Horror&quot; pioneers, including Amy Lazarus, Theresa Krakauskas, and Bill O&#x27;Brian, did this to entertain each other, each week trying to come up with something new to make each other laugh. This quickly caught on with other theatre-goers and thus began this self-proclaimed &quot;counter point dialogue&quot;, which became standard practice and was repeated nearly verbatim at each screening. Performance groups became a staple at &quot;Rocky Horror&quot; screenings due in part to the prominent New York City fan cast. The New York City cast was originally run by former schoolteacher and stand-up comic Sal Piro and his friend Dori Hartley, the latter of whom portrayed Dr. Frank N. Furter and was one of several performers, including Will Kohler as Brad Majors, Nora Poses as Janet, and Lilias Piro as Magenta, in a flexible rotating cast. The performances of the audience were scripted and actively discouraged improvising, being conformist in a similar way to the repressed characters.

On Halloween in 1976, people attended in costume and talked back to the screen, and by mid-1978, &quot;Rocky Horror&quot; was playing in over 50 locations on Fridays and Saturdays at midnight. Newsletters were published by local performance groups, and fans gathered for &quot;Rocky Horror&quot; conventions. By the end of 1979, there were twice-weekly showings at over 230 theatres. The National Fan Club was established in 1977 and later merged with the International Fan Club. The fan publication &quot;The Transylvanian&quot; printed a number of issues, and a semi-regular poster magazine was published as well as an official magazine.

Performance groups in the Los Angeles area originated at the Fox Theatre in 1977, where Michael Wolfson won a look-alike contest as Frank N. Furter, and won another at the Tiffany Theater on Sunset Boulevard. Wolfson&#x27;s group eventually performed in all of the L.A. area theatres screening &quot;Rocky Horror&quot;, including the Balboa Theater in Balboa, The Cove at Hermosa Beach, and The Sands in Glendale. He was invited to perform at the Sombrero Playhouse in Phoenix, Arizona. At the Tiffany Theatre, the audience performance cast had the theatre&#x27;s full cooperation; the local performers entered early and without charge. The fan playing Frank for this theatre was a transgender performer, D. Garret Gafford, who was out of work in 1978 and trying to raise the funds for a gender reassignment while spending the weekends performing at the Tiffany. Presently, the live action rendition of &quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot; is available for attendance in various locations in Los Angeles, typically Saturday nights at midnight.
By 1978, &quot;Rocky Horror&quot; had moved from an earlier San Francisco location to the Strand Theatre located near the Tenderloin on Market Street. The performance group there, Double Feature/Celluloid Jam, was the first to act out and perform almost the entire film, unlike the New York cast at that time. The Strand cast was put together from former members of an early Berkeley group, disbanded due to less than enthusiastic management. Frank N. Furter was portrayed by Marni Scofidio, who, in 1979, attracted many of the older performers from Berkeley. Other members included Mishell Erickson as Columbia, her twin sister Denise Erickson as Magenta, Kathy Dolan as Janet, and Linda &quot;Lou&quot; Woods as Riff Raff. The Strand group performed at two large science fiction conventions in Los Angeles and San Francisco, were offered a spot at The Mabuhay, a local punk club, and performed for children&#x27;s television of Argentina.

===Legacy===

Annual &quot;Rocky Horror&quot; conventions are held in varying locations, lasting days. Tucson, Arizona has been host a number of times, including 1999 with &quot;El Fishnet Fiesta&quot;, and &quot;Queens of the Desert&quot; held in 2006. Vera Dika wrote that, to the fans, &quot;Rocky Horror&quot; is ritualistic and comparable to a religious event, with a compulsive, repeated cycle of going home and coming back to see the film each weekend. The audience call-backs are similar to responses in church during a mass. Many theatre troupes exist across the United States that produce shadow-cast performances where the actors play each part in the film in full costume, with props, as the movie plays on the big screen in a movie theatre. O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s Orchestra, formerly known as the Queerios (based in Austin, Texas), is the longest running shadow-cast in Texas.

The film has a global following and remains popular. Subcultures such as &quot;Rocky Horror&quot; have also found a place on the Internet. Audience participation scripts for many cities are available for download from the internet. The internet has a number of &quot;Rocky Horror&quot; fan-run websites with various quizzes and information, specializing in different content, allowing fans to participate at a unique level.

===LGBT influence===

Members of the LGBT community composed a large part of the &quot;Rocky Horror&quot; cult following: they identified with the embrace of sexual liberation and androgyny, and attended show after show, slowly forming a community. Judith A. Peraino compares Brad and Janet&#x27;s initiation into Frank N. Furter&#x27;s world to the self-discovery of &quot;queer identity&quot;, and to the traditional initiation of &quot;virgins&quot; in the shadow screenings. June Thomas describes the midnight screenings in Newark, Delaware as a &quot;very queer scene&quot;, which increased visibility for the LGBTQ community: &quot;The folks standing in line outside the State in fishnets and makeup every Saturday night undoubtedly widened the sphere of possibilities for gender expression on Main Street.&quot;

&quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot; remains a cultural phenomenon in both the U.S. and U.K. Cult film participants are often people on the fringe of society who find connection and community at the screenings, although the film attracts fans of differing backgrounds all over the world.

&quot;Bisexuality, The Rocky Horror Picture Show, and Me&quot;, by Elizabeth Reba Weise, is part of the publication, &quot;Bi Any Other Name: Bisexual People Speak Out&quot; (1991), an anthology edited by Loraine Hutchins and Lani Kaʻahumanu about the history of the modern bisexual rights movement that is one of the first publications of bisexual literature.

===Cultural influence===

&quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot; has been featured in a number of other feature films and television series over the years. Episodes of &quot;The Simpsons&quot;, &quot;The Venture Bros.&quot;,&quot;Cold Case&quot;, &quot;Tuca &amp; Bertie&quot;, &quot;The Boondocks&quot;, &quot;Glee&quot;, &quot;The Drew Carey Show&quot;, &quot;That &#x27;70s Show&quot;, &quot;Deutschland 86&quot;, and &quot;American Dad!&quot; spotlight &quot;Rocky Horror&quot;, as do films such as &quot;Vice Squad&quot; (1982), &quot;Halloween II&quot; (2009), and &quot;The Perks of Being a Wallflower&quot; (2012). The 1980 film &quot;Fame&quot; featured the audience reciting their callback lines to the screen and dancing the Time Warp, the dance from the stage show and film, which has become a novelty dance at parties. Director Rob Zombie cited &quot;Rocky Horror&quot; as a major influence on his film &quot;House of 1000 Corpses&quot; (2003), while the film&#x27;s fan culture of cosplaying and audience participation during screenings laid the groundwork for the similarly influential cult following surrounding Tommy Wiseau&#x27;s &quot;The Room&quot; (2003). &quot;Rocky Horror&quot; also inspired John McPhail&#x27;s zombie musical &quot;Anna and the Apocalypse&quot; (2018).

==Sequel==
O&#x27;Brien drafted a sequel titled &quot;Rocky Horror Shows His Heels&quot; in 1979. This script featured the return of all of the characters from the original film, and O&#x27;Brien wished to reunite the original production team. But Sharman did not wish to revisit the original concept so directly, nor did Tim Curry wish to reprise his role.

Instead, Sharman reunited with O&#x27;Brien to film &quot;Shock Treatment&quot; in 1981, a stand-alone feature with little continuity from the original film. Initially conceived and scripted in 1980 as &quot;The Brad and Janet Show&quot;, the film repurposed several songs from the earlier &quot;Rocky Horror Shows His Heels&quot; project with lyrical adjustments, and depicting the characters&#x27; continuing adventures in the town of Denton. Production was forced to adjust amidst the Screen Actors Guild strike; eventually the entire film was shot on a single sound stage. &quot;Shock Treatment&quot; was poorly received by critics and audiences upon release (largely due to the absence of Curry, Sarandon, and Bostwick) but over time has built its own niche following.

O&#x27;Brien revisited the notion for a direct &quot;RHPS&quot; sequel in 1991, writing &quot;Revenge of the Old Queen&quot;. Producer Michael White had hoped to begin work on the production and described the script as being &quot;in the same style as the other one. It has reflections of the past in it.&quot; &quot;Revenge of the Old Queen&quot; commenced pre-production; however, after studio head Joe Roth was ousted from Fox in 1993, the project was shelved indefinitely. Although the script went unpublished, bootleg copies have leaked online, and a song from the original demo tape circulates among fans. The script remains the property of Fox, producer of the two prior films, and remains unlikely to be revived.

Between 1999 and 2001, O&#x27;Brien was working on a third attempted sequel project with the working title &quot;Rocky Horror: The Second Coming&quot;, intended as a stage production, with an option to adapt to film if met with success. This script integrated plot elements from &quot;Rocky Horror Shows His Heels&quot; paired with all-new songs. O&#x27;Brien completed a first draft of this script (which was read by Terry Jones) but had difficulties finalising anything beyond the first act, and development went dormant.

O&#x27;Brien produced &quot;Shock Treatment&quot; for the theatrical stage with a premiere at the King&#x27;s Head Theatre in Islington, London in spring 2015.

==Remake==

&quot;The Rocky Horror Glee Show&quot; aired on 26 October 2010, as part of the second season of the television series &quot;Glee&quot;—and recreated several scenes from the film, including the opening credits. It featured Barry Bostwick and Meat Loaf in cameo roles. An covering seven songs from the movie was released on 19 October 2010.

On 10 April 2015, the Fox Network announced it would air a modern-day reimagining of the film, titled &quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show: Let&#x27;s Do the Time Warp Again&quot;. On 22 October 2015, Fox announced that the role of Dr. Frank N. Furter would be played by transgender actress Laverne Cox. Ryan McCartan played Brad, alongside Victoria Justice as Janet, with Reeve Carney as Riff Raff and singer/model Staz Nair as Rocky. Adam Lambert portrays Eddie. Tim Curry, who portrayed Dr. Frank N. Furter in the original film, portrays the Criminologist. On 1 February 2016, the network announced that Broadway veteran Annaleigh Ashford would portray Columbia. On 5 February 2016, Ben Vereen joined the cast as Dr. Everett von Scott.

Kenny Ortega, best known for the &quot;High School Musical&quot; franchise and &quot;Michael Jackson&#x27;s This Is It&quot; (2009) directed, choreographed and executive-produced the remake; Lou Adler, who was an executive producer of the original film, has the same role for the new film, which premiered on Fox on 20 October 2016.

== Video game ==
A video game adaptation by Freakzone Games released on October 27, 2024 on Microsoft Windows, Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 5, Xbox Series X and Series S.

==See also==

* Cannibalism in popular culture
* Cross-dressing in film and television
* List of American films of 1975
* List of British films of 1975
* List of cult films
* List of films featuring extraterrestrials
* List of films featuring Frankenstein&#x27;s monster

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* 
* 
* &quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot; at the British Film Institute
* — official trailer</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="40" end="51" title="independent film" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q842256" start="52" end="59" title="Musical film" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q224700" start="60" end="73" title="comedy horror" label="comedy horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q568770" start="91" end="100" title="Lou Adler" label="Lou Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835322" start="105" end="118" title="Michael White (producer)" label="Michael White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689216" start="132" end="143" title="Jim Sharman" label="Jim Sharman"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="164" end="180" title="20th Century Studios" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q982182" start="224" end="244" title="Richard O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Richard O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="323" end="347" title="Musical theatre" label="musical stage production"/>
<link wikidata="Q583612" start="354" end="375" title="The Rocky Horror Show" label="The Rocky Horror Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="464" end="479" title="Science fiction film" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q223770" start="491" end="498" title="B movie" label="B movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q52392" start="556" end="565" title="Tim Curry" label="Tim Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q133050" start="580" end="594" title="Susan Sarandon" label="Susan Sarandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q809019" start="600" end="614" title="Barry Bostwick" label="Barry Bostwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q961187" start="640" end="652" title="Charles Gray (actor)" label="Charles Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169370" start="690" end="709" title="Royal Court Theatre" label="Royal Court Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565972" start="711" end="723" title="Roxy Theatre (West Hollywood)" label="Roxy Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q815278" start="729" end="744" title="Belasco Theatre" label="Belasco Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q273092" start="768" end="781" title="Nell Campbell" label="Nell Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q462982" start="786" end="800" title="Patricia Quinn" label="Patricia Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q614130" start="1071" end="1084" title="mad scientist" label="mad scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q486680" start="1095" end="1107" title="Transvestism" label="transvestite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852228" start="1188" end="1198" title="Strongman" label="muscle man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924156" start="1256" end="1268" title="Bray Studios (UK)" label="Bray Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441828" start="1316" end="1328" title="Oakley Court" label="Oakley Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433745" start="1364" end="1387" title="Hammer Film Productions" label="Hammer Film Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q942297" start="1401" end="1406" title="props" label="props"/>
<link wikidata="Q131711" start="1522" end="1528" title="kitsch" label="kitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634021" start="1580" end="1589" title="Sue Blane" label="Sue Blane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423086" start="1716" end="1733" title="punk rock fashion" label="punk rock fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777874" start="1755" end="1762" title="fishnet" label="fishnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q638364" start="1873" end="1887" title="midnight movie" label="midnight movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970652" start="1945" end="1960" title="Waverly Theater" label="Waverly Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491297" start="2387" end="2402" title="limited release" label="limited release"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="2684" end="2693" title="Halloween" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761321" start="2715" end="2751" title="The Rocky Horror Picture Show cult following" label="a large international cult following"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2787" end="2832" title="List of films considered the best#Musical" label="one of the greatest musical films of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="2897" end="2919" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="2927" end="2946" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="3119" end="3134" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251417" start="3135" end="3149" title="double feature" label="double feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260209" start="3157" end="3187" title="Science Fiction/Double Feature" label="Science Fiction/Double Feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q161733" start="3219" end="3232" title="Criminology" label="criminologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212690" start="3548" end="3560" title="Dammit Janet" label="Dammit Janet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113459" start="3746" end="3776" title="Over at the Frankenstein Place" label="Over at the Frankenstein Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q833899" start="3883" end="3889" title="butler" label="butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q833860" start="3905" end="3909" title="maid" label="maid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145660" start="3925" end="3932" title="groupie" label="groupie"/>
<link wikidata="Q451854" start="3968" end="3981" title="Time Warp (song)" label="The Time Warp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3978790" start="4104" end="4122" title="Sweet Transvestite" label="Sweet Transvestite"/>
<link wikidata="Q100159" start="4542" end="4555" title="mercy killing" label="mercy killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q421" start="5119" end="5122" title="UFO" label="UFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q160730" start="5607" end="5613" title="Medusa" label="Medusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="5922" end="5925" title="RKO Pictures" label="RKO"/>
<link wikidata="Q216810" start="6392" end="6431" title="King Kong" label="climbs the tower with Frank&amp;#x27;s body"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785605" start="6831" end="6843" title="Hilary Farr" label="Hilary Labow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542058" start="7009" end="7028" title="Christopher Biggins" label="Christopher Biggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6079991" start="7042" end="7051" title="Ishaq Bux" label="Ishaq Bux"/>
<link wikidata="Q107417565" start="7082" end="7095" title="Imogen Claire" label="Imogen Claire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397916" start="7109" end="7120" title="Sadie Corré" label="Sadie Corré"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767683" start="7170" end="7186" title="Annabel Leventon" label="Annabel Leventon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43379330" start="7188" end="7202" title="Anthony Milner (actor)" label="Anthony Milner"/>
<link wikidata="Q114031505" start="7222" end="7231" title="Tony Then" label="Tony Then"/>
<link wikidata="Q5730498" start="7248" end="7259" title="Henry Woolf" label="Henry Woolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="7406" end="7412" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q583612" start="7460" end="7481" title="The Rocky Horror Show" label="The Rocky Horror Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="7570" end="7585" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q223770" start="7590" end="7605" title="B movies" label="B horror movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q358193" start="7724" end="7736" title="Steve Reeves" label="Steve Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="7764" end="7777" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q76092" start="8014" end="8023" title="glam rock" label="glam rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169370" start="8225" end="8244" title="Royal Court Theatre" label="Royal Court Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032089" start="8248" end="8261" title="Sloane Square" label="Sloane Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q743535" start="8263" end="8278" title="Chelsea, London" label="Chelsea, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q180975" start="8387" end="8406" title="Andrew Lloyd Webber" label="Andrew Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q242667" start="8420" end="8442" title="Jesus Christ Superstar" label="Jesus Christ Superstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q294583" start="8507" end="8518" title="Sam Shepard" label="Sam Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965470" start="8598" end="8611" title="Brian Thomson (scenic designer)" label="Brian Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634021" start="8681" end="8690" title="Sue Blane" label="Sue Blane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149741" start="8709" end="8724" title="Richard Hartley (composer)" label="Richard Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835322" start="8745" end="8758" title="Michael White (producer)" label="Michael White"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090057" start="9120" end="9142" title="Chelsea Classic Cinema" label="Chelsea Classic Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q373302" start="9146" end="9162" title="King&amp;#x27;s Road" label="King&amp;#x27;s Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="9346" end="9357" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="9384" end="9397" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077570" start="9436" end="9447" title="Ode Records" label="Ode Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q233837" start="9537" end="9549" title="Britt Ekland" label="Britt Ekland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565972" start="9652" end="9664" title="Roxy Theatre (West Hollywood)" label="Roxy Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="9729" end="9737" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q815278" start="9756" end="9771" title="Belasco Theatre" label="Belasco Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924156" start="9860" end="9872" title="Bray Studios (UK)" label="Bray Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441828" start="9877" end="9889" title="Oakley Court" label="Oakley Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q238803" start="9912" end="9922" title="Maidenhead" label="Maidenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q23220" start="9924" end="9933" title="Berkshire" label="Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q22001022" start="9951" end="9966" title="Elstree Studios (Shenley Road)" label="Elstree Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="10060" end="10076" title="Victorian Gothic" label="Victorian Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q32880" start="10077" end="10082" title="Architectural style" label="style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433745" start="10109" end="10121" title="Hammer Film Productions" label="Hammer films"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="10377" end="10404" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="10646" end="10655" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037884" start="11179" end="11215" title="Universal Classic Monsters" label="Universal Studios&amp;#x27; horror films"/>
<link wikidata="Q128121" start="11641" end="11652" title="Mick Jagger" label="Mick Jagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="11657" end="11668" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="11746" end="11750" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q339170" start="11764" end="11773" title="Mick Rock" label="Mick Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="11963" end="11973" title="punk music" label="punk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q153946" start="12035" end="12039" title="Punk subculture" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q970571" start="12415" end="12442" title="The Revenge of Frankenstein" label="The Revenge of Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="12541" end="12552" title="Cult film" label="cult status"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="12751" end="12758" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974455" start="12766" end="12782" title="Citizens Theatre" label="Citizens Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068744" start="12808" end="12817" title="The Maids" label="The Maids"/>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="13066" end="13086" title="science fiction film" label="science fiction film"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="13206" end="13209" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q131711" start="14190" end="14196" title="kitsch" label="kitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q857784" start="14206" end="14215" title="campiness" label="campiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="14362" end="14371" title="Halloween" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063547" start="14559" end="14569" title="Voice type" label="male voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q207959" start="14597" end="14606" title="androgyny" label="androgyny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260209" start="14677" end="14707" title="Science Fiction/Double Feature" label="Science Fiction/Double Feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q425992" start="15193" end="15222" title="The Day the Earth Stood Still" label="The Day the Earth Stood Still"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667789" start="15243" end="15255" title="Flash Gordon (serial)" label="Flash Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q135932" start="15276" end="15293" title="The Invisible Man (1933 film)" label="The Invisible Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q309048" start="15314" end="15323" title="King Kong (1933 film)" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q781980" start="15344" end="15368" title="It Came from Outer Space" label="It Came from Outer Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233890" start="15389" end="15397" title="Doctor X (film)" label="Doctor X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331230" start="15418" end="15434" title="Forbidden Planet" label="Forbidden Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q958007" start="15455" end="15464" title="Tarantula (film)" label="Tarantula"/>
<link wikidata="Q886190" start="15485" end="15508" title="The Day of the Triffids (film)" label="The Day of the Triffids"/>
<link wikidata="Q630237" start="15529" end="15547" title="Curse of the Demon" label="Curse of the Demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199203" start="15572" end="15591" title="When Worlds Collide (1951 film)" label="When Worlds Collide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077570" start="15657" end="15668" title="Ode Records" label="Ode Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149741" start="15702" end="15717" title="Richard Hartley (composer)" label="Richard Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="15758" end="15783" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q275029" start="15818" end="15841" title="ARIA Charts" label="Australian albums chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q843881" start="15860" end="15884" title="Recording Industry Association of New Zealand" label="New Zealand albums chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260209" start="15996" end="16026" title="Science Fiction/Double Feature" label="Science Fiction/Double Feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212690" start="16109" end="16121" title="Dammit Janet" label="Dammit Janet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113459" start="16162" end="16192" title="Over at the Frankenstein Place" label="Over at the Frankenstein Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q451854" start="16244" end="16257" title="Time Warp (song)" label="The Time Warp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3978790" start="16342" end="16360" title="Sweet Transvestite" label="Sweet Transvestite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989065" start="16420" end="16441" title="Sword of Damocles (Rocky Horror song)" label="The Sword of Damocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989065" start="16545" end="16573" title="Hot Patootie – Bless My Soul" label="Hot Patootie – Bless My Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989065" start="16695" end="16730" title="Touch-a, Touch-a, Touch-a, Touch Me" label="Touch-a, Touch-a, Touch-a, Touch Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253643" start="16840" end="16853" title="deleted scene" label="deleted scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989065" start="17109" end="17127" title="Rose Tint My World" label="Rose Tint My World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989065" start="17177" end="17211" title="Fanfare/Don&amp;#x27;t Dream It, Be It" label="Fanfare/Don&amp;#x27;t Dream It, Be It"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989065" start="17266" end="17288" title="Wild and Untamed Thing" label="Wild and Untamed Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989065" start="17360" end="17379" title="I&amp;#x27;m Going Home (Rocky Horror song)" label="I&amp;#x27;m Going Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260209" start="17547" end="17588" title="Science Fiction/Double Feature" label="[Science Fiction/Double Feature (Reprise)"/>
<link wikidata="Q189526" start="18135" end="18149" title="Brian De Palma" label="Brian De Palma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170086" start="18163" end="18186" title="Phantom of the Paradise" label="Phantom of the Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q189505" start="18405" end="18409" title="Jaws (film)" label="Jaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="18476" end="18483" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140590" start="18550" end="18564" title="Pink Flamingos" label="Pink Flamingos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547202" start="18588" end="18602" title="Reefer Madness" label="Reefer Madness"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="18664" end="18667" title="20th Century Fox" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399132" start="18867" end="18902" title="Seattle International Film Festival" label="Seattle International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761321" start="18908" end="18922" title="The Rocky Horror Picture Show cult following" label="cult following"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="19051" end="19059" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q985341" start="19068" end="19090" title="Uniondale, Long Island" label="Uniondale, Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q43301" start="19335" end="19341" title="Fresno" label="Fresno"/>
<link wikidata="Q499189" start="19346" end="19352" title="Merced" label="Merced"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="19371" end="19381" title="Sacramento" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864197" start="19387" end="19397" title="UC Theatre" label="UC Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="19401" end="19409" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q204561" start="19428" end="19435" title="Modesto" label="Modesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="19440" end="19451" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="19554" end="19578" title="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania" label="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="19584" end="19591" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914863" start="19600" end="19616" title="Biograph Theater" label="Biograph Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="20031" end="20054" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q45758788" start="20055" end="20088" title="Acquisition of 21st Century Fox by Disney" label="acquired 20th Century Fox in 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282482" start="20167" end="20179" title="Disney Vault" label="Disney Vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412320" start="20346" end="20353" title="Super 8 film" label="Super 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448944" start="20535" end="20555" title="8th Street Playhouse" label="8th Street Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="20796" end="20799" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="20868" end="20871" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044630" start="20943" end="20946" title="THX" label="THX"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="21068" end="21075" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084961" start="21092" end="21127" title="20th Century Fox Home Entertainment" label="20th Century Fox Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818198" start="21192" end="21210" title="7.1 surround sound" label="7.1 surround sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323979" start="21240" end="21250" title="mono sound" label="mono sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q238162" start="21262" end="21267" title="4K2K" label="4K/2K"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21268" end="21273" title="Digital cinematography#Video formats" label="image"/>
<link wikidata="Q4220904" start="21292" end="21316" title="original camera negative" label="original camera negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053254" start="21467" end="21505" title="Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment" label="Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084961" start="21516" end="21547" title="20th Century Home Entertainment" label="20th Century Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958752" start="21595" end="21602" title="Disney+" label="Disney+"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="21700" end="21717" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="21731" end="21742" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="22300" end="22307" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="22431" end="22454" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="22590" end="22598" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="22679" end="22696" title="Review aggregator" label="Review aggregator"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="22705" end="22720" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="23167" end="23170" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="23354" end="23372" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q17279141" start="23490" end="23502" title="Geoff Andrew" label="Geoff Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657609" start="23513" end="23521" title="Time Out (magazine)" label="Time Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q4219471" start="23778" end="23787" title="Dave Kehr" label="Dave Kehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076422" start="23801" end="23815" title="Chicago Reader" label="Chicago Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="24015" end="24037" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="24045" end="24064" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135802" start="24279" end="24288" title="art-house" label="art-house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067324" start="24292" end="24304" title="exploitation film" label="exploitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4498571" start="24449" end="24460" title="J. Hoberman" label="J. Hoberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403301" start="25451" end="25459" title="Sal Piro" label="Sal Piro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931687" start="26540" end="26551" title="Fox Theater, Westwood Village" label="Fox Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528262" start="26651" end="26666" title="Tiffany Theater" label="Tiffany Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q860442" start="26670" end="26686" title="Sunset Boulevard" label="Sunset Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889678" start="26831" end="26837" title="Balboa Peninsula, Newport Beach" label="Balboa"/>
<link wikidata="Q828712" start="26851" end="26864" title="Hermosa Beach" label="Hermosa Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q485716" start="26883" end="26891" title="Glendale, California" label="Glendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q42311296" start="26926" end="26944" title="Sombrero Playhouse" label="Sombrero Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="26948" end="26964" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="27161" end="27172" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053501" start="27267" end="27286" title="gender reassignment" label="gender reassignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="27588" end="27601" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q463781" start="27618" end="27632" title="Strand Theatre (San Francisco)" label="Strand Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7464" start="27650" end="27660" title="Tenderloin, San Francisco" label="Tenderloin"/>
<link wikidata="Q248284" start="27664" end="27677" title="Market Street (San Francisco)" label="Market Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="27903" end="27911" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721653" start="28378" end="28389" title="Mabuhay Gardens" label="The Mabuhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="28573" end="28588" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="29296" end="29309" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q51393" start="29820" end="29834" title="LGBT community" label="LGBT community"/>
<link wikidata="Q465467" start="29941" end="29958" title="sexual liberation" label="sexual liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q51415" start="30157" end="30162" title="queer" label="queer"/>
<link wikidata="Q506586" start="30311" end="30327" title="Newark, Delaware" label="Newark, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="30398" end="30403" title="LGBTQ" label="LGBTQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q15404978" start="30562" end="30579" title="gender expression" label="gender expression"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31020" end="31064" title="Bi Any Other Name: Bisexual People Speak Out" label="Bi Any Other Name: Bisexual People Speak Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="31082" end="31091" title="anthology" label="anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259354" start="31102" end="31118" title="Loraine Hutchins" label="Loraine Hutchins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217565" start="31123" end="31138" title="Lani Kaʻahumanu" label="Lani Kaʻahumanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="31171" end="31186" title="bisexual rights" label="bisexual rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q55605519" start="31237" end="31256" title="bisexual literature" label="bisexual literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="31436" end="31448" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636213" start="31462" end="31479" title="The Venture Bros." label="The Venture Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q733960" start="31492" end="31501" title="Cold Case" label="Cold Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958428" start="31515" end="31532" title="Tuca &amp;amp; Bertie" label="Tuca &amp;amp; Bertie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456777" start="31546" end="31559" title="The Boondocks (TV series)" label="The Boondocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q152178" start="31573" end="31577" title="Glee (TV series)" label="Glee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258715" start="31591" end="31610" title="The Drew Carey Show" label="The Drew Carey Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q208072" start="31624" end="31643" title="That &amp;#x27;70s Show" label="That &amp;#x27;70s Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q56275513" start="31657" end="31671" title="Deutschland 86" label="Deutschland 86"/>
<link wikidata="Q210311" start="31689" end="31702" title="American Dad!" label="American Dad!"/>
<link wikidata="Q4370225" start="31771" end="31781" title="Vice Squad (1982 film)" label="Vice Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q908690" start="31802" end="31814" title="Halloween II (2009 film)" label="Halloween II"/>
<link wikidata="Q675468" start="31839" end="31870" title="The Perks of Being a Wallflower (film)" label="The Perks of Being a Wallflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351911" start="31905" end="31909" title="Fame (1980 film)" label="Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q298255" start="32103" end="32113" title="Rob Zombie" label="Rob Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q691788" start="32184" end="32205" title="House of 1000 Corpses" label="House of 1000 Corpses"/>
<link wikidata="Q142554" start="32257" end="32264" title="cosplay" label="cosplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q860114" start="32390" end="32402" title="Tommy Wiseau" label="Tommy Wiseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q533383" start="32416" end="32424" title="The Room (2003 film)" label="The Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q21997606" start="32478" end="32490" title="John McPhail (director)" label="John McPhail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072049" start="32498" end="32504" title="zombie film" label="zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q36491853" start="32519" end="32542" title="Anna and the Apocalypse" label="Anna and the Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q261636" start="32592" end="32598" title="sequel" label="sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628298" start="32975" end="32990" title="Shock Treatment" label="Shock Treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q108673324" start="33405" end="33431" title="1980 actors strike" label="Screen Actors Guild strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q919992" start="34093" end="34101" title="Joe Roth" label="Joe Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q558325" start="34207" end="34221" title="Bootleg recording" label="bootleg copies"/>
<link wikidata="Q166159" start="34832" end="34843" title="Terry Jones" label="Terry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410962" start="35037" end="35061" title="King&amp;#x27;s Head Theatre" label="King&amp;#x27;s Head Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q125163" start="35065" end="35074" title="Islington" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981329" start="35118" end="35144" title="The Rocky Horror Glee Show" label="The Rocky Horror Glee Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574680" start="35192" end="35205" title="Glee (season 2)" label="second season"/>
<link wikidata="Q152178" start="35237" end="35241" title="Glee (TV series)" label="Glee"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="35367" end="35378" title="Cameo appearance" label="cameo roles"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="35475" end="35486" title="Fox Network" label="Fox Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q31235" start="35523" end="35534" title="reimagining" label="reimagining"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502596" start="35743" end="35754" title="Laverne Cox" label="Laverne Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864737" start="35756" end="35769" title="Ryan McCartan" label="Ryan McCartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q200194" start="35793" end="35809" title="Victoria Justice" label="Victoria Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423039" start="35825" end="35837" title="Reeve Carney" label="Reeve Carney"/>
<link wikidata="Q27553625" start="35868" end="35877" title="Staz Nair" label="Staz Nair"/>
<link wikidata="Q190231" start="35888" end="35900" title="Adam Lambert" label="Adam Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767815" start="36076" end="36093" title="Annaleigh Ashford" label="Annaleigh Ashford"/>
<link wikidata="Q770841" start="36138" end="36148" title="Ben Vereen" label="Ben Vereen"/>
<link wikidata="Q380852" start="36192" end="36204" title="Kenny Ortega" label="Kenny Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q53110" start="36231" end="36250" title="High School Musical" label="High School Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q44447" start="36277" end="36310" title="Michael Jackson&amp;#x27;s This Is It" label="Michael Jackson&amp;#x27;s This Is It"/>
<link wikidata="Q568770" start="36383" end="36392" title="Lou Adler" label="Lou Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="36618" end="36635" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610114" start="36637" end="36652" title="Nintendo Switch" label="Nintendo Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q63184502" start="36654" end="36667" title="PlayStation 5" label="PlayStation 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q98973368" start="36669" end="36695" title="Xbox Series X and Series S" label="Xbox Series X and Series S"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032670" start="36714" end="36744" title="Cannibalism in popular culture" label="Cannibalism in popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188173" start="36747" end="36784" title="Cross-dressing in film and television" label="Cross-dressing in film and television"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561536" start="36787" end="36817" title="List of American films of 1975" label="List of American films of 1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q6564945" start="36820" end="36849" title="List of British films of 1975" label="List of British films of 1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614871" start="36852" end="36870" title="List of cult films" label="List of cult films"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810780" start="36873" end="36914" title="List of films featuring extraterrestrials" label="List of films featuring extraterrestrials"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100430" start="36917" end="36968" title="List of films featuring Frankenstein&amp;#x27;s monster" label="List of films featuring Frankenstein&amp;#x27;s monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="37121" end="37143" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25493" wikidata="Q56005" url="?curid=25493" title="Ridley Scott">
<text>Sir Ridley Scott (born 30 November 1937) is an English film director and producer. He directs films in the science fiction, crime, and historical epic genres, with an atmospheric and highly concentrated visual style. He ranks among the highest-grossing directors, with his films grossing a cumulative $5 billion worldwide. He has received many accolades, including the BAFTA Fellowship for Lifetime Achievement in 2018, two Primetime Emmy Awards, and a Golden Globe Award. He was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II in 2003, and appointed a Knight Grand Cross by King Charles III in 2024.

An alumnus of the Royal College of Art in London, Scott began his career in television as a designer and director before moving into advertising as a director of commercials. He made his film directorial debut with &quot;The Duellists&quot; (1977) and gained wider recognition with his next film, &quot;Alien&quot; (1979). Though his films range widely in setting and period, they showcase memorable imagery of urban environments, spanning 2nd-century Rome in &quot;Gladiator&quot; (2000) and its 2024 sequel, 12th-century Jerusalem in &quot;Kingdom of Heaven&quot; (2005), medieval England in &quot;Robin Hood&quot; (2010), ancient Memphis in &quot;&quot; (2014), contemporary Mogadishu in &quot;Black Hawk Down&quot; (2001), the futuristic cityscapes of &quot;Blade Runner&quot; (1982) and different planets in &quot;Alien&quot;, &quot;Prometheus&quot; (2012), &quot;The Martian&quot; (2015) and &quot;&quot; (2017).

Scott has been nominated for three Academy Awards for Directing for &quot;Thelma &amp; Louise&quot;, &quot;Gladiator&quot; and &quot;Black Hawk Down&quot;. &quot;Gladiator&quot; won the Academy Award for Best Picture, and he received a nomination in the same category for &quot;The Martian&quot;. In 1995, both Scott and his brother Tony received a British Academy Film Award for Outstanding British Contribution to Cinema. Scott&#x27;s films &quot;Alien&quot;, &quot;Blade Runner&quot; and &quot;Thelma &amp; Louise&quot; were each selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress for being considered &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant&quot;. In a 2004 BBC poll, Scott was ranked 10 on the list of most influential people in British culture. Scott also works in television, and has earned 10 Primetime Emmy Award nominations. He won twice, for Outstanding Television Film for the HBO film &quot;The Gathering Storm&quot; (2002) and for Outstanding Documentary or Nonfiction Special for the History Channel&#x27;s &quot;Gettysburg&quot; (2011). He was Emmy-nominated for &quot;RKO 281&quot; (1999), &quot;The Andromeda Strain&quot; (2008), and &quot;The Pillars of the Earth&quot; (2010).

==Early life and education==
Scott was born on 30 November 1937 in South Shields, to Francis (&quot;Frank&quot;) Percy Scott, a partner in a commercial shipping business based in Newcastle who would serve as a Colonel in the Royal Engineers during the Second World War, and Elizabeth, née Williams, a miner&#x27;s daughter. His grand-uncle Dixon Scott was a pioneer of the cinema chain and opened many cinemas around Tyneside. One of his cinemas, Tyneside Cinema, is still operating in Newcastle and is the last remaining newsreel cinema in the UK.

Born two years before the Second World War began, Scott was brought up in a military family. His father, as a senior officer in the Royal Engineers, was absent for most of his early life. His elder brother, Frank, joined the Merchant Navy when he was still young and the pair had little contact. During this time the family moved around; they lived in Cumberland as well as other areas in England, in addition to Wales and Germany, where Colonel Scott was part of the post-war Allied Control Council. After the war, the Scott family moved back to County Durham and eventually settled on Teesside.

His interest in science fiction began by reading the novels of H. G. Wells as a child. He was also influenced by science-fiction films such as &quot;It! The Terror from Beyond Space&quot;, &quot;The Day the Earth Stood Still&quot;, and &quot;Them!&quot; He said these films &quot;kind of got [him] going a little&quot; but his attention was not fully caught until he saw Stanley Kubrick&#x27;s &quot;2001: A Space Odyssey&quot;, about which he said, &quot;Once I saw that, I knew what I could do.&quot; He went to Grangefield Grammar School in Stockton on Tees and obtained a diploma in design at West Hartlepool College of Art. The industrial landscape in West Hartlepool would later inspire visuals in &quot;Blade Runner&quot;, with Scott stating, &quot;There were steelworks adjacent to West Hartlepool, so every day I&#x27;d be going through them, and thinking they&#x27;re kind of magnificent, beautiful, winter or summer, and the darker and more ominous it got, the more interesting it got.&quot;

Scott went on to study at the Royal College of Art in London, contributing to the college magazine &quot;ARK&quot; and helping to establish the college film department. For his final show, he made a black and white short film, &quot;Boy and Bicycle&quot;, starring both his younger brother and his father (the film was later released on the &quot;Extras&quot; section of &quot;The Duellists&quot; DVD). In February 1963, Scott was named in the title credits as &quot;Designer&quot; for the BBC television programme &quot;Tonight&quot;.

After graduation in 1963, he secured a job as a trainee set designer with the BBC, leading to work on the popular television police series &quot;Z-Cars&quot; and science fiction series &quot;Out of the Unknown&quot;. He was originally assigned to design the second &quot;Doctor Who&quot; serial, &quot;The Daleks&quot;, which would have entailed realising the serial&#x27;s eponymous alien creatures. Shortly before he was due to start work, a schedule conflict meant he was replaced by Raymond Cusick. In 1965, he began directing episodes of television series for the BBC, only one of which, an episode of &quot;Adam Adamant Lives!&quot;, is available commercially.
In 1968, Ridley and his younger brother Tony Scott – who would also go on to become a film director – founded Ridley Scott Associates (RSA), a film and commercial production company. Working alongside Alan Parker, Hugh Hudson and cinematographer Hugh Johnson, Ridley Scott made many commercials at RSA during the 1970s, including a 1973 Hovis bread advertisement, &quot;Bike Round&quot; (underscored by the slow movement of Dvořák&#x27;s &quot;New World&quot; symphony rearranged for brass), filmed in Gold Hill, Shaftesbury, Dorset. A nostalgia themed television advert that captured the public imagination, it was voted the UK&#x27;s favourite commercial in a 2006 poll. In the 1970s the Chanel No. 5 brand needed revitalisation having run the risk of being labelled as mass market and passé. Directed by Scott in the 1970s and 1980s, Chanel television commercials were inventive mini-films with production values of surreal fantasy and seduction, which &quot;played on the same visual imagery, with the same silhouette of the bottle.&quot;

Five members of the Scott family are directors, and all have worked for RSA. His brother Tony was a successful film director whose career spanned more than two decades; his sons Jake and Luke are both acclaimed directors of commercials, as is his daughter, Jordan Scott. Jake and Jordan both work from Los Angeles; Luke is based in London. In 1995, Shepperton Studios was purchased by a consortium headed by Ridley and Tony Scott, which extensively renovated the studios while also expanding and improving its grounds.

==Career==
===1970s: &quot;The Duellists&quot;, &quot;Alien&quot;===
&quot;The Duellists&quot; (1977) marked Ridley Scott&#x27;s first feature film as director. Shot in continental Europe, it was nominated for the main prize at the Cannes Film Festival, and won an award for Best Debut Film. &quot;The Duellists&quot; had limited commercial impact internationally. Based on Joseph Conrad&#x27;s short story &quot;The Duel&quot; and set during the Napoleonic Wars, it follows two French Hussar officers, D&#x27;Hubert and Feraud (Keith Carradine and Harvey Keitel) whose quarrel over an initially minor incident turns into a bitter extended feud spanning fifteen years, interwoven with the larger conflict that provides its backdrop. The film has been acclaimed for providing a historically authentic portrayal of Napoleonic uniforms and military conduct. The 2013 release of the film on Blu-ray coincided with the publication of an essay on the film in a collection of scholarly essays on Scott.

Scott had originally planned next to adapt a version of &quot;Tristan and Iseult&quot;, but after seeing &quot;Star Wars&quot;, he became convinced of the potential of large scale, effects-driven films. He accepted the job of directing &quot;Alien&quot;, the 1979 horror/science-fiction film that would win him international success. Scott made the decision to switch Ellen Ripley from the standard male action hero to a heroine. Ripley (played by Sigourney Weaver), who appeared in the first four &quot;Alien&quot; films, would become a cinematic icon. The final scene of John Hurt&#x27;s character has been named by a number of publications as one of the most memorable in cinematic history. Filmed at Shepperton Studios in England, &quot;Alien&quot; was the sixth highest-grossing film of 1979, earning over $104 million worldwide. Scott was involved in the 2003 restoration and re-release of the original film. In promotional interviews at the time, Scott indicated he had been in discussions to make a fifth film in the &quot;Alien&quot; franchise. However, in a 2006 interview, Scott remarked that he had been unhappy about &quot;Alien: The Director&#x27;s Cut&quot;, feeling that the original was &quot;pretty flawless&quot; and that the additions were merely a marketing tool. Scott later returned to &quot;Alien&quot;-related projects when he directed &quot;Prometheus&quot; and &quot;&quot; three decades after the original film&#x27;s release.

=== 1980s: &quot;Blade Runner&quot; and other films ===

After a year working on the film adaptation of &quot;Dune&quot;, and following the sudden death of his brother Frank, Scott signed to direct the film version of Philip K. Dick&#x27;s novel &quot;Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?&quot; Re-titled &quot;Blade Runner&quot; and starring Harrison Ford, the film was a commercial disappointment in cinemas in 1982, and was criticised by Pauline Kael in the New Yorker who wrote &quot;...Scott doesn&#x27;t seem to have a grasp of how to use words as part of the way a movie moves. &quot;Blade Runner&quot; is a suspenseless thriller; it appears to be a victim of its own imaginative use of hardware and miniatures and mattes. At some point, Scott and the others must have decided that the story was unimportant; maybe the booming, lewd and sultry score by Chariots-for-Hire Vangelis that seems to come out of the smoke convinced them that the audience would be moved even if vital parts of the story were trimmed.&quot;

In response to the review, Scott said: &quot;...It was four pages of destruction. I never met her. I was so offended. I framed those pages and they&#x27;ve been in my office for 30 years to remind me there&#x27;s only one critic that counts and that&#x27;s you. I haven&#x27;t read critiques ever since. Because if it&#x27;s a good one, you can get a swollen head and forget yourself. And if it&#x27;s a bad one, you&#x27;re so depressed that it&#x27;s debilitating.&quot; but is now regarded as a classic. In 1991, Scott&#x27;s notes were used by Warner Bros. to create a rushed director&#x27;s cut which removed the main character&#x27;s voiceover and made a number of other small changes, including to the ending. Later Scott personally supervised a digital restoration of &quot;Blade Runner&quot; and approved what was called &quot;The Final Cut&quot;. This version was released in Los Angeles, New York City and Toronto cinemas on 5 October 2007, and as an elaborate DVD release in December 2007.

Today, &quot;Blade Runner&quot; is ranked by many critics as one of the most important and influential science fiction films ever made, partly thanks to its much imitated portraits of a future cityscape. It is often discussed along with William Gibson&#x27;s novel &quot;Neuromancer&quot; as initiating the cyberpunk genre. Stephen Minger, stem cell biologist at King&#x27;s College London, states, &quot;It was so far ahead of its time and the whole premise of the story – what is it to be human and who are we, where we come from? It&#x27;s the age-old questions.&quot; Scott has described &quot;Blade Runner&quot; as his &quot;most complete and personal film&quot;.

In 1985, Scott directed &quot;Legend&quot;, a fantasy film produced by Arnon Milchan. Scott decided to create a &quot;once upon a time&quot; tale set in a world of princesses, unicorns and goblins, filming almost entirely inside the studio. Scott cast Tom Cruise as the film&#x27;s hero, Jack; Mia Sara as Princess Lili; and Tim Curry as the Satan-horned Lord of Darkness. Scott had a forest set built on the 007 Stage at Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, with trees 60 feet high and trunks 30 feet in diameter. In the final stages of filming, the forest set was destroyed by fire; Jerry Goldsmith&#x27;s original score was used for European release, but replaced in North America with a score by Tangerine Dream. Rob Bottin provided the film&#x27;s Academy Award-nominated make-up effects, most notably Curry&#x27;s red-coloured Satan figure. Despite a major commercial failure on release, the film has gone on to become a cult classic. The 2002 Director&#x27;s Cut restored Goldsmith&#x27;s original score.

Scott made &quot;Someone to Watch Over Me&quot;, a romantic thriller starring Tom Berenger and Mimi Rogers in 1987, and &quot;Black Rain&quot; (1989), a police drama starring Michael Douglas and Andy García, shot partially in Japan. The latter was very well received at the box office. &quot;Black Rain&quot; was the first of Scott&#x27;s six collaborations with the composer Hans Zimmer.

====&quot;1984&quot; Apple Macintosh commercial====

In 1984, Scott directed a big-budget ($900,000) television commercial, &quot;1984&quot;, to launch Apple Computer&#x27;s Macintosh computer. Scott filmed the advertisement in England for about $370,000; which was given a showcase airing in the US on 22 January 1984, during Super Bowl XVIII, alongside screenings in cinemas. Some consider this advertisement a &quot;watershed event&quot; in advertising and a &quot;masterpiece&quot;. &quot;Advertising Age&quot; placed it top of its list of the 50 greatest commercials.

Set in a dystopian future modelled after George Orwell&#x27;s &quot;Nineteen Eighty-Four&quot;, Scott&#x27;s advertisement used its hero (portrayed by English athlete Anya Major) to represent the coming of the Macintosh (indicated by her white tank top adorned with a picture of the Apple Macintosh computer) as a means of saving humanity from &quot;conformity&quot; (Big Brother), an allusion to IBM, at that time the dominant force in computing.

=== 1990s ===
The road film &quot;Thelma &amp; Louise&quot; (1991) starring Geena Davis as Thelma, Susan Sarandon as Louise, in addition to the breakthrough role for Brad Pitt as J.D, proved to be one of Scott&#x27;s biggest critical successes, helping revive the director&#x27;s reputation and receiving his first nomination for the Academy Award for Best Director. His next project, independently funded historical epic &quot;1492: Conquest of Paradise&quot;, was a box office failure. The film recounts the expeditions to the Americas by Christopher Columbus (French star Gérard Depardieu). Scott did not release another film for four years.

In 1995, Ridley and his brother Tony formed a production company, Scott Free Productions, in Los Angeles. All Ridley&#x27;s subsequent feature films, starting with &quot;White Squall&quot; (starring Jeff Bridges) and &quot;G.I. Jane&quot; (starring Demi Moore), have been produced under the Scott Free banner. In 1995 the two brothers purchased a controlling interest in the British film studio Shepperton Studios. In 2001, Shepperton merged with Pinewood Studios to become The Pinewood Studios Group, which is headquartered in Buckinghamshire, England.

===2000s===
Scott&#x27;s historical drama &quot;Gladiator&quot; (2000) proved to be one of his biggest critical and commercial successes. It won five Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Actor for the film&#x27;s star Russell Crowe, and saw Scott nominated for the Academy Award for Best Director. Scott worked with British visual effects company The Mill for the film&#x27;s computer-generated imagery, and the film was dedicated to Oliver Reed who died during filming – The Mill created a digital body double for Reed&#x27;s remaining scenes. Some have credited &quot;Gladiator &quot; with reviving the nearly defunct &quot;sword and sandal&quot; historical genre. The film was named the fifth best action film of all time in the ABC special &quot;Best in Film: The Greatest Movies of Our Time&quot;.
Scott directed &quot;Hannibal&quot; (2001) starring Anthony Hopkins as Hannibal Lecter. The film was commercially successful despite receiving mixed reviews. Scott&#x27;s next film, &quot;Black Hawk Down&quot; (2001), featuring Tom Hardy in his film debut, was based on a group of stranded US soldiers fighting for their lives in Somalia; Scott was nominated for an Oscar for Best Director. In 2003, Scott directed a smaller scale project, &quot;Matchstick Men&quot;, adapted from the novel by Eric Garcia and starring Nicolas Cage, Sam Rockwell and Alison Lohman. It received mostly positive reviews but performed moderately at the box office.

In 2005, he made the modestly successful &quot;Kingdom of Heaven&quot;, a film about the Crusades. The film starred Orlando Bloom, and marked Scott&#x27;s first collaboration with the composer Harry Gregson-Williams. The Moroccan government sent the Moroccan cavalry as extras for some battle scenes. Unhappy with the theatrical version of &quot;Kingdom of Heaven&quot; (which he blamed on paying too much attention to the opinions of preview audiences in addition to relenting when Fox wanted 45 minutes shaved off), Scott supervised a director&#x27;s cut of the film, the true version of what he wanted, which was released on DVD in 2006. The director&#x27;s cut of &quot;Kingdom of Heaven&quot; has been met with critical acclaim, with &quot;Empire&quot; magazine calling the film an &quot;epic&quot;, adding: &quot;The added 45 minutes in the director&#x27;s cut are like pieces missing from a beautiful but incomplete puzzle.&quot; &quot;This is the one that should have gone out&quot; reflected Scott. Asked if he was against previewing in general in 2006, Scott stated: &quot;It depends who&#x27;s in the driving seat. If you&#x27;ve got a lunatic doing my job, then you need to preview. But a good director should be experienced enough to judge what he thinks is the correct version to go out into the cinema.&quot;

Scott teamed up again with &quot;Gladiator&quot; star Russell Crowe for &quot;A Good Year&quot;, based on the best-selling book by Peter Mayle about an investment banker who finds a new life in Provence. The film was released on 10 November 2006. A few days later Rupert Murdoch, chairman of studio 20th Century Fox (who backed the film) dismissed &quot;A Good Year&quot; as &quot;a flop&quot; at a shareholders&#x27; meeting.

Scott&#x27;s next film was &quot;American Gangster&quot;, based on the story of real-life drug kingpin Frank Lucas. Scott took over the project in early 2006 and had screenwriter Steven Zaillian rewrite his script to focus on the dynamic between Frank Lucas and Richie Roberts. Denzel Washington signed on to the project as Lucas, with Russell Crowe co-starring as Roberts. The film premiered in November 2007 to positive reviews and box office success, and Scott was nominated for a Golden Globe for Best Director.

In late 2008, Scott&#x27;s espionage thriller &quot;Body of Lies&quot;, starring Leonardo DiCaprio and Russell Crowe, opened to lukewarm ticket-sales and mixed reviews. Scott directed a revisionist adaptation of &quot;Robin Hood&quot;, which starred Russell Crowe as Robin Hood and Cate Blanchett as Maid Marian. It was released in May 2010 to mixed reviews, but a respectable box-office.

On 31 July 2009, news surfaced of a two-part prequel to &quot;Alien&quot; with Scott attached to direct. The project, ultimately reduced to a single film called &quot;Prometheus&quot;, which Scott described as sharing &quot;strands of &quot;Alien&quot;&#x27;s DNA&quot; while not being a direct prequel, was released in June 2012. The film starred Charlize Theron and Michael Fassbender, with Noomi Rapace playing the leading role of the scientist named Elizabeth Shaw. The film received mostly positive reviews and grossed $403 million at the box office.

In August 2009, Scott planned to direct an adaptation of Aldous Huxley&#x27;s &quot;Brave New World&quot; set in a dystopian London with Leonardo DiCaprio. In 2009, the TV series &quot;The Good Wife&quot; premiered with Ridley and his brother Tony credited as executive producers.

===2010s===
On 6 July 2010, YouTube announced the launch of &quot;Life in a Day&quot;, an experimental documentary executive produced by Scott. Released at the Sundance Film Festival on 27 January 2011, it incorporates footage shot on 24 July 2010 submitted by YouTube users from around the world. As part of the buildup to the 2012 London Olympics, Scott produced &quot;Britain in a Day&quot;, a documentary film consisting of footage shot by the British public on 12 November 2011.

In 2012, Scott produced the commercial for Lady Gaga&#x27;s fragrance, &quot;Fame&quot;. It was touted as the first ever black Eau de Parfum, in the informal credits attached to the trailer for this advertisement. On 24 June 2013, Scott&#x27;s series &quot;Crimes of the Century&quot; debuted on CNN. In November 2012 it was announced that Scott would produce the documentary, &quot;Springsteen &amp; I&quot; directed by Baillie Walsh and inspired by &quot;Life in a Day&quot;, which Scott also produced. The film featured fan footage from throughout the world on what musician Bruce Springsteen meant to them and how he impacted their lives. The film was released for one day only in 50 countries and on over 2000 film screens on 22 July 2013.

Scott directed &quot;The Counselor&quot; (2013), with a screenplay by author Cormac McCarthy. On 25 October 2013, &quot;Indiewire&quot; reported that &quot;Before McCarthy sold his first spec script for Scott&#x27;s (&quot;The Counselor&quot;) film, the director was heavily involved in developing an adaptation of the author&#x27;s 1985 novel &quot;Blood Meridian&quot; with screenwriter Bill Monahan (&quot;The Departed&quot;). But as Scott said in a &quot;Time Out&quot; interview, &#x27;[Studios] didn&#x27;t want to make it. The book is so uncompromising, which is what&#x27;s great about it.&#x27; Described as an &#x27;anti-western&#x27;...&quot; Scott directed the biblically inspired epic film &quot;&quot;, released in December 2014 which received negative reviews from critics (particularly for the casting of white actors as Middle Eastern characters) and grossed $268 million worldwide on a $140 million budget, making it a financial disappointment. Filmed at Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, the film starred Christian Bale in the lead role.
In May 2014, Scott began negotiations to direct &quot;The Martian&quot;, starring Matt Damon as Mark Watney. Like many of Scott&#x27;s previous works, &quot;The Martian&quot; features a heroine in the form of Jessica Chastain&#x27;s character who is the mission commander. The film was originally scheduled for release on 25 November 2015, but Fox later switched its release date with that of &quot;Victor Frankenstein&quot;, and thus &quot;The Martian&quot; was released on 2 October 2015. &quot;The Martian&quot; was a critical and commercial success, grossed over $630 million worldwide, becoming Scott&#x27;s highest-grossing film to date.

A sequel to &quot;Prometheus&quot;, &quot;&quot;, started filming in 2016, premiered in London on 4 May 2017, and received general release on 19 May 2017. The film received generally positive reviews from critics, with many praising Michael Fassbender&#x27;s dual performance and calling the film a return to form for both director Ridley Scott and the franchise.

In August 2011, information leaked about production of a sequel to &quot;Blade Runner&quot; by Alcon Entertainment, with Alcon partners Broderick Johnson and Andrew Kosove. Scott informed the &quot;Variety&quot; publication in November 2014 that he was no longer the director for the film and would only fulfill a producer&#x27;s role. Scott also revealed that filming would begin sometime within 2015, and that Harrison Ford has signed on to reprise his role from the original film but his character should only appear in &quot;the third act&quot; of the sequel. On 26 February 2015, the sequel was officially confirmed, with Denis Villeneuve hired to direct the film, and Scott being an executive producer. The sequel, &quot;Blade Runner 2049&quot;, was released on 6 October 2017 to universal acclaim.

From May to August 2017, Scott filmed &quot;All the Money in the World&quot;, a drama about the kidnapping of John Paul Getty III, starring Mark Wahlberg and Michelle Williams. Kevin Spacey originally portrayed Getty Sr. However, after multiple sexual assault allegations against the actor, Scott decided to replace him with Christopher Plummer, saying &quot;You can&#x27;t condone that kind of behaviour in any shape or form. We cannot let one person&#x27;s action affect the good work of all these other people. It&#x27;s that simple.&quot; Scott began re-shooting Spacey&#x27;s scenes with Plummer on 20 November, which included filming at Elveden Hall in west Suffolk, England. With a release date of 25 December 2017, the film studio had its doubts that Scott would manage it, saying: &quot;They were like, &#x27;You&#x27;ll never do it. God be with you.&#x27;&quot;

=== 2020s ===
In 2020, Scott directed &quot;The Last Duel&quot;, a film adaptation of Eric Jager&#x27;s 2004 book &quot;The Last Duel: A True Story of Crime, Scandal, and Trial by Combat in Medieval France&quot;, starring Adam Driver, Matt Damon and Jodie Comer which was released on 15 October 2021 to positive reviews but it bombed at the box office, grossing only $30.6 million against a production budget of $100 million. Filming locations included the French medieval castle of Berzé-le-Châtel (with a film crew of 300 people including 100 extras), and Ireland. He directed &quot;House of Gucci&quot;, a film about the murder of Maurizio Gucci orchestrated by Patrizia Reggiani, who were portrayed by Adam Driver and Lady Gaga, respectively. Scott had originally been set to direct the film in 2006, but the project languished in development hell for several years, with different directors entering talks to sign on, before he returned to the project in November 2019. The film was released on 24 November 2021.

Scott next directed &quot;Napoleon&quot;, a biopic of Napoleon Bonaparte starring Joaquin Phoenix as Napoleon and Vanessa Kirby as Empress Joséphine, the first wife of Napoleon. Filming began in February 2022; the film was released on 22 November 2023 by Sony Pictures Releasing before streaming on Apple TV+ on 1 March 2024. Scott&#x27;s next film was &quot;Gladiator II&quot;, a sequel to &quot;Gladiator&quot;, starring Paul Mescal, Denzel Washington, and Pedro Pascal. The film, which began production in June 2023 but had been discussed since early 2001, was released on 22 November 2024.

===Upcoming projects===
In February 2024, it was announced that Scott will direct Paramount Pictures&#x27; Bee Gees biopic titled &quot;You Should Be Dancing&quot;, written by John Logan and Joe Penhall. The film is scheduled to begin principal photography in September 2025 in London and Miami. In November that year, Scott was announced to be directing an adaptation of &quot;The Dog Stars&quot;, starring Jacob Elordi, with principal photography eyed to begin in April 2025, in Italy.

While promoting &quot;Gladiator II&quot;, in a September 2024 interview for French network La Premiere, Scott revealed that he was planning a &quot;Gladiator III&quot;, comparing the ending of &quot;II&quot; to &quot;The Godfather&quot;; &quot;with Michael Corleone ending up with a job he didn&#x27;t want [...] So the next [film] will be about a man who doesn&#x27;t want to be where he is.&quot;

==Television projects==
In 2002, Ridley Scott and his brother Tony were among the executive producers of &quot;The Gathering Storm&quot;, a television biographical film of Winston Churchill in the years just prior to World War II. A BBC–HBO co-production, it received acclaim, with Mark Lawson of &quot;The Guardian&quot; ranking it as the most memorable television portrayal of Churchill. The brothers produced the CBS series &quot;Numb3rs&quot; (2005–10), a crime drama about a genius mathematician who helps the FBI solve crimes; and &quot;The Good Wife&quot; (2009–2016), a legal drama about an attorney balancing her job with her husband, a former state attorney trying to rebuild his political career after a major scandal. The two Scotts also produced a 2010 film adaptation of 1980s television show &quot;The A-Team&quot;, directed by Joe Carnahan.

Ridley Scott was an executive producer of the first season of Amazon&#x27;s &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot; (2015–16). Through Scott Free Productions, he is an executive producer on the dark comic science-fiction series &quot;BrainDead&quot; which debuted on CBS in 2016.

On 20 November 2017, Amazon agreed a deal with AMC Studios for a worldwide release of &quot;The Terror&quot;, Scott&#x27;s series adaptation of Dan Simmons&#x27; novel, a speculative retelling of British explorer Sir John Franklin&#x27;s lost expedition of HMS &quot;Erebus&quot; and HMS &quot;Terror&quot; to the Arctic in 1845–1848 to force the Northwest Passage, with elements of horror and supernatural fiction, and the series premiered in March 2018. Scott was an executive producer for the 2019 BBC/FX three-part miniseries &quot;A Christmas Carol&quot;, developed by Steven Knight, alongside Tom Hardy.

Scott&#x27;s first television directing role in 50 years, &quot;Raised by Wolves&quot;, was released on HBO Max in 2020. Scott said his &quot;tendency was to think, &#x27;I don&#x27;t want to go down that road of androids again&#x27;&quot;, but decided to take on the project after he read the script and liked it. The show revolves around androids Mother and Father, who attempt to save humankind on planet Kepler-22b after earth is demolished by war between the Mithraic, who follow a god called Sol, and militant atheists.

In August 2022, it was announced Scott would executive produce the Apple TV+ series &quot;Dope Thief&quot;, written by Peter Craig and starring Brian Tyree Henry, and would also direct an episode.

==Personal life==
Scott was married to Felicity Heywood from 1964 to 1975. The couple had two sons, Jake and Luke, both of whom work as directors in Scott&#x27;s production company, Ridley Scott Associates. Scott later married advertising executive Sandy Watson in 1979, with whom he had a daughter, Jordan Scott, also a director, and divorced in 1989. In 2015 he married actress Giannina Facio, whom he has cast in all his films since &quot;White Squall&quot; except &quot;American Gangster&quot; and &quot;The Martian&quot;. He divides his time between homes in London, France, and Los Angeles.

His eldest brother Frank died, aged 45, of skin cancer in 1980. His younger brother Tony, who was also his business partner in their company Scott Free, died on 19 August 2012 at the age of 68 after jumping from the Vincent Thomas Bridge which spans Los Angeles Harbor, after an originally disputed long struggle with cancer. Before Tony&#x27;s death, he and Ridley collaborated on a miniseries based on Robin Cook&#x27;s novel &quot;Coma&quot; for A&amp;E. The two-part miniseries premiered on A&amp;E on 3 September 2012, to mixed reviews.

Scott has dedicated several of his films in memory of his family: &quot;Blade Runner&quot; to his brother Frank, &quot;Black Hawk Down&quot; to his mother, and &quot;The Counselor&quot; and &quot;&quot; to his brother Tony. Ridley also paid tribute to his late brother Tony at the 2016 Golden Globes, after his film, &quot;The Martian&quot;, won Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy.

In 2013, Scott stated that he is an atheist. Although when asked by the BBC in a September 2014 interview if he believes in God, Scott replied:

==Directorial style==
Scott&#x27;s frequent collaborator Russell Crowe commented, &quot;I like being on Ridley&#x27;s set because actors can perform [...] and the focus is on the performers.&quot; Paul M. Sammon, in his book &quot;Future Noir: The Making of Blade Runner&quot;, commented in an interview with Brmovie.com that Scott&#x27;s relationship with his actors has improved considerably over the years. More recently during the filming of Scott&#x27;s 2012 film, &quot;Prometheus&quot;, Charlize Theron praised the director&#x27;s willingness to listen to suggestions from the cast for improvements in the way their characters are portrayed on screen. Theron worked alongside the writers and Scott to give more depth to her character during filming. When working on epics, Scott states, &quot;there&#x27;s always the danger that the characters can get swamped&quot; on a large canvas, before adding, &quot;My model is David Lean, whose characters never got lost in the proscenium.&quot;

Scott&#x27;s work is identified for its striking visuals, with heroines also a common theme. &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; film editor Joshua Rothkopf wrote &quot;Scott may be the movies&#x27; most consistent stealth feminist&quot;. His visual style, incorporating a detailed approach to production design and innovative, atmospheric lighting, has been influential on a subsequent generation of filmmakers. James Cameron commented, &quot;I love Ridley&#x27;s films and I love his filmmaking, I love the beauty of the photography, I love the visceral sense that you&#x27;re there, that you&#x27;re present.&quot; Scott commonly uses slow pacing until the action sequences. Examples include &quot;Alien&quot; and &quot;Blade Runner&quot;; the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; critic Sheila Benson, for example, would call the latter &quot;Blade Crawler&quot; &quot;because it&#x27;s so damn slow&quot;. Scott claims to have an eidetic memory, which he says aids him in visualising and storyboarding the scenes in his films.

Scott has developed a method for filming intricate shots as swiftly as possible: &quot;I like working, always, with a minimum of three cameras. [...] So those 50 set-ups [a day] might only be 25 set-ups except I&#x27;m covering in the set-up. So you&#x27;re finished. I mean, if you take a little bit more time to prep on three cameras, or if it&#x27;s a big stunt, eleven cameras, and – whilst it may take 45 minutes to set up – then when you&#x27;re ready you say &#x27;Action!&#x27;, and you do three takes, two takes and is everybody happy? You say, &#x27;Yeah, that&#x27;s it.&#x27; So you move on.&quot;

Artificial intelligence is a theme that appears in several of Scott&#x27;s films, including &quot;Blade Runner&quot;, &quot;Alien&quot;, and &quot;Prometheus&quot;. The 2013 book &quot;The Culture and Philosophy of Ridley Scott&quot; identifies pioneering computer scientist Alan Turing and the philosopher John Searle as presenting relevant models of testing artificial intelligence known as the Turing test and the Chinese Room Thought Experiment, respectively, in the chapter titled &quot;What&#x27;s Wrong with Building Replicants&quot;, which has been a recurring theme for many of Scott&#x27;s films. The chapter titled &quot;Artificial Intelligence in &quot;Blade Runner&quot;, &quot;Alien&quot;, and &quot;Prometheus&quot;,&quot; concludes by citing the writings of John Stuart Mill in the context of Scott&#x27;s Nexus-6 Replicants in &quot;Blade Runner&quot; (Rutger Hauer), the android Ash (Ian Holm) in &quot;Alien&quot;, and the android David 8 (Michael Fassbender) in &quot;Prometheus&quot;, where Mill is applied to assert that measures and tests of intelligence must also assess actions and moral behaviour in androids to effectively address the themes which Scott explores in these films.

===DVD format and director&#x27;s cut===

Scott provides audio commentaries and interviews for all his films where possible. In the July 2006 issue of &quot;Total Film&quot; magazine, he stated: &quot;After all the work we go through, to have it run in the cinema and then disappear forever is a great pity. To give the film added life is really cool for both those who missed it and those who really loved it.&quot;

The positive reaction to the &quot;Blade Runner&quot; Director&#x27;s Cut encouraged Scott to re-cut several movies that were a disappointment at the time of their release (including &quot;Legend&quot; and &quot;Kingdom of Heaven&quot;), which have been met with acclaim. Today the practice of alternative cuts is more commonplace, though often as a way to make a film stand out in the DVD marketplace by adding new material.

==Filmography==

==Honours and awards==
Scott was knighted in the 2003 New Year Honours for services to the British film industry. He received his accolade from Queen Elizabeth II at an investiture ceremony at Buckingham Palace on 8 July 2003. Scott admitted feeling &quot;stunned and truly humbled&quot; after the ceremony, saying, &quot;As a boy growing up in South Shields, I could never have imagined that I would receive such a special recognition. I am truly humbled to receive this treasured award and believe it also further recognises the excellence of the British film industry.&quot; He was appointed a Knight Grand Cross by King Charles III in 2024.

He has been nominated for three Academy Awards for Directing—&quot;Thelma &amp; Louise&quot;, &quot;Gladiator&quot; and &quot;Black Hawk Down&quot;—as well as three British Academy Film Awards for Best Director, four Golden Globe Awards for Best Director, and two Primetime Emmy Awards. In 1995, Ridley and his brother Tony received the BAFTA for Outstanding British Contribution To Cinema. In 2018 he received the highest accolade from BAFTA, the BAFTA Fellowship, for lifetime achievement.

Scott was inducted into the Science Fiction Hall of Fame in 2007. In 2017 the German newspaper &quot;FAZ&quot; compared Scott&#x27;s influence on the science fiction film genre to Sir Alfred Hitchcock&#x27;s on thrillers and John Ford&#x27;s on Westerns. In 2011, he received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.

Scott has received three Hugo Awards in the category of Best Dramatic Presentation for &quot;Alien&quot;, &quot;Blade Runner&quot; and &quot;The Martian&quot;. In 2012, Scott was among the British cultural icons selected by artist Sir Peter Blake to appear in a new version of his most famous artwork, the Beatles&#x27; &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot; album cover, to celebrate the British cultural figures of his life that he most admires to mark his 80th birthday. On 3 July 2015, he was awarded an honorary doctorate by the Royal College of Art in a ceremony at the Royal Albert Hall in London at which he described how he still keeps on his office wall his school report placing him 31st out of 31 in his class, and how his teacher encouraged him to pursue what became his passion at art school.

Directed Academy Award performances
==See also==
* 
* Ridley Scott&#x27;s unrealised projects
* List of Academy Award winners and nominees from Great Britain

==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* Ridley Scott Associates (RSA)
* They Shoot Pictures, Don&#x27;t They?
* 
* Interview with Ridley Scott at Texas Archive of the Moving Image</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q56005" start="0" end="16" title="Ridley Scott" label="Sir Ridley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="107" end="122" title="Science fiction film" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q959790" start="124" end="129" title="Crime film" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168625" start="135" end="150" title="historical drama" label="historical epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622410" start="236" end="262" title="List of highest-grossing film directors" label="highest-grossing directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q108032094" start="339" end="353" title="List of awards and nominations received by Ridley Scott" label="many accolades"/>
<link wikidata="Q787148" start="369" end="385" title="BAFTA Fellowship" label="BAFTA Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="424" end="445" title="Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="453" end="471" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="480" end="488" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="492" end="510" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="536" end="554" title="Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the British Empire" label="Knight Grand Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="558" end="574" title="Charles III" label="King Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753535" start="603" end="623" title="Royal College of Art" label="Royal College of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212051" start="806" end="819" title="The Duellists" label="The Duellists"/>
<link wikidata="Q103569" start="888" end="893" title="Alien (film)" label="Alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1037" end="1041" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q128518" start="1051" end="1060" title="Gladiator (2000 film)" label="Gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q115789958" start="1082" end="1093" title="Gladiator II" label="2024 sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="1108" end="1117" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q207698" start="1127" end="1144" title="Kingdom of Heaven (film)" label="Kingdom of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251971" start="1159" end="1175" title="England in the Middle Ages" label="medieval England"/>
<link wikidata="Q223559" start="1185" end="1195" title="Robin Hood (2010 film)" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5715" start="1210" end="1225" title="Memphis, Egypt" label="ancient Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449" start="1263" end="1272" title="Mogadishu" label="Mogadishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q221384" start="1282" end="1297" title="Black Hawk Down (film)" label="Black Hawk Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q184843" start="1347" end="1359" title="Blade Runner" label="Blade Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q192686" start="1423" end="1433" title="Prometheus (2012 film)" label="Prometheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18547944" start="1454" end="1465" title="The Martian (film)" label="The Martian"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="1540" end="1568" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Academy Awards for Directing"/>
<link wikidata="Q658041" start="1579" end="1598" title="Thelma &amp;amp; Louise" label="Thelma &amp;amp; Louise"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="1691" end="1721" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Academy Award for Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q193648" start="1838" end="1842" title="Tony Scott" label="Tony"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="1854" end="1880" title="British Academy Film Award" label="British Academy Film Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834546" start="1885" end="1927" title="BAFTA Outstanding British Contribution to Cinema Award" label="Outstanding British Contribution to Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="2085" end="2107" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="2115" end="2134" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="2234" end="2237" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="2373" end="2393" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243506" start="2425" end="2452" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Television Movie" label="Outstanding Television Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="2461" end="2464" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778705" start="2476" end="2495" title="The Gathering Storm (2002 film)" label="The Gathering Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895159" start="2517" end="2562" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Documentary or Nonfiction Special" label="Outstanding Documentary or Nonfiction Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621107" start="2571" end="2586" title="History Channel" label="History Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554729" start="2600" end="2610" title="Gettysburg (2011 film)" label="Gettysburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093425" start="2657" end="2664" title="RKO 281" label="RKO 281"/>
<link wikidata="Q513178" start="2685" end="2705" title="The Andromeda Strain (miniseries)" label="The Andromeda Strain"/>
<link wikidata="Q283073" start="2730" end="2754" title="The Pillars of the Earth (miniseries)" label="The Pillars of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q279000" start="2837" end="2850" title="South Shields" label="South Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q12799162" start="2980" end="2987" title="Colonel (United Kingdom)" label="Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="2995" end="3010" title="Royal Engineers" label="Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3022" end="3038" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578988" start="3187" end="3195" title="Tyneside" label="Tyneside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860538" start="3217" end="3232" title="Tyneside Cinema" label="Tyneside Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="3256" end="3265" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q735478" start="3292" end="3300" title="newsreel" label="newsreel"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3346" end="3362" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q14970920" start="3545" end="3558" title="Merchant Navy (United Kingdom)" label="Merchant Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23360" start="3672" end="3682" title="Cumberland" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="3733" end="3738" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q698099" start="3797" end="3819" title="Allied Control Council" label="Allied Control Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q23082" start="3867" end="3880" title="County Durham" label="County Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293366" start="3907" end="3915" title="Teesside" label="Teesside"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="3981" end="3992" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089636" start="4067" end="4099" title="It! The Terror from Beyond Space" label="It! The Terror from Beyond Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q425992" start="4113" end="4142" title="The Day the Earth Stood Still" label="The Day the Earth Stood Still"/>
<link wikidata="Q578809" start="4160" end="4165" title="Them!" label="Them!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="4289" end="4304" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4318" end="4339" title="2001: A Space Odyssey (film)" label="2001: A Space Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595703" start="4432" end="4458" title="Grangefield Grammar School" label="Grangefield Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q989418" start="4462" end="4478" title="Stockton on Tees" label="Stockton on Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132103" start="4515" end="4545" title="West Hartlepool College of Art" label="West Hartlepool College of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753535" start="4952" end="4972" title="Royal College of Art" label="Royal College of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922986" start="5155" end="5170" title="Boy and Bicycle" label="Boy and Bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821416" start="5437" end="5456" title="Tonight (1957 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Tonight&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q180347" start="5604" end="5610" title="Z-Cars" label="Z-Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111800" start="5650" end="5668" title="Out of the Unknown" label="Out of the Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="5730" end="5740" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768716" start="5761" end="5771" title="The Daleks" label="The Daleks"/>
<link wikidata="Q853715" start="5833" end="5858" title="Dalek" label="eponymous alien creatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298234" start="5946" end="5960" title="Raymond Cusick" label="Raymond Cusick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678620" start="6072" end="6091" title="Adam Adamant Lives!" label="Adam Adamant Lives!"/>
<link wikidata="Q193648" start="6166" end="6176" title="Tony Scott" label="Tony Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q271284" start="6327" end="6338" title="Alan Parker" label="Alan Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q538578" start="6340" end="6351" title="Hugh Hudson" label="Hugh Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931301" start="6372" end="6384" title="Hugh Johnson (cinematographer)" label="Hugh Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5917245" start="6463" end="6468" title="Hovis" label="Hovis"/>
<link wikidata="Q111756717" start="6496" end="6506" title="Bike Round" label="Bike Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q11985" start="6550" end="6594" title="Symphony No. 9 (Dvořák)" label="Dvořák&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;New World&amp;quot; symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q12058752" start="6628" end="6650" title="Gold Hill, Shaftesbury" label="Gold Hill, Shaftesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q820507" start="6816" end="6828" title="Chanel No. 5" label="Chanel No. 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q198567" start="7348" end="7352" title="Jake Scott (director)" label="Jake"/>
<link wikidata="Q21066699" start="7357" end="7361" title="Luke Scott (director)" label="Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q452925" start="7427" end="7439" title="Jordan Scott (filmmaker)" label="Jordan Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278256" start="7519" end="7537" title="Shepperton Studios" label="Shepperton Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212051" start="7765" end="7778" title="The Duellists" label="The Duellists"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="7922" end="7942" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q82925" start="8064" end="8077" title="Joseph Conrad" label="Joseph Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q16653711" start="8103" end="8111" title="The Duel (short story)" label="The Duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="8137" end="8152" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q191713" start="8176" end="8182" title="Hussar" label="Hussar"/>
<link wikidata="Q433417" start="8219" end="8234" title="Keith Carradine" label="Keith Carradine"/>
<link wikidata="Q191132" start="8239" end="8252" title="Harvey Keitel" label="Harvey Keitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q335367" start="8749" end="8767" title="Tristan and Iseult" label="Tristan and Iseult"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="8798" end="8807" title="Star Wars (film)" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q103569" start="8929" end="8934" title="Alien (film)" label="Alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q988925" start="9055" end="9067" title="Ellen Ripley" label="Ellen Ripley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9108" end="9115" title="Girl Power in popular culture#Female action heroes and science fiction" label="heroine"/>
<link wikidata="Q102124" start="9135" end="9151" title="Sigourney Weaver" label="Sigourney Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q200405" start="9260" end="9269" title="John Hurt" label="John Hurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278256" start="9391" end="9409" title="Shepperton Studios" label="Shepperton Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q753322" start="9448" end="9483" title="1979 in film" label="sixth highest-grossing film of 1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q192686" start="10054" end="10064" title="Prometheus (2012 film)" label="Prometheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190192" start="10253" end="10257" title="Dune (novel)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q171091" start="10361" end="10375" title="Philip K. Dick" label="Philip K. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q605249" start="10395" end="10431" title="Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?" label="Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?"/>
<link wikidata="Q184843" start="10454" end="10466" title="Blade Runner" label="Blade Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q81328" start="10486" end="10499" title="Harrison Ford" label="Harrison Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="10604" end="10614" title="New Yorker magazine" label="New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="11716" end="11728" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q240862" start="11748" end="11767" title="director&amp;#x27;s cut" label="director&amp;#x27;s cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="12085" end="12092" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q188987" start="12408" end="12422" title="William Gibson" label="William Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q662029" start="12442" end="12453" title="Neuromancer" label="Neuromancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q174526" start="12478" end="12487" title="cyberpunk" label="cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q509913" start="12871" end="12877" title="Legend (1985 film)" label="Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q697131" start="12912" end="12925" title="Arnon Milchan" label="Arnon Milchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37079" start="13093" end="13103" title="Tom Cruise" label="Tom Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q253487" start="13135" end="13143" title="Mia Sara" label="Mia Sara"/>
<link wikidata="Q52392" start="13166" end="13175" title="Tim Curry" label="Tim Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="13183" end="13188" title="Satan" label="Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545538" start="13250" end="13259" title="007 Stage" label="007 Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q661896" start="13263" end="13279" title="Pinewood Studios" label="Pinewood Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q235077" start="13426" end="13441" title="Jerry Goldsmith" label="Jerry Goldsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q153616" start="13541" end="13556" title="Tangerine Dream" label="Tangerine Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="13768" end="13780" title="cult classic" label="cult classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195568" start="13871" end="13895" title="Someone to Watch Over Me (film)" label="Someone to Watch Over Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q299317" start="13932" end="13944" title="Tom Berenger" label="Tom Berenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q233054" start="13949" end="13960" title="Mimi Rogers" label="Mimi Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048085" start="13980" end="13990" title="Black Rain (1989 American film)" label="Black Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q119798" start="14029" end="14044" title="Michael Douglas" label="Michael Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q189415" start="14049" end="14060" title="Andy García" label="Andy García"/>
<link wikidata="Q76364" start="14230" end="14241" title="Hans Zimmer" label="Hans Zimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q203383" start="14374" end="14378" title="1984 (advertisement)" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="14396" end="14410" title="Apple Computer" label="Apple Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="14418" end="14427" title="Apple Macintosh" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848392" start="14571" end="14587" title="Super Bowl XVIII" label="Super Bowl XVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q380047" start="14737" end="14752" title="Advertising Age" label="Advertising Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="14859" end="14872" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q208460" start="14886" end="14906" title="Nineteen Eighty-Four" label="Nineteen Eighty-Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563945" start="14985" end="14995" title="Anya Major" label="Anya Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q340704" start="15062" end="15070" title="Sleeveless shirt" label="tank top"/>
<link wikidata="Q751417" start="15186" end="15197" title="Big Brother (1984)" label="Big Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="15215" end="15218" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q658041" start="15301" end="15320" title="Thelma &amp;amp; Louise" label="Thelma &amp;amp; Louise"/>
<link wikidata="Q280098" start="15343" end="15354" title="Geena Davis" label="Geena Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q133050" start="15366" end="15380" title="Susan Sarandon" label="Susan Sarandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35332" start="15433" end="15442" title="Brad Pitt" label="Brad Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="15601" end="15632" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Academy Award for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15695" end="15721" title="1492: Conquest of Paradise" label="1492: Conquest of Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="15808" end="15828" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q106508" start="15842" end="15858" title="Gérard Depardieu" label="Gérard Depardieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476213" start="15979" end="16001" title="Scott Free Productions" label="Scott Free Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756394" start="16083" end="16095" title="White Squall (film)" label="White Squall"/>
<link wikidata="Q174843" start="16112" end="16124" title="Jeff Bridges" label="Jeff Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q526690" start="16136" end="16145" title="G.I. Jane" label="G.I. Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q43044" start="16162" end="16172" title="Demi Moore" label="Demi Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476213" start="16204" end="16214" title="Scott Free Productions" label="Scott Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278256" start="16308" end="16326" title="Shepperton Studios" label="Shepperton Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q661896" start="16360" end="16376" title="Pinewood Studios" label="Pinewood Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757177" start="16387" end="16413" title="The Pinewood Studios Group" label="The Pinewood Studios Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q128518" start="16516" end="16525" title="Gladiator (2000 film)" label="Gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q129817" start="16694" end="16707" title="Russell Crowe" label="Russell Crowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="16741" end="16772" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Academy Award for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q7218427" start="16823" end="16831" title="The Mill (company)" label="The Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q313588" start="16910" end="16921" title="Oliver Reed" label="Oliver Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433443" start="17102" end="17118" title="sword-and-sandal" label="sword and sandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="17208" end="17211" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q722682" start="17300" end="17308" title="Hannibal (2001 film)" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q65932" start="17331" end="17346" title="Anthony Hopkins" label="Anthony Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q221384" start="17467" end="17482" title="Black Hawk Down (film)" label="Black Hawk Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q208026" start="17507" end="17516" title="Tom Hardy" label="Tom Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="17609" end="17616" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4536" start="17725" end="17739" title="Matchstick Men" label="Matchstick Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351304" start="17773" end="17784" title="Eric Garcia (writer)" label="Eric Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42869" start="17798" end="17810" title="Nicolas Cage" label="Nicolas Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q316446" start="17812" end="17824" title="Sam Rockwell" label="Sam Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4518" start="17829" end="17842" title="Alison Lohman" label="Alison Lohman"/>
<link wikidata="Q207698" start="17972" end="17989" title="Kingdom of Heaven (film)" label="Kingdom of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="18014" end="18022" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q44467" start="18041" end="18054" title="Orlando Bloom" label="Orlando Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q314623" start="18118" end="18140" title="Harry Gregson-Williams" label="Harry Gregson-Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="18670" end="18676" title="Empire (film magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q129817" start="19304" end="19317" title="Russell Crowe" label="Russell Crowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q912877" start="19328" end="19339" title="A Good Year" label="A Good Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q531759" start="19381" end="19392" title="Peter Mayle" label="Peter Mayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q101081" start="19444" end="19452" title="Provence" label="Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q53944" start="19514" end="19528" title="Rupert Murdoch" label="Rupert Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="19549" end="19565" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q270351" start="19711" end="19728" title="American Gangster (film)" label="American Gangster"/>
<link wikidata="Q441241" start="19781" end="19792" title="Frank Lucas" label="Frank Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q291141" start="19857" end="19872" title="Steven Zaillian" label="Steven Zaillian"/>
<link wikidata="Q920667" start="19940" end="19954" title="Richie Roberts" label="Richie Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q42101" start="19956" end="19973" title="Denzel Washington" label="Denzel Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q586356" start="20162" end="20192" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Director" label="Golden Globe for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q578312" start="20247" end="20259" title="Body of Lies (film)" label="Body of Lies"/>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="20276" end="20293" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q223559" start="20413" end="20423" title="Robin Hood (2010 film)" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="20462" end="20472" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q80966" start="20477" end="20491" title="Cate Blanchett" label="Cate Blanchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q968748" start="20495" end="20506" title="Maid Marian" label="Maid Marian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192686" start="20752" end="20762" title="Prometheus (2012 film)" label="Prometheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80046" start="20933" end="20948" title="Charlize Theron" label="Charlize Theron"/>
<link wikidata="Q57147" start="20953" end="20971" title="Michael Fassbender" label="Michael Fassbender"/>
<link wikidata="Q228676" start="20978" end="20990" title="Noomi Rapace" label="Noomi Rapace"/>
<link wikidata="Q81447" start="21199" end="21212" title="Aldous Huxley" label="Aldous Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q191949" start="21226" end="21241" title="Brave New World" label="Brave New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="21257" end="21266" title="dystopian" label="dystopian"/>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="21279" end="21296" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q19570" start="21327" end="21340" title="The Good Wife" label="The Good Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q193648" start="21385" end="21389" title="Tony Scott" label="Tony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075458" start="21490" end="21503" title="Life in a Day (YouTube)" label="Life in a Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="21584" end="21606" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="21752" end="21772" title="2012 London Olympics" label="2012 London Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969257" start="21795" end="21811" title="Britain in a Day" label="Britain in a Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="21952" end="21961" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024786" start="21986" end="21990" title="Lady Gaga Fame" label="Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="22205" end="22208" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581183" start="22292" end="22311" title="Springsteen &amp;amp; I" label="Springsteen &amp;amp; I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879901" start="22330" end="22343" title="Baillie Walsh" label="Baillie Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="22487" end="22504" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061599" start="22676" end="22689" title="The Counselor" label="The Counselor"/>
<link wikidata="Q272610" start="22732" end="22747" title="Cormac McCarthy" label="Cormac McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q581426" start="23005" end="23019" title="Blood Meridian" label="Blood Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q611586" start="23044" end="23056" title="William Monahan" label="Bill Monahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q172975" start="23064" end="23076" title="The Departed" label="The Departed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863185" start="23328" end="23347" title="List of films based on the Bible" label="biblically inspired"/>
<link wikidata="Q652256" start="23348" end="23357" title="epic film" label="epic film"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="23492" end="23506" title="Middle Eastern peoples" label="Middle Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165644" start="23592" end="23616" title="box-office bomb" label="financial disappointment"/>
<link wikidata="Q661896" start="23628" end="23644" title="Pinewood Studios" label="Pinewood Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q45772" start="23682" end="23696" title="Christian Bale" label="Christian Bale"/>
<link wikidata="Q18547944" start="23769" end="23780" title="The Martian (film)" label="The Martian"/>
<link wikidata="Q175535" start="23797" end="23807" title="Matt Damon" label="Matt Damon"/>
<link wikidata="Q229313" start="23924" end="23940" title="Jessica Chastain" label="Jessica Chastain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16637004" start="24108" end="24139" title="Victor Frankenstein (film)" label="&amp;quot;Victor Frankenstein&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q57147" start="24593" end="24611" title="Michael Fassbender" label="Michael Fassbender"/>
<link wikidata="Q21500755" start="24782" end="24788" title="Blade Runner 2049" label="sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713342" start="24820" end="24839" title="Alcon Entertainment" label="Alcon Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972958" start="24861" end="24878" title="Broderick Johnson" label="Broderick Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757652" start="24883" end="24896" title="Andrew Kosove" label="Andrew Kosove"/>
<link wikidata="Q81328" start="25137" end="25150" title="Harrison Ford" label="Harrison Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q548823" start="25352" end="25368" title="Denis Villeneuve" label="Denis Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q21500755" start="25452" end="25469" title="Blade Runner 2049" label="Blade Runner 2049"/>
<link wikidata="Q30321629" start="25575" end="25601" title="All the Money in the World" label="All the Money in the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361260" start="25627" end="25660" title="kidnapping of John Paul Getty III" label="kidnapping of John Paul Getty III"/>
<link wikidata="Q164119" start="25671" end="25684" title="Mark Wahlberg" label="Mark Wahlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q156796" start="25689" end="25706" title="Michelle Williams (actress)" label="Michelle Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q25144" start="25708" end="25720" title="Kevin Spacey" label="Kevin Spacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q190523" start="25856" end="25875" title="Christopher Plummer" label="Christopher Plummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367999" start="26174" end="26186" title="Elveden Hall" label="Elveden Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q85000980" start="26448" end="26461" title="The Last Duel (2021 film)" label="The Last Duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386799" start="26490" end="26500" title="Eric Jager" label="Eric Jager"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26524" end="26609" title="The Last Duel: A True Story of Crime, Scandal, and Trial by Combat in Medieval France" label="The Last Duel: A True Story of Crime, Scandal, and Trial by Combat in Medieval France"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678990" start="26626" end="26637" title="Adam Driver" label="Adam Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q175535" start="26639" end="26649" title="Matt Damon" label="Matt Damon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567346" start="26654" end="26665" title="Jodie Comer" label="Jodie Comer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165644" start="26731" end="26755" title="Box-office bomb" label="bombed at the box office"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="26868" end="26876" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q614567" start="26887" end="26902" title="Berzé-le-Châtel" label="Berzé-le-Châtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q105549749" start="26989" end="27003" title="House of Gucci" label="House of Gucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852623" start="27038" end="27052" title="Maurizio Gucci" label="Maurizio Gucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148087" start="27069" end="27086" title="Patrizia Reggiani" label="Patrizia Reggiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678990" start="27110" end="27121" title="Adam Driver" label="Adam Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="27126" end="27135" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081312" start="27239" end="27255" title="development hell" label="development hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q105806948" start="27449" end="27457" title="Napoleon (2023 film)" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="27477" end="27495" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q185140" start="27505" end="27520" title="Joaquin Phoenix" label="Joaquin Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159535" start="27537" end="27550" title="Vanessa Kirby" label="Vanessa Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q171480" start="27554" end="27571" title="Empress Joséphine" label="Empress Joséphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065128" start="27678" end="27701" title="Sony Pictures Releasing" label="Sony Pictures Releasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q62446736" start="27722" end="27731" title="Apple TV+" label="Apple TV+"/>
<link wikidata="Q115789958" start="27782" end="27794" title="Gladiator II" label="Gladiator II"/>
<link wikidata="Q73367368" start="27846" end="27857" title="Paul Mescal" label="Paul Mescal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42101" start="27859" end="27876" title="Denzel Washington" label="Denzel Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q14752155" start="27882" end="27894" title="Pedro Pascal" label="Pedro Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="28100" end="28118" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q133405" start="28125" end="28133" title="Bee Gees" label="Bee Gees"/>
<link wikidata="Q384004" start="28194" end="28204" title="John Logan (writer)" label="John Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808679" start="28209" end="28220" title="Joe Penhall" label="Joe Penhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256415" start="28253" end="28274" title="principal photography" label="principal photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="28296" end="28302" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="28307" end="28312" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q27949471" start="28396" end="28409" title="The Dog Stars" label="The Dog Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q53909401" start="28426" end="28438" title="Jacob Elordi" label="Jacob Elordi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="28499" end="28504" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513499" start="28598" end="28609" title="La Première (French TV network)" label="La Premiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q47703" start="28724" end="28737" title="The Godfather" label="The Godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q835154" start="28756" end="28772" title="Michael Corleone" label="Michael Corleone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778705" start="29018" end="29037" title="The Gathering Storm (2002 film)" label="The Gathering Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="29079" end="29096" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="29124" end="29136" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="29140" end="29143" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="29144" end="29147" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768515" start="29189" end="29200" title="Mark Lawson" label="Mark Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="29210" end="29222" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="29323" end="29326" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5935" start="29340" end="29347" title="Numb3rs" label="Numb3rs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="29422" end="29425" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q19570" start="29450" end="29463" title="The Good Wife" label="The Good Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q471746" start="29673" end="29688" title="The A-Team (film)" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q464123" start="29720" end="29730" title="The A-Team" label="The A-Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q936866" start="29750" end="29762" title="Joe Carnahan" label="Joe Carnahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18844750" start="29847" end="29873" title="The Man in the High Castle (TV series)" label="The Man in the High Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476213" start="29899" end="29921" title="Scott Free Productions" label="Scott Free Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q20966089" start="29998" end="30007" title="BrainDead (TV series)" label="BrainDead"/>
<link wikidata="Q27538067" start="30137" end="30147" title="The Terror (TV series)" label="The Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991597" start="30189" end="30212" title="The Terror (novel)" label="Dan Simmons&amp;#x27; novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655" start="30262" end="30275" title="John Franklin" label="John Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305" start="30283" end="30298" title="Franklin&amp;#x27;s lost expedition" label="lost expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q512615" start="30302" end="30324" title="HMS Erebus (1826)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Erebus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q141667" start="30329" end="30351" title="HMS Terror (1813)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Terror&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="30359" end="30365" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q81136" start="30392" end="30409" title="Northwest Passage" label="Northwest Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="30546" end="30549" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q651228" start="30550" end="30552" title="FX (TV channel)" label="FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q64481876" start="30581" end="30598" title="A Christmas Carol (miniseries)" label="A Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337354" start="30619" end="30632" title="Steven Knight" label="Steven Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q208026" start="30644" end="30653" title="Tom Hardy" label="Tom Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747802" start="30720" end="30736" title="Raised by Wolves (American TV series)" label="Raised by Wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078710" start="30760" end="30767" title="HBO Max" label="HBO Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q62446736" start="31250" end="31259" title="Apple TV+" label="Apple TV+"/>
<link wikidata="Q116783932" start="31273" end="31283" title="Dope Thief" label="Dope Thief"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173432" start="31302" end="31313" title="Peter Craig" label="Peter Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q26924801" start="31327" end="31344" title="Brian Tyree Henry" label="Brian Tyree Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q198567" start="31481" end="31485" title="Jake Scott (director)" label="Jake"/>
<link wikidata="Q21066699" start="31490" end="31494" title="Luke Scott (director)" label="Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q452925" start="31681" end="31693" title="Jordan Scott (filmmaker)" label="Jordan Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q457736" start="31761" end="31775" title="Giannina Facio" label="Giannina Facio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756394" start="31823" end="31835" title="White Squall (film)" label="White Squall"/>
<link wikidata="Q270351" start="31855" end="31872" title="American Gangster (film)" label="American Gangster"/>
<link wikidata="Q18547944" start="31889" end="31900" title="The Martian (film)" label="The Martian"/>
<link wikidata="Q193648" start="32063" end="32067" title="Tony Scott" label="Tony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476213" start="32120" end="32130" title="Scott Free Productions" label="Scott Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q496944" start="32195" end="32216" title="Vincent Thomas Bridge" label="Vincent Thomas Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655470" start="32363" end="32373" title="Coma (U.S. miniseries)" label="miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q352059" start="32383" end="32393" title="Robin Cook (novelist)" label="Robin Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q724196" start="32413" end="32417" title="Coma (novel)" label="Coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q277561" start="32428" end="32435" title="A&amp;amp;E (TV channel)" label="A&amp;amp;E"/>
<link wikidata="Q184843" start="32594" end="32606" title="Blade Runner" label="Blade Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q221384" start="32641" end="32656" title="Black Hawk Down (film)" label="Black Hawk Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061599" start="32688" end="32701" title="The Counselor" label="The Counselor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="32808" end="32821" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18547944" start="32845" end="32856" title="The Martian (film)" label="The Martian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="32946" end="32953" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="32982" end="32985" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q129817" start="33112" end="33125" title="Russell Crowe" label="Russell Crowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q184843" start="33313" end="33325" title="Blade Runner" label="Blade Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q192686" start="33531" end="33541" title="Prometheus (2012 film)" label="Prometheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80046" start="33549" end="33564" title="Charlize Theron" label="Charlize Theron"/>
<link wikidata="Q55260" start="33980" end="33990" title="David Lean" label="David Lean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34113" end="34121" title="Girl Power in popular culture#Female action heroes and science fiction" label="heroines"/>
<link wikidata="Q42574" start="34457" end="34470" title="James Cameron" label="James Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q103569" start="34745" end="34750" title="Alien (film)" label="Alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q386001" start="34972" end="34986" title="eidetic memory" label="eidetic memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="35681" end="35704" title="Artificial intelligence" label="Artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251" start="35956" end="35967" title="Alan Turing" label="Alan Turing"/>
<link wikidata="Q295012" start="35988" end="35999" title="John Searle" label="John Searle"/>
<link wikidata="Q189223" start="36078" end="36089" title="Turing test" label="Turing test"/>
<link wikidata="Q304726" start="36098" end="36110" title="Chinese Room" label="Chinese Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="36455" end="36471" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q133393" start="36578" end="36581" title="Ash (Alien)" label="Ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q123531213" start="36631" end="36638" title="David 8" label="David 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q440991" start="36945" end="36963" title="Audio commentary (DVD)" label="audio commentaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270191" start="37045" end="37055" title="Total Film" label="Total Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q240862" start="37360" end="37379" title="Director&amp;#x27;s Cut" label="Director&amp;#x27;s Cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="37783" end="37791" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601660" start="37799" end="37820" title="2003 New Year Honours" label="2003 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="37894" end="37912" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="37943" end="37960" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q279000" start="38095" end="38108" title="South Shields" label="South Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="38347" end="38365" title="Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the British Empire" label="Knight Grand Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="38369" end="38385" title="Charles III" label="King Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="38428" end="38456" title="Academy Award for Directing" label="Academy Awards for Directing"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="38561" end="38588" title="British Academy Film Awards" label="British Academy Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="38613" end="38632" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="38660" end="38681" title="Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q193648" start="38715" end="38719" title="Tony Scott" label="Tony"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="38733" end="38738" title="BAFTA Award" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834546" start="38743" end="38785" title="BAFTA Outstanding British Contribution to Cinema Award" label="Outstanding British Contribution To Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q787148" start="38844" end="38860" title="BAFTA Fellowship" label="BAFTA Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38917" end="38945" title="Museum of Pop Culture#Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame" label="Science Fiction Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q10184" start="38990" end="38993" title="Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung" label="FAZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="39073" end="39089" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484376" start="39100" end="39109" title="Thriller film" label="thrillers"/>
<link wikidata="Q51114" start="39114" end="39123" title="John Ford" label="John Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="39134" end="39142" title="Western (genre)" label="Westerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="39179" end="39201" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="39229" end="39239" title="Hugo Award" label="Hugo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414212" start="39260" end="39286" title="Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation" label="Best Dramatic Presentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q504611" start="39439" end="39450" title="Peter Blake (artist)" label="Peter Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="39510" end="39517" title="Beatles" label="Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q169226" start="39530" end="39572" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753535" start="39754" end="39774" title="Royal College of Art" label="Royal College of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="39796" end="39813" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405483" start="40082" end="40121" title="Ridley Scott&amp;#x27;s unrealised projects" label="Ridley Scott&amp;#x27;s unrealised projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570069" start="40124" end="40185" title="List of Academy Award winners and nominees from Great Britain" label="List of Academy Award winners and nominees from Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768586" start="40335" end="40368" title="Texas Archive of the Moving Image" label="Texas Archive of the Moving Image"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25495" wikidata="Q1417200" url="?curid=25495" title="History of the Republic of the Congo">
<text>The history of the [[Republic of the Congo]] has been marked by diverse civilisations: Indigenous, French and post-independence.

==Bantus and Forest Peoples==
The earliest inhabitants of the region comprising present-day Congo were the Forest peoples whose Stone Age culture was slowly replaced by Bantu tribes. The main Bantu tribe living in the region were the Kongo, also known as Bakongo, who established mostly unstable kingdoms along the mouth, north and south, of the Congo River. The capital of this Kongolese kingdom, Mbanza Kongo, later baptized as São Salvador by the Portuguese, is a town in northern Angola near the border with the DRC.

From the capital they ruled over an empire encompassing large parts of present-day Angola, the Republic of the Congo and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. They ruled over nearby tributary states, often by appointing sons of the Kongo kings to head these states. It had six &#x27;so-called&#x27; provinces called Mpemba, Soyo, Mbamba, Mbata, Nsundi and Mpangu. With the Kingdom of Loango in the north and the Kingdom of Mbundu in the south being tributary states. In the East it bordered on the Kwango river, a tributary of the Congo River. In total the kingdom is said to have had 3 to 4 million inhabitants and a surface of about 300,000 km2. According to oral traditions it was established in around 1400 when King Lukeni lua Nimi conquered the kingdom of Kabunga and established Mbanza Kongo as its capital.

==Portuguese exploration==

This African Iron Age culture came under great pressure with the arrival of the first Europeans, in this case Portuguese explorers. King John II of Portugal sought, in order to break Venetian and Ottoman control over trade with the East, to organize a series of expeditions south along the African coast with the goal of establishing direct contact with Asia. In 1482–1483, Captain Diogo Cão, sailing southwards on the uncharted Congo River, discovered the mouth of the river, and became the first European to encounter the Kingdom of Kongo.

Initially relations were limited and considered beneficial to both sides. With Christianity easily accepted by the local nobility, leading on 3 May 1491 to the baptism of king Nzinga a Nkuwu as the first Christian Kongolese king João I. He was succeeded after his death in 1506 by his son Nzinga Mbemba, who ruled as King Afonso I until 1543. Under his reign Christianity gained a strong foothold in the country. Many churches were built in Mbanza, of which the Kulumbimbi Cathedral (erected between 1491 and 1534) was the most impressive. In theory the kings of Portugal and Kongo were equals and they exchanged letters as such. Kongo at some point even established diplomatic relations with the Vatican, and the Pope appointed a local priest as bishop for the region.

==Revolts==
The result was a series of revolts against Portuguese rule of which the battle of Mbwila and the revolt led by Kimpa Vita (Tchimpa Vita) were the most important. The battle of Mbwila (or battle of Ambouilla or battle of Ulanga) was the result of a conflict between the Portuguese, led by governor André Vidal de Negreiros, and the Kongolese king António I concerning mining rights. The Kongolese refused to give the Portuguese extra territorial rights and the Portuguese were angry because of Kongolese support for previous Dutch invasions of the region. During a battle on 25 October 1665 an estimated 20,000 Kongolese fought against the Portuguese, who won the battle thanks to the early death in battle of Kongolese King Afonso I of Kongo.

The revolt of Kimpa Vita was another attempt to regain independence from the Portuguese. Baptised around 1684 as Dona Béatrice, Kimpa Vita was raised Catholic and being very pious she became a nun seeing visions of St. Anthony of Padua ordering her to restore the kingdom of Kongo to its former glory. Creating the Anthonian prophetic movement she interfered directly in the then civil war between the three members of the local nobility claiming the Kongolese throne, João II, Pedro IV and Pedro Kibenga. In it she took sides against Pedro IV, considered the favorite of the Portuguese. Her revolt, during which she captured the capital Mbanza Kongo, was short lived. She was captured by the forces of Pedro IV and under orders of Portuguese Capuchin Friars condemned for being a witch and a heretic and consequently burned to death. For many, she is the African version of Joan of Arc and an early symbol of African resistance against colonialism because, for her outspokenness, she was burned alive on a pyre.

==Congo&#x27;s disintegration==

As a result of all these wars the kingdom of the Loango in the north gained independence from Kongo. Also new kingdoms came to existence of which the Téké was the most important, ruling over a large area encompassing present-day Brazzaville and Kinshasa. Portugal&#x27;s position in Europe suffered a major change in 1580 when the Kingdoms of Spain and Portugal were united by a personal union under King Philip, creating the Iberian Union which lasted until 1640. This resulted in a diminished role for Portugal in African affairs, including the area around the mouth of the Congo River. The Kingdom of Kongo was reduced to a small enclave in the north of Angola with King Pedro V in 1888 finally accepting to become a vassal of the Portuguese. The Portuguese abolished the kingdom after the revolt of the Kongolese in 1914.

==French rule==

===Scramble for raw materials===
The period leading up to the Berlin Conference on Africa saw a rush by the major European powers to increase their control of the African continent. The rise in Western Europe of capitalism and the consequent industrialization led to a fast-growing demand for African raw materials like rubber, palm oil and cotton. Those who had these raw materials could have their economy grow strong. Others would lose out. This resulted in a new and more intensified scramble for Africa.

The Congo River hereby was a prime target for this new conquest by the European nations. Here the French, the Belgian King Leopold II and the Portuguese, in close cooperation with the British, fought for control of this area. Resulting in the division of the mouth of the Congo River between Portugal, who obtained Cabinda, an enclave north of the Congo River situated on the Atlantic Coast, the French who seized the large area north of the River, and king Leopold II gaining only a small foothold at the mouth of the Congo River but obtaining the huge hinterland, the present-day Democratic Republic of the Congo (formerly Zaïre). Hereby Leopold II obtained control via his International African Society and later the International Congolese Society, so-called philanthropic organizations who hired the British explorer Henry Morton Stanley to establish its authority. This resulted in the creation of the Congo Free State, the private empire of Leopold II. On November 15, 1908, the Belgian parliament annexed the colony, the reign of Leopold II over the Congo being discredited.

===Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza===
On the north bank of the river arrived the French explorer Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza, born in the Italian city of Rome in 1852. As a French naval officer he refused to work for the International African Society and instead helped the French in their conquest of the area north of the Congo River. Traveling from the Atlantic Ocean coast in present-day Gabon via the rivers Ogooué and Lefini he arrived in 1880 in the kingdom of the Téké where on 10 September 1880 he signed the treaty with King Makoko establishing French control over the region and making his capital soon afterwards at the small village named Mfoa later to be called Brazzaville.

===Establishing control===
Establishing French control was difficult. Belgian King Leopold II also tried to gain a foothold on the northern bank of the Congo River and sent Stanley to the area around Brazzaville. Following this was a series of revolts against the French of which the Bahangala Revolt led by Mabiala Ma Nganga was the first important one. It started in 1892 with the murder of the French administrator Laval and ended with the killing by the French of its leader in 1896. Many of the revolts were the result of French policy of maltreating the local population through the use of harsh forced labor. The locals were governed through the use of the repressive Code de l&#x27;indigénat Act. A law, which introduced forced labor, made it illegal for the local population to publicly air its grievances and excluded them from all the important jobs.The French government allowed for the establishment of the so-called Concessionary Companies in 1889 so as to circumvent the economic non-discrimination provisions of the Treaty of Berlin and maximize the revenue drawn from underpopulated and undeveloped regions under their control. Roughly forty companies with a capital of roughly 59.5 million francs were given a free hand to exploit the colony&#x27;s resources under virtual monopoly conditions. 650,000 square miles of land, except for a few strategic locations mainly around the Congo River, were leased as concessions for a thirty-year period. Cost-benefit considerations reigned supreme as often undercapitalized companies employed unqualified personnel and/or adventurers who lived off the land while stripping their concessions of all possible riches. Ivory and rubber virtually disappeared from the concessionary areas; indigenous populations were decimated by brutal forced labor, disease, and maladministration, and some fled to neighboring colonies.

French rule was brutal and led to many thousands of deaths. The construction between 1921 and 1934 of the 511 km long railway, the Chemin de Fer Congo-Océan between Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire is for example said to have cost the lives of around 23,000 locals and a few hundred Europeans. Any resistance against French colonial rule, however small, was brutally repressed. Ultimately the French government lost more money than it gained in rents and taxes from the Concessionary system upon which the colony had become reliant, and French public opinion was shocked by reports of the wide-scale brutalities which the system had given rise to. By 1930 most of the Concessionary companies had gone bankrupt and the practice had largely ceased.

In 1911 parts of the colony (the so-called New Cameroon territories) were ceded to the German Empire in exchange for German recognition of France&#x27;s rights to Morocco. German rule in these regions lasted only five years, and ultimately the New Cameroon territories were seized back by France in 1916, after the fall of German forces in Kamerun.

===French administration===
The first name given officially on 1 August 1886 for the new colony was Colony of Gabon and Congo. On 30 April 1891 this was renamed Colony of French Congo, consisting of Gabon and Middle Congo, the name the French gave to Congo-Brazzaville at that time. On 15 January 1910 the colony again was renamed to French Equatorial Africa (Afrique Equatoriale Française or AEF), this time it also included Chad and Oubangui-Chari, nowadays the Central African Republic. Congo-Brazzaville gained autonomy on the November 28, 1958 and independence from France on the August 15, 1960. The capital of the AEF was Brazzaville, for Middle Congo the capital was Pointe Noire.

The Federation quickly became centered on Middle Congo due to the presence of the Governor-General in Brazzaville, so while each colony was theoretically fairly autonomous the centralization of powers meant that the Governor-General gave preferential treatment to the region in which he resided. Education, health services, judicial systems, and public works were all under the control of Brazzaville-based authorities who could overrule the territorial governors. Middle Congo was provided with the only deep-water port in the Federation at Pointe Noire as well as the railway. Brazzaville&#x27;s public buildings, schools, law courts, trading firms, telecommunications and medical services soon surpassed by far their counterparts elsewhere in the Federation. Peoples from more marginal areas of AEF such as Chad were forced to work in Middle Congo, and funds were funneled primarily into the region, causing a great sense of resentment. Ultimately the massive expansion of Middle Congo&#x27;s civil service contributed to a drain of the rural population into the cities, and created an entrenched bureaucracy and trade union network that would prove to be a burden on state stability following independence.

The French government continued to rule through a Governor-General until the elections of 1957 when a High Commissioner of the République was established. The total population in 1950 for the whole AEF was 4,143,922, with only around 15,000 non-Africans present.

==1940s and Reforms==

===World War II===

As with the arrival of the Portuguese events in Europe again had a deep impact on the affairs of Congo-Brazzaville, and Africa in general. Marshal Philippe Pétain surrendered to Germany on 22 June 1940, and this gave birth to the so-called Vichy France republic. Pétain had earlier refused to continue the war against Germany from African territory alongside Great Britain. With the help of a handful of local French administrators and officers, the British, and the Belgian government in exile Charles de Gaulle&#x27;s Free French won over large parts of the French Empire. Politicians such as René Pleven, who later became prime minister, and officers as General Philippe Leclerc de Hauteclocque, Lieutenant René Amiot, Captain Raymond Delange, Colonel Edgar De Larminat and Adolphe Sicé helped him to gain control of the AEF territory. In three days troops loyal to De Gaulle took control of Chad (26 August 1940), Cameroon (27 August) and of Middle Congo (the 28th of August). Brazzaville hereby became the capital of the so-called Free French in Africa, ruled in theory by a Conseil de défense de l&#x27;Empire set up by De Gaulle on 27 October 1940. The FEA centred on Middle Congo went overnight from a backwater to a linchpin of Free French forces in Africa. Point Noire in particular became a vital transit area and base for bringing supplies, soldiers and labor from the interior to the coast and back again. The intense use of the railway led to the rise of a new urban labor class and improved the infrastructure of the colony.

===Felix Eboué===
In this revolt the then-governor of Chad Félix Eboué played a key role. Because of this and his earlier support for De Gaulle he became Governor-General of the Afrique Equatoriale Française (AEF) in 1940, the first non-white to achieve this position in French colonial history. Born in 1884 in French Guiana this descendant of African slaves was a key figure together with René Pleven in the organization by the De Gaulle government of the Brazzaville Conference of 1944, which took place between January 30 and February 8, 1944 and which set out the new direction of French colonial policies after World War II. Many of these were policies already put forward by Eboué in his 1941 book entitled &quot;La nouvelle politique coloniale de l&#x27;A.E.F.&quot; This conference led to the abolition of forced labor and the code de l&#x27;indigénat, which had made the political and social activities of the indigenous people illegal. This in turn led to the new French constitution of the Fourth Republic approved on 27 October 1946 and the election of the first Equatorial African members of Parliament in Paris. For Eboué and the new French government the people in the colonies were officially part of the French empire and had a new series of rights, including freedom of association, a uniform code of law, and elective institutions at three levels. A severely weakened France, under pressure from the US, had hardly any option but to change its colonial policies.

===Rise of nationalism===
Governor General Felix Eboué had a carrot and stick approach to local Congolese grievances. While allowing certain freedoms he brutally repressed any activities deemed dangerous to French colonial control. The case of the Congolese trade unionist André Matsoua (Matswa) shows his tough approach to political dissent.

André Matsoua can be seen as the father of modern Congolese nationalism. His rise shows how, in spite of the Code de l&#x27;Indigénat and the brutal repression, Africans in French colonies were able to set up resistance movements to colonial rule. Local schools run by French missionaries, as elsewhere in Africa formed the basis of this rise of African nationalism. André Matsoua got his education and contacts with European thinking through the church. Born in 1899 in Mandzakala he joined the French customs administration in Brazzaville in 1919 and soon after left for France where he joined the French army to fight in Morocco. He returned home as a non-commissioned officer. In 1926 he in Paris formed the Association des Originaires de l&#x27;A.E.F. with the purpose of helping people from his region living in France. For this he got support from some sections of French society as the French Communist Party and elements within the Free Masonry movement.

When in 1929 his group also became active in Congo itself and demanded an end to the Code de l&#x27;Indigénat, things changed. In 1929 the French dissolved Matsoua&#x27;s association and he together with some of his friends were jailed and sent in exile to Chad, leading to riots and a campaign of disobedience against the French administration lasting many years. He however escaped to France in 1935 where under a new identity he continued his political work. Showing his loyalty to France, in spite of the harsh repression, he joined the French army to fighting the German invasion in 1940. Wounded, he was rearrested, and sent back to Brazzaville where on 8 February 1941 he was sentenced under Felix Eboué to work in labor camps for the rest of his life. He died under unclear circumstances in prison on 13 January 1942. His supporters maintain that he was murdered, and began the Matsouanist movement, active chiefly among the Lari, even after independence.

==Road to independence==
The Congo went in the space of fourteen years from having no political freedom whatsoever to complete independence, making the rise of legitimate democratic institutions respected by a substantial proportion of the population near-impossible. Original democratic institutions were modeled on those of France, but multiple Africanising constitutions were instituted and then set aside in 1961, 1963, 1968, 1973 and 1992. As a heterogeneous state, political parties very quickly began to focus solely on ethnic and regionalist groupings. For example, between 1946 and 1956 the Lari, an important community in the country, refused to take part in elections, with many under the belief that their deceased messianic leader André Matsoua would return. The absence of the Bakongo from early politics led to a power vacuum into which the Vili and Mbochi moved until independence.

The most prominent Congolese politician until 1956 was Jean-Félix Tchicaya, born in Libreville on 9 November 1903 and a member of the royal family of the Kingdom of Loango. Together with Ivorian leader Félix Houphouët-Boigny and others, he formed the Rassemblement Démocratique Africain (RDA) in 1946 and, in 1947, the Parti Progressiste Africain. On 21 November 1945, Tchicaya became one of the first African leaders elected to the French parliament, giving him great prestige in his native country.

Although Tchicaya was on the left of the French political spectrum, he never strongly questioned French colonial rule. This resulted in a loss of influence as the Congo prepared for independence, influenced by nationalist anti-colonial leaders as Kwame Nkrumah from Ghana and Egyptian President Gamel Abdel Nasser. Only by aligning himself with his erstwhile enemy, the more radical Jacques Opangault in the parliamentary elections of March 31, 1957 could he continue to play a leading role in Congolese political life.

Prior to independence, the French establishment and Catholic Church feared Opangault&#x27;s radicalism and favored the rise of Fulbert Youlou, a former priest. The defection of Georges Yambot from the African Socialist Movement (MSA) to Youlou&#x27;s Union Démocratique pour la Défense d&#x27;Intérêts Africains (UDDIA) helped Youlou become prime minister in 1958. This led to the establishment of the Republic of the Congo on 28 November 1958 (with Brazzaville replacing Point Noire as the country&#x27;s capital).

On 16 February 1959, a revolt organized by Opangault and his MSA erupted in clashes along tribal lines between Southerners, supporting Youlou, and people from the North, loyal to the MSA. The riots were suppressed by French army and Opangault was arrested. In total about 200 people died. Prime Minister Youlou then held the elections for which Opangault had previously asked in vain. After the May 9 arrest of several politicians, including veteran politician Simon Kikhounga Ngot, because of an alleged communist plot, parliamentary elections were convincingly won by Youlou. On 12 July 1960 France agreed to Congo becoming fully independent. On 15 August 1960, the Republic of the Congo became an independent country and Fulbert Youlou became its first President.

In November that year, Youlou released Opangault, Ngot and other adversaries, as part of an amnesty. In return both politicians, as well as Germain Bicoumat, joined Youlou&#x27;s government and received ministerial posts, effectively destroying any organized political opposition.

===Oil===
Shortly before gaining independence an event occurred that in the years to come would have deep influence on the country and its relations with the outside world, mainly France. Although French geologists had already established for certain in 1926 the presence of oil and gas in the country, in 1957 near Pointe Indienne the French Societé des Pétroles de l&#x27;Afrique Equatoriale Françaises (SPAEF) found oil and gas reserves offshore in sufficient exploitable quantities. Only then did France start exploiting these reserves. The reason was that in Algeria a war of independence was fought, and the French were losing. Until then Algeria was the main source of oil and gas destined for the French market. To remain independent of the American and British oil majors France had to look elsewhere for its supply. For some the discovery of oil off the Congolese coast was a blessing. For the majority of the local population it rather proved to be a curse as the International Monetary Fund in its yearly reports on the country a few years ago sadly observed. By the 1970s oil was Congo&#x27;s largest export, however global market-price vicissitudes together with Congo&#x27;s tendency to rely on overly optimistic projections of future revenues for the political purposes of sustaining a large civil service and a highly inefficient State sector, have regularly caused serious fiscal imbalances. Development of the sector has been hampered by the nation&#x27;s traditionally powerful trade unionist movement, political uncertainties, as well as the costs of exploitation in a country with poor transport infrastructure.

==Les Trois Glorieuses and the 1968 Coup d&#x27;état==
As Brazzaville had been the capital of the large federation of French Equatorial Africa, it had an important workforce and many trade unions. Further radicalization elsewhere in Africa as a result of the decolonization led to revolt against the dictatorial rule of Youlou. Following Youlou&#x27;s 6 August 1963 announcement of the formation of a one-party state with only one legal trade union, trade unions started their revolt on 13 August. Youlou&#x27;s palace was besieged in August by angry workers and the French refused to intervene militarily, and he was forced to resign. This uprising is known as Les Trois Glorieuses (the Three Glorious Days), named after the French July Revolution against King Charles X in 1830. Fulbert Youlou and his main supporters were arrested by the military and ceased to play any further role in Congolese political life.

The Congolese military took charge of the country briefly and installed a civilian provisional government headed by Alphonse Massamba-Débat. Under the 1963 constitution, Massamba-Débat was elected president for a five-year term and named Pascal Lissouba to serve as prime minister.

President Massamba-Débat&#x27;s term in office was characterized by a shift to the political left which included nationalizations and increased political ties to the USSR and communist China. Massamba-Débat&#x27;s government ended in August 1968 when Captain Marien Ngouabi and other army officers toppled the government in a bloodless coup. After a period of consolidation under the newly formed National Revolutionary Council, Ngouabi assumed the presidency on December 31, 1968. One year later, President Ngouabi proclaimed the People&#x27;s Republic of the Congo, Africa&#x27;s first People&#x27;s Republic and announced the decision of the National Revolutionary Movement to change its name to the Congolese Party of Labour (PCT).

==Assassination of Ngouabi and election of Sassou-Nguesso==
On March 18, 1977, President Ngouabi was assassinated. A number of people were accused of shooting Ngouabi were tried and some of them executed, including former President Alphonse Massemba-Débat and a fisherman, Chanrithy Moukoko, but there was little evidence to prove their involvement, and the motive behind the assassination remains unclear.

An 11-member Military Committee of the Party (CMP) was named to head an interim government with Col. (later Gen.) Joachim Yhombi-Opango to serve as President of the Republic. After two years in power, Yhombi-Opango was accused of corruption and deviation from party directives, and removed from office on February 5, 1979, by the Central Committee of the PCT, which then simultaneously designated Vice President and Defense Minister Col. Denis Sassou-Nguesso as interim President.

The Central Committee directed Sassou-Nguesso to take charge of preparations for the Third Extraordinary Congress of the PCT, which proceeded to elect him President of the Central Committee and President of the Republic. Under a congressional resolution, Yhombi-Opango was stripped of all powers, rank, and possessions and placed under arrest to await trial for high treason. He was released from house arrest in late 1984 and ordered back to his native village of Owando.

==Democracy and civil war==
After decades of turbulent politics bolstered by Marxist-Leninist rhetoric, and with the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Congolese gradually moderated their economic and political views to the point that, in 1992, Congo completed a transition to multi-party democracy. Ending a long history of one-party Marxist rule, a specific agenda for this transition was laid out during Congo&#x27;s national conference of 1991 and culminated in August 1992 with multi-party parliamentary and presidential elections. Sassou Nguesso conceded defeat and Congo&#x27;s new president, Professor Pascal Lissouba, was inaugurated on August 31, 1992.

Congolese democracy experienced severe trials in 1993 and early 1994. The President dissolved the National Assembly in November 1992, calling for new elections in May 1993. The results of those elections were disputed, touching off violent civil unrest in June and again in November. In February 1994 the decisions of an international board of arbiters were accepted by all parties, and the risk of large-scale insurrection subsided.

Lissouba lost favour with the French government early in his presidency by asking the American-owned Occidental Petroleum company to provide financial support for his Government in exchange for promises of future oil production. As the French company Elf Aquitaine (which reaped much of its profits from the Republic of the Congo) had only just recently opened a large deep-water oil platform off the coast of Pointe-Noire, Mr. Lissouba was pressured by the French into canceling all contracts with Occidental Petroleum, but suspicions of Lissouba remained.

However, Congo&#x27;s democratic progress derailed in 1997. As presidential elections scheduled for July 1997 approached, tensions between the Lissouba and Sassou Nguesso camps mounted. In May, a visit by Sassou Nguesso to Owando, Joachim Yhombi-Opango&#x27;s political stronghold, led to the outbreak of violence between their supporters. On June 5, 1997, government forces surrounded Sassou Nguesso&#x27;s home in the Mpila section of Brazzaville, attempting to arrest two men, Pierre Aboya and Engobo Bonaventure, who had been implicated in the earlier violence. Fighting broke out between the government forces and Sassou Nguesso&#x27;s fighters, called Cobras, igniting a 4-month conflict that destroyed or damaged much of Brazzaville.

Angola supported Sassou Nguesso with about 1,000 Angolan tanks, troops. Support by the sympathetic French government further bolstered Sassou Nguesso&#x27;s rebels.

Together these forces took Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire in the morning of October 16. Lissouba fled the capital while his soldiers surrendered and citizens began looting. Yhombi-Opango supported Lissouba during the war, serving as leader of the Presidential Majority, and after Sassou Nguesso&#x27;s victory he fled into exile in Ivory Coast and France. Soon thereafter, Sassou Nguesso declared himself President and named a 33-member government.

In January 1998 the Sassou Nguesso regime held a National Forum for Reconciliation to determine the nature and duration of the transition period. The Forum, tightly controlled by the government, decided elections should be held in about three years, elected a transition advisory legislature, and announced that a constitutional convention will finalize a draft constitution. However, the eruption in late 1998 of fighting between Sassou Nguesso&#x27;s government forces and an armed opposition disrupted the transitional return to democracy. This new violence also closed the economically vital Congo-Ocean Railway, caused great destruction and loss of life in southern Brazzaville and in the Pool, Bouenza, and Niari regions, and displaced hundreds of thousands of persons.

In November and December 1999, the government signed agreements with representatives of many, though not all, of the rebel groups. The December accord, mediated by President Omar Bongo of Gabon, called for follow-on, inclusive political negotiations between the government and the opposition.

==Sassou&#x27;s second presidency==
Sassou won elections in 2002 with an implausible 90% or so of the votes. His two main rivals, Lissouba and Bernard Kolelas, were prevented from competing and the only remaining credible rival, André Milongo, boycotted the elections and withdrew from the race due to, among other reasons, perceived voter fraud on the part of Sassou. A new constitution was agreed upon in January 2002, granting the president new powers and extending his term to seven years as well as introducing a new bicameral assembly. On December 30, twenty opposition political parties issued a statement through spokesman Chistope Ngokaka, saying Sassou&#x27;s government had purchased &quot;weapons and military craft... under contracts signed between the officials in Brazzaville and the government in Beijing.&quot; Sassou was re-elected for a further seven-year term at the next presidential election in July 2009.

In 2015, Sassou changed the constitution to run in the 2016 election. He won the election believed by many to be fraudulent. After violent protests in the capital, Sassou attacked the Pool region, where the Ninja rebels of the civil war used to be based, in what was believed to be a distraction. This led to a revival of the Ninja rebels who launched attacks against the army in April 2016, leading 80,000 people to flee their homes. A ceasefire deal was signed in December 2017.
==See also==
*History of Africa
*People&#x27;s Republic of the Congo
*Politics of the Republic of the Congo
*List of heads of government of the Republic of the Congo
*List of heads of state of the Republic of the Congo
* Brazzaville history and timeline
* Scholastique Dianzinga

==Notes==


==Bibliography==
*.
*.
*.
*Petringa, Maria: &quot;Brazza, A Life for Africa&quot;. Bloomington, Indiana: AuthorHouse, 2006. 
* Wm. Roger Louis and Jean Stengers: &quot;E.D. Morel&#x27;s History of the Congo Reform Movement&quot;, Clarendon Press Oxford, 1968.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1417200" start="4" end="44" title="History of the Republic of the Congo" label="history of the [[Republic of the Congo]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q171927" start="237" end="251" title="Pygmy peoples" label="Forest peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="258" end="267" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="299" end="304" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q640090" start="364" end="369" title="Kongo people" label="Kongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503" start="476" end="487" title="Congo River" label="Congo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q500189" start="528" end="540" title="Mbanza Kongo" label="Mbanza Kongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="580" end="590" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="614" end="620" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q971" start="747" end="768" title="Republic of the Congo" label="Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015108" start="976" end="980" title="Soyo" label="Soyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7067585" start="997" end="1003" title="Nsundi" label="Nsundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479630" start="1025" end="1042" title="Kingdom of Loango" label="Kingdom of Loango"/>
<link wikidata="Q732790" start="1150" end="1162" title="Kwango river" label="Kwango river"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503" start="1183" end="1194" title="Congo River" label="Congo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702512" start="1373" end="1388" title="Lukeni lua Nimi" label="Lukeni lua Nimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q500189" start="1438" end="1450" title="Mbanza Kongo" label="Mbanza Kongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="1501" end="1507" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="1509" end="1517" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="1582" end="1590" title="European ethnic groups" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="1606" end="1626" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese explorers"/>
<link wikidata="Q217637" start="1633" end="1652" title="John II of Portugal" label="John II of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="1679" end="1687" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1692" end="1699" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q313060" start="1878" end="1887" title="Diogo Cão" label="Diogo Cão"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503" start="1925" end="1936" title="Congo River" label="Congo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q796583" start="2020" end="2036" title="Kingdom of Kongo" label="Kingdom of Kongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="2118" end="2130" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522957" start="2215" end="2229" title="Nzinga a Nkuwu" label="Nzinga a Nkuwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522957" start="2268" end="2274" title="João I of Kongo" label="João I"/>
<link wikidata="Q383455" start="2328" end="2341" title="Nzinga Mbemba" label="Nzinga Mbemba"/>
<link wikidata="Q587697" start="2361" end="2369" title="Afonso I" label="Afonso I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697145" start="2501" end="2521" title="Cathedral of the Holy Saviour of Congo" label="Kulumbimbi Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="2736" end="2743" title="Holy See" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="2753" end="2757" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752752" start="2894" end="2910" title="battle of Mbwila" label="battle of Mbwila"/>
<link wikidata="Q467347" start="2933" end="2943" title="Kimpa Vita" label="Kimpa Vita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752752" start="2988" end="3004" title="battle of Mbwila" label="battle of Mbwila"/>
<link wikidata="Q12784665" start="3119" end="3143" title="André Vidal de Negreiros" label="André Vidal de Negreiros"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="3346" end="3351" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q383455" start="3546" end="3563" title="Afonso I of Kongo" label="Afonso I of Kongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q467347" start="3679" end="3692" title="Dona Beatrice" label="Dona Béatrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q167477" start="3781" end="3801" title="St. Anthony of Padua" label="St. Anthony of Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q8465" start="3946" end="3955" title="civil war" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850320" start="4035" end="4042" title="João II of Kongo" label="João II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3385524" start="4044" end="4052" title="Pedro IV of Kongo" label="Pedro IV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4057" end="4070" title="Pedro Kibenga" label="Pedro Kibenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q124862" start="4309" end="4324" title="Capuchin Friars" label="Capuchin Friars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226" start="4441" end="4452" title="Joan of Arc" label="Joan of Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479630" start="4662" end="4668" title="Loango Kingdom" label="Loango"/>
<link wikidata="Q811078" start="4763" end="4767" title="Téké" label="Téké"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844" start="4842" end="4853" title="Brazzaville" label="Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838" start="4858" end="4866" title="Kinshasa" label="Kinshasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="4868" end="4876" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="4896" end="4902" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="4956" end="4961" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="4992" end="5006" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="5013" end="5024" title="Philip II of Spain" label="King Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q377350" start="5039" end="5052" title="Iberian Union" label="Iberian Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="5270" end="5276" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387205" start="5287" end="5294" title="Pedro V of Kongo" label="Pedro V"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582" start="5519" end="5536" title="Berlin Conference" label="Berlin Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="5669" end="5679" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="5699" end="5716" title="industrialization" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="5777" end="5783" title="rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="5785" end="5793" title="palm oil" label="palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="5798" end="5804" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q179848" start="5945" end="5964" title="scramble for Africa" label="scramble for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12967" start="6085" end="6100" title="King Leopold II" label="King Leopold II"/>
<link wikidata="Q168787" start="6282" end="6289" title="Cabinda (province)" label="Cabinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500954" start="6592" end="6597" title="Zaïre" label="Zaïre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078495" start="6643" end="6672" title="International African Society" label="International African Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q171421" start="6789" end="6809" title="Henry Morton Stanley" label="Henry Morton Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q76048" start="6875" end="6891" title="Congo Free State" label="Congo Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q319834" start="7143" end="7169" title="Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza" label="Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="7199" end="7203" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078495" start="7266" end="7295" title="International African Society" label="International African Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q750021" start="7458" end="7464" title="Ogooué" label="Ogooué"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270093" start="7469" end="7475" title="Lefini River" label="Lefini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844" start="7721" end="7732" title="Brazzaville" label="Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q12967" start="7813" end="7828" title="King Leopold II" label="King Leopold II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8019" end="8035" title="Bahangala Revolt" label="Bahangala Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8043" end="8060" title="Mabiala Ma Nganga" label="Mabiala Ma Nganga"/>
<link wikidata="Q579391" start="8425" end="8434" title="indigénat" label="indigénat"/>
<link wikidata="Q223920" start="9793" end="9805" title="Pointe-Noire" label="Pointe-Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q655939" start="10399" end="10411" title="New Cameroon" label="New Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="10443" end="10456" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q668294" start="10696" end="10703" title="Kamerun" label="Kamerun"/>
<link wikidata="Q271894" start="11040" end="11064" title="French Equatorial Africa" label="French Equatorial Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="11132" end="11136" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421888" start="11141" end="11155" title="Oubangui-Chari" label="Oubangui-Chari"/>
<link wikidata="Q929" start="11170" end="11194" title="Central African Republic" label="Central African Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721" start="13062" end="13077" title="Philippe Pétain" label="Philippe Pétain"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="13155" end="13167" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="13410" end="13427" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="13435" end="13446" title="Free French" label="Free French"/>
<link wikidata="Q314545" start="13510" end="13521" title="René Pleven" label="René Pleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q312391" start="13580" end="13612" title="Philippe Leclerc de Hauteclocque" label="Philippe Leclerc de Hauteclocque"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13670" end="13687" title="Edgar De Larminat" label="Edgar De Larminat"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="13951" end="13962" title="Free French" label="Free French"/>
<link wikidata="Q989568" start="14515" end="14526" title="Félix Eboué" label="Félix Eboué"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769" start="14768" end="14781" title="French Guiana" label="French Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781371" start="14910" end="14944" title="Brazzaville Conference of 1944" label="the Brazzaville Conference of 1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q989568" start="15983" end="15994" title="Felix Eboué" label="Felix Eboué"/>
<link wikidata="Q227809" start="16001" end="16017" title="carrot and stick" label="carrot and stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2848280" start="16213" end="16226" title="André Matsoua" label="André Matsoua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="16908" end="16915" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q192821" start="17178" end="17200" title="French Communist Party" label="French Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="17225" end="17237" title="Free Masons" label="Free Masonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3166001" start="19168" end="19187" title="Jean-Félix Tchicaya" label="Jean-Félix Tchicaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825" start="19197" end="19207" title="Libreville" label="Libreville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479630" start="19267" end="19284" title="Kingdom of Loango" label="Kingdom of Loango"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="19300" end="19307" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q214407" start="19315" end="19337" title="Félix Houphouët-Boigny" label="Félix Houphouët-Boigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q429170" start="19364" end="19399" title="Rassemblement Démocratique Africain" label="Rassemblement Démocratique Africain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19432" end="19459" title="Parti Progressiste Africain" label="Parti Progressiste Africain"/>
<link wikidata="Q632552" start="19546" end="19563" title="French parliament" label="French parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q8620" start="19862" end="19875" title="Kwame Nkrumah" label="Kwame Nkrumah"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="19881" end="19886" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15618993" start="19891" end="19909" title="President of Egypt" label="Egyptian President"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="19910" end="19928" title="Gamel Abdel Nasser" label="Gamel Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159687" start="19998" end="20015" title="Jacques Opangault" label="Jacques Opangault"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="20188" end="20203" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q559442" start="20263" end="20277" title="Fulbert Youlou" label="Fulbert Youlou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326838" start="20337" end="20363" title="African Socialist Movement" label="African Socialist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="21158" end="21167" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q559442" start="21377" end="21391" title="Fulbert Youlou" label="Fulbert Youlou"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="22267" end="22274" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="22277" end="22296" title="Algerian War" label="war of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="22678" end="22705" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546258" start="24000" end="24020" title="Les Trois Glorieuses" label="Les Trois Glorieuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q214028" start="24071" end="24086" title="July Revolution" label="July Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q740438" start="24370" end="24393" title="Alphonse Massamba-Débat" label="Alphonse Massamba-Débat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995164" start="24410" end="24422" title="Constitution of the Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q379725" start="24492" end="24507" title="Pascal Lissouba" label="Pascal Lissouba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24547" end="24583" title="Alphonse Massamba-Débat#Congo under Massamba-Débat (1963-1968)" label="Massamba-Débat&amp;#x27;s term in office"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="24620" end="24634" title="political left" label="political left"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="24703" end="24707" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="24722" end="24727" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q454025" start="24796" end="24810" title="Marien Ngouabi" label="Marien Ngouabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152126" start="25068" end="25103" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of the Congo" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q465613" start="25125" end="25147" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785816" start="25240" end="25265" title="Congolese Party of Labour" label="Congolese Party of Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q740438" start="25506" end="25529" title="Alphonse Massemba-Débat" label="Alphonse Massemba-Débat"/>
<link wikidata="Q740411" start="25796" end="25817" title="Joachim Yhombi-Opango" label="Joachim Yhombi-Opango"/>
<link wikidata="Q57418" start="26120" end="26140" title="Denis Sassou-Nguesso" label="Denis Sassou-Nguesso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201732" start="26629" end="26635" title="Owando" label="Owando"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="26715" end="26731" title="Marxist-Leninist" label="Marxist-Leninist"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="26914" end="26925" title="multi-party" label="multi-party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314548" start="27132" end="27145" title="Republic of the Congo parliamentary election, 1992" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586542" start="27150" end="27172" title="Republic of the Congo presidential election, 1992" label="presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q379725" start="27247" end="27262" title="Pascal Lissouba" label="Pascal Lissouba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969587" start="27399" end="27416" title="National Assembly of the Republic of the Congo" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314549" start="27451" end="27472" title="Republic of the Congo parliamentary election, 1993" label="elections in May 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013357" start="27837" end="27857" title="Occidental Petroleum" label="Occidental Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505649" start="27987" end="28000" title="Elf Aquitaine" label="Elf Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q689880" start="28116" end="28128" title="oil platform" label="oil platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q223920" start="28146" end="28158" title="Pointe-Noire" label="Pointe-Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201732" start="28518" end="28524" title="Owando" label="Owando"/>
<link wikidata="Q740411" start="28526" end="28547" title="Joachim Yhombi-Opango" label="Joachim Yhombi-Opango"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28715" end="28720" title="Mpila" label="Mpila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450662" start="29136" end="29153" title="French government" label="French government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="29533" end="29544" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069319" start="30247" end="30266" title="Congo-Ocean Railway" label="Congo-Ocean Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q172083" start="30602" end="30612" title="Omar Bongo" label="Omar Bongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="30616" end="30621" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q767085" start="30865" end="30880" title="Bernard Kolelas" label="Bernard Kolelas"/>
<link wikidata="Q521920" start="30951" end="30964" title="André Milongo" label="André Milongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="31097" end="31109" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="31535" end="31542" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q21075164" start="31667" end="31691" title="2015 Republic of the Congo constitutional referendum" label="changed the constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q27974546" start="31706" end="31719" title="2016 Republic of the Congo presidential election" label="2016 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376614" start="31858" end="31869" title="Ninja (militia)" label="Ninja rebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q149813" start="32146" end="32163" title="History of Africa" label="History of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152126" start="32165" end="32200" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of the Congo" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153666" start="32202" end="32239" title="Politics of the Republic of the Congo" label="Politics of the Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q932245" start="32241" end="32297" title="List of heads of government of the Republic of the Congo" label="List of heads of government of the Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q878300" start="32299" end="32350" title="List of heads of state of the Republic of the Congo" label="List of heads of state of the Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32365" end="32372" title="Brazzaville#History" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q48781010" start="32377" end="32385" title="Timeline of Brazzaville" label="timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q127813158" start="32388" end="32410" title="Scholastique Dianzinga" label="Scholastique Dianzinga"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25496" wikidata="Q2046858" url="?curid=25496" title="Geography of the Republic of the Congo">
<text>The Republic of the Congo is located in the western part of central Africa, on the Equator. Congo has several important ports. The Republic of the Congo covers an area of 342,000 km², of which 341,500 km² is land while 500 km² is water. Congo claims of territorial sea.

The capital of the Republic of the Congo is Brazzaville, located on the Congo River immediately across from Kinshasa, capital of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. With a metropolitan population of approximately 1.5 million, Brazzaville is by far the largest city in the Republic, having almost twice the population of Pointe-Noire (663,400 as of the 2005 census), the country&#x27;s second largest city. About 70% of the population lives in Brazzaville, Pointe-Noire, or along the railroad between them.
==Area and boundaries==
; Area:
:* Total: 342,000 km²
:**&quot;country rank in the world:&quot; 54th
:* Land: 341,500 km²
:* Water: 500 km²

; Area comparative
:* Australia comparative: approximately times the size of Victoria
:* Canada comparative: approximately smaller than Newfoundland and Labrador
:* United Kingdom comparative: approximately larger than the United Kingdom
:* United States comparative: approximately twice the size of Florida
:* EU comparative: slightly smaller than Germany
; Land boundaries:
:* Total: 
:* Border countries: Cabinda (Angola) (), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (), Central African Republic (), Cameroon (), Gabon ().
; Coastline: 169 km on Atlantic Ocean

== Environment ==

=== Climate ===
Congo is a tropical nation, which means it has a tropical climate. The wet season lasts from March to June and the dry season for the rest of the year. Temperature and humidity are high as in all tropical nations. The rivers of the country are flooded seasonally.


=== Ecology ===
The terrain is a variation of coastal plains, mountainous regions, plateaus and fertile valleys. About 70 percent of the country&#x27;s area is covered by rain forest. The highest point, at 1,020 m, is Mont Nabeba in the Mayumbe mountains. The major rivers are the Congo River at the border with the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the Kouilou-Niari River.

A 2014 expedition leaving from Itanga village discovered a peat bog &quot;as big as England&quot; which stretches into neighboring Democratic Republic of Congo.

UNESCO has declared two world biosphere reserves in the country: Odzala in 1977 and Dimonika in 1988.
=== Natural resources ===

Natural resources include petroleum, timber, potash, lead, zinc, uranium, copper, phosphates, gold, magnesium, natural gas, and hydropower.

As of a 2012 estimate, 1.55% of the land is arable, while only 0.20% contains permanent crops. Approximately 20 km² is irrigated (2003 estimation).
=== Environmental issues ===

Environmental issues include the high level of air pollution from vehicle emissions, water pollution from the dumping of raw sewage, tap water not being potable, and deforestation.

Congo is party to the international agreements on Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands. It has signed but not ratified the Law of the Sea and so on.

== Extreme points ==

This is a list of the extreme points of the Republic of Congo, i.e. the points that are farther north, south, east, or west than any other location.

*Northernmost point — unnamed location on the border with Central African Republic immediately south-west of the CAR town of Madoukou, Likouala department
*Easternmost point — Motenge-Bom, Likouala department
*Southernmost point — unnamed headland near the point at which the Congo-Cabinda border enters the Atlantic Ocean, Kouilou department
*Westernmost point — the point at which the border with Gabon enters the Atlantic Ocean, Kouilou department

==Notes==
==References==

== See also ==

* Geology in the Republic of the Congo</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q971" start="4" end="25" title="Republic of the Congo" label="Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27433" start="60" end="74" title="central Africa" label="central Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="83" end="90" title="Equator" label="Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844" start="315" end="326" title="Brazzaville" label="Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503" start="343" end="354" title="Congo River" label="Congo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838" start="379" end="387" title="Kinshasa" label="Kinshasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="404" end="436" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q223920" start="593" end="605" title="Pointe-Noire" label="Pointe-Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="997" end="1005" title="Victoria (state)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="1056" end="1081" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="1220" end="1227" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1231" end="1233" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1269" end="1276" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q168787" start="1328" end="1335" title="Cabinda Province" label="Cabinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="1337" end="1343" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="1353" end="1385" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q929" start="1390" end="1414" title="Central African Republic" label="Central African Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="1419" end="1427" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="1432" end="1437" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="1465" end="1479" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q31566" start="1828" end="1841" title="coastal plain" label="coastal plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="1844" end="1855" title="mountain" label="mountainous"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="1865" end="1872" title="plateau" label="plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39816" start="1886" end="1892" title="valley" label="valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="1953" end="1964" title="rain forest" label="rain forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113296" start="2000" end="2011" title="Mont Nabeba" label="Mont Nabeba"/>
<link wikidata="Q748035" start="2019" end="2026" title="Mayumbe" label="Mayumbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503" start="2063" end="2074" title="Congo River" label="Congo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="2098" end="2130" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637839" start="2140" end="2159" title="Kouilou-Niari River" label="Kouilou-Niari River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681353" start="2221" end="2229" title="Bog" label="peat bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="2246" end="2253" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="2293" end="2321" title="Democratic Republic of Congo" label="Democratic Republic of Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="2324" end="2330" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q14018439" start="2354" end="2372" title="Man and the Biosphere Programme" label="biosphere reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q263883" start="2389" end="2395" title="Odzala National Park" label="Odzala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457174" start="2408" end="2416" title="Dimonika Biosphere Reserve" label="Dimonika"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="2479" end="2488" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="2490" end="2496" title="timber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q10564271" start="2498" end="2504" title="potash" label="potash"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="2506" end="2510" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="2512" end="2516" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="2518" end="2525" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="2527" end="2533" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="2535" end="2544" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="2547" end="2551" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="2553" end="2562" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="2564" end="2575" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="2581" end="2591" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="3004" end="3016" title="Biodiversity" label="Biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208645" start="3018" end="3032" title="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change" label="Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="3034" end="3049" title="Desertification" label="Desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="3051" end="3069" title="Endangered Species" label="Endangered Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="3071" end="3093" title="Ozone Layer Protection" label="Ozone Layer Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q26837533" start="3095" end="3113" title="Tropical Timber 83" label="Tropical Timber 83"/>
<link wikidata="Q26837533" start="3115" end="3133" title="Tropical Timber 94" label="Tropical Timber 94"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="3135" end="3143" title="Wetlands" label="Wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088099" start="3180" end="3194" title="Law of the Sea" label="Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q971" start="3273" end="3290" title="Republic of Congo" label="Republic of Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q929" start="3437" end="3461" title="Central African Republic" label="Central African Republic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3504" end="3512" title="Madoukou" label="Madoukou"/>
<link wikidata="Q863554" start="3514" end="3533" title="Likouala Department" label="Likouala department"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3555" end="3566" title="Motenge-Bom" label="Motenge-Bom"/>
<link wikidata="Q168787" start="3661" end="3668" title="Cabinda Province" label="Cabinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="3687" end="3701" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q855327" start="3703" end="3710" title="Kouilou Region" label="Kouilou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="3778" end="3783" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3875" end="3911" title="Mining in the Republic of Congo#Geology" label="Geology in the Republic of the Congo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25497" wikidata="Q3092546" url="?curid=25497" title="Demographics of the Republic of the Congo">
<text>Demographic features of the population of the Republic of the Congo include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

The Republic of the Congo&#x27;s sparse population is concentrated in the southwestern portion of the country, leaving the vast areas of tropical jungle in the north virtually uninhabited. Thus, Congo is one of the most urbanized countries in Africa, with 85% of its total population living in a few urban areas, namely in Brazzaville, Pointe-Noire, or one of the small cities or villages lining the railway which connects the two cities. In rural areas, industrial and commercial activity has declined rapidly in recent years, leaving rural economies dependent on the government for support and subsistence. Before the 1997 war, about 15,000 Europeans and other non-Africans lived in Congo, most of whom were French. Presently, only about 9,500 remain. Pygmies make up 2% of Congo&#x27;s population.

==Population==

According to the total population was in , compared to only 808 000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 40.6%, 55.7% was between 15 and 65 years of age, while 3.7% was 65 years or older.


Population estimates by sex and age group (01.VII.2009):
Population estimates by sex and age group (01.VII.2020):
==Vital statistics==
Registration of vital events in the Republic of the Congo is incomplete. The Population Department of the United Nations prepared the following estimates.

Source: UN DESA, World Population Prospects, 2022


===Demographic and Health Surveys===
Total Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):

Fertility data as of 2011-2012 (DHS Program):

==Ethnic groups==
:Kongo 40.5%, Teke 16.9%, Mbochi 13.1%, Sangha 5.6%, Europeans and other 23.9%

==Languages==

Languages spoken here include French (official), Kituba or Monokutuba (lingua franca), Kongo or Kikongo, Lingala, and many local languages and dialects.

The majority of the population is concentrated along the railroad between Pointe-Noire and Brazzaville in the south where Kituba (a creole language based on Kikongo) is the primary language. Lingala is influential in the sparsely inhabited northern half of the country.

==Religion==
:Roman Catholic 33.1%, Awakening Churches/Christian Revival 22.3%, Protestant 19.9%, Salutiste 2.2%, Islam 1.6%, Kimbanguiste 1.5%, other 8.1%, none 11.3% (2010 est.)

==Health==
Life expectancy for the population was estimated at 54.91 years in 2011: 53.62 for males and 56.25 for females. The adult prevalence rate for HIV/AIDS was 3.4% as of 2009, representing 77,000 people living with the disease and 5,100 deaths. The Republic of the Congo is considered to have a high degree of risk of infectious diseases, particularly bacterial diarrhea, hepatitis A and typhoid fever (all food- or waterborne), and malaria (vectorborne).

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="0" end="11" title="Demography" label="Demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="28" end="38" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q971" start="46" end="67" title="Republic of the Congo" label="Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="76" end="94" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="96" end="105" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311268" start="165" end="187" title="Religion in the Republic of the Congo" label="religious affiliations"/>
<link wikidata="Q191086" start="372" end="378" title="jungle" label="jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844" start="549" end="560" title="Brazzaville" label="Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q223920" start="562" end="574" title="Pointe-Noire" label="Pointe-Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069319" start="626" end="663" title="Congo-Ocean Railway" label="railway which connects the two cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q171927" start="980" end="987" title="Pygmies" label="Pygmies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671637" start="1564" end="1571" title="UN DESA" label="UN DESA"/>
<link wikidata="Q640090" start="1791" end="1796" title="Kongo people" label="Kongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q811078" start="1804" end="1808" title="Teke people" label="Teke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650456" start="1816" end="1822" title="Mbochi people" label="Mbochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417971" start="1830" end="1836" title="Sangha people" label="Sangha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704511" start="1843" end="1852" title="White Africans" label="Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1915" end="1921" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q35746" start="1934" end="1954" title="Kituba language" label="Kituba or Monokutuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="1956" end="1969" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q33702" start="1972" end="1988" title="Kongo language" label="Kongo or Kikongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q36217" start="1990" end="1997" title="Lingala language" label="Lingala"/>
<link wikidata="Q223920" start="2113" end="2125" title="Pointe-Noire" label="Pointe-Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844" start="2130" end="2141" title="Brazzaville" label="Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2324" end="2338" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="2390" end="2400" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="2424" end="2429" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="2644" end="2647" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="2648" end="2652" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="2860" end="2868" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q157661" start="2870" end="2881" title="hepatitis A" label="hepatitis A"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="2886" end="2899" title="typhoid fever" label="typhoid fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="2931" end="2938" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25498" wikidata="Q1153666" url="?curid=25498" title="Politics of the Republic of the Congo">
<text>Politics of the Republic of the Congo takes place in a framework of a unitary semi-presidential republic, whereby the President is the head of state and the Prime Minister is the head of government, of a pluriform multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the President and the Government. Recently, following the approval of a new Constitution after a referendum in 2015, Congo became a semi-presidential republic after the creation of the post of prime minister who is responsible to the legislature, as well is the cabinet of the former. Legislative power is vested in both the Government and the two chambers of parliament.

Many countries have a semi-presidential republic and elections, examples of other countries than the Republic of the Congo include France, Peru, and Croatia. However, having semi-presidential republic does not necessarily mean that a country is a democracy. A central, but not the only, component of democracy is free and fair elections, where the population can hold accountable those in power. Data collected from Freedom House, shows that the country scored 2/40 on political rights, and 15/60 on civil liberties; however, more specifically, the country scored 0/4 on whether there were free and fair elections.

In terms of civil, political, and human rights, another tenant of democracy, another non-governmental organization, BTI, reports that the rule of law “only exists on paper” in the country; this follows suit from a report from Amnesty International, which documents how Alexandre Ibacka Dzabana and Ras le Bol, both human rights leaders in the country were arrested the day after they announced they would hold a press conference to denounce election irregularities that occurred.

==Executive branch==
|President
|Denis Sassou-Nguesso
|Party of Labour
|25 October 1997
|Prime Minister
|Anatole Collinet Makosso
|Party of Labour
|12 May 2021

==Legislative branch==
The Parliament (&quot;Parlement&quot;) has two chambers. The National Assembly (&quot;Assemblée Nationale&quot;) elects its members to five-year terms in single-seat constituencies. The members of the Senate (&quot;Sénat&quot;) are elected for a six-year term by district, local and regional councils. 
The Republic of Congo is a one party dominant state with the Congolese Labour Party in power. Opposition parties are allowed, but are widely considered to have no real chance of gaining power.

==Political parties and elections==
===Presidential elections===

===Parliamentary elections===

==International organization participation==
ACCT, 
ACP, 
AfDB, 
BDEAC, 
CCC, 
CEEAC, 
ECA, 
FAO, 
FZ, 
G-77, 
IBRD, 
ICAO, 
ICFTU, 
ICRM, 
IDA, 
IFAD, 
IFC, 
IFRCS, 
ILO, 
IMF, 
IMO, 
Intelsat, 
Interpol, 
IOC, 
IOM (observer), 
ITU, 
NAM, 
OAU, 
OPCW, 
UDEAC, 
UN (Security Council member for 2006/2007), 
UNCTAD, 
UNESCO, 
UNIDO, 
UPU, 
WFTU, 
WHO, 
WIPO, 
WMO, 
WToO, 
WTrO

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1153666" start="0" end="37" title="Politics of the Republic of the Congo" label="Politics of the Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="70" end="77" title="Unitary state" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="78" end="95" title="Semi-presidential system" label="semi-presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="96" end="104" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q878300" start="118" end="127" title="President of the Republic of the Congo" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="135" end="148" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q932245" start="157" end="171" title="List of heads of government of the Republic of the Congo" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="179" end="197" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="234" end="249" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="288" end="298" title="Government" label="Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q21512338" start="342" end="354" title="Constitution of the Republic of the Congo" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="398" end="424" title="Semi-presidential system" label="semi-presidential republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="551" end="568" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345421" start="626" end="636" title="Parliament of the Republic of Congo" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q40231" start="692" end="700" title="election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q971" start="740" end="761" title="Republic of the Congo" label="Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="770" end="776" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="778" end="782" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="788" end="795" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="886" end="895" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q108146844" start="952" end="974" title="free and fair election" label="free and fair election"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="1055" end="1068" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="1267" end="1272" title="Civil and political rights" label="civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="1274" end="1283" title="Civil and political rights" label="political"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="1289" end="1301" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="1321" end="1330" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="1481" end="1502" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q878300" start="1758" end="1767" title="President of the Republic of Congo" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q57418" start="1769" end="1789" title="Denis Sassou-Nguesso" label="Denis Sassou-Nguesso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785816" start="1791" end="1806" title="Congolese Party of Labour" label="Party of Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q932245" start="1825" end="1839" title="Prime Minister of the Republic of the Congo" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752077" start="1841" end="1865" title="Anatole Collinet Makosso" label="Anatole Collinet Makosso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785816" start="1867" end="1882" title="Congolese Party of Labour" label="Party of Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345421" start="1924" end="1934" title="Parliament of the Republic of Congo" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="1967" end="1975" title="bicameralism" label="chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969587" start="1981" end="1998" title="National Assembly of the Republic of Congo" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="2086" end="2100" title="constituency" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510840" start="2121" end="2127" title="Senate of the Republic of Congo" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439061" start="2250" end="2274" title="one party dominant state" label="one party dominant state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785816" start="2284" end="2306" title="Congolese Labour Party" label="Congolese Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q192852" start="2317" end="2327" title="Opposition (politics)" label="Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="2328" end="2335" title="Political parties" label="parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826590" start="2559" end="2563" title="Agency for the French-Speaking Community" label="ACCT"/>
<link wikidata="Q294278" start="2566" end="2569" title="African, Caribbean, and Pacific Group of States" label="ACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q340195" start="2572" end="2576" title="African Development Bank" label="AfDB"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2579" end="2584" title="Central African States Development Bank" label="BDEAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q605326" start="2587" end="2590" title="Customs Cooperation Council" label="CCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q189966" start="2593" end="2598" title="Economic Community of Central African States" label="CEEAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144508" start="2601" end="2604" title="Economic Commission for Africa" label="ECA"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="2607" end="2610" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="FAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q191511" start="2613" end="2615" title="Franc Zone" label="FZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q477328" start="2618" end="2622" title="Group of 77" label="G-77"/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="2625" end="2629" title="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="IBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="2632" end="2636" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="ICAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138589" start="2639" end="2644" title="International Confederation of Free Trade Unions" label="ICFTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="2647" end="2651" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="ICRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q827525" start="2654" end="2657" title="International Development Association" label="IDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q689859" start="2660" end="2664" title="International Fund for Agricultural Development" label="IFAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q656801" start="2667" end="2670" title="International Finance Corporation" label="IFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069175" start="2673" end="2678" title="International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies" label="IFRCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="2681" end="2684" title="International Labour Organization" label="ILO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="2687" end="2690" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="2693" end="2696" title="International Maritime Organization" label="IMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q15546770" start="2699" end="2707" title="International Telecommunications Satellite Organization" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="2710" end="2718" title="International Criminal Police Organization" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="2721" end="2724" title="International Olympic Committee" label="IOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q472311" start="2727" end="2730" title="International Organization for Migration" label="IOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="2744" end="2747" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="ITU"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="2750" end="2753" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="NAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="2756" end="2759" title="Organization of African Unity" label="OAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="2762" end="2766" title="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons" label="OPCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940250" start="2769" end="2774" title="Central African Customs and Economic Union" label="UDEAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2777" end="2779" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="2781" end="2797" title="Security Council" label="Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="2822" end="2828" title="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development" label="UNCTAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="2831" end="2837" title="United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q386120" start="2840" end="2845" title="United Nations Industrial Development Organization" label="UNIDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="2848" end="2851" title="Universal Postal Union" label="UPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q748999" start="2854" end="2858" title="World Federation of Trade Unions" label="WFTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="2861" end="2864" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q177773" start="2867" end="2871" title="World Intellectual Property Organization" label="WIPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="2874" end="2877" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="WMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q61923" start="2880" end="2884" title="World Tourism Organization" label="WToO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="2887" end="2891" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTrO"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25499" wikidata="Q2603882" url="?curid=25499" title="Economy of the Republic of the Congo">
<text>The economy of the Republic of the Congo is a mixture of subsistence hunting and agriculture, an industrial sector based largely on petroleum extraction and support services. Government spending is characterized by budget problems and overstaffing. Petroleum has supplanted forestry as the mainstay of the economy, providing a major share of government revenues and exports. Nowadays the Republic of the Congo is increasingly converting natural gas to electricity rather than burning it, greatly improving energy prospects.

== Historical overview ==
Earlier in the 1990s, Congo&#x27;s major employer was the state bureaucracy, which had a payroll of 80,000, which is enormous for a country of Congo&#x27;s size. The World Bank and other international financial institutions pressured Congo to institute sweeping civil service reforms to reduce the size of the state bureaucracy and pare back a civil service payroll that amounted to more than 20% of GDP in 1993. The effort to cut back began in 1994 with a 50% devaluation that cut the payroll in half in dollar terms and by a mid-year reduction of nearly 8,000 in civil service employment and resulted in inflation of 61%. Inflation has since subsided.

Between 1994 and 1996, the Congolese economy underwent a difficult transition. The prospects for building the foundation of a healthy economy, however, were better than at any time in the previous 15 years. Congo took a number of measures to liberalize its economy, including reforming the tax, investment, labor, and hydrocarbon codes. Planned privatizations of key parastatals, primarily telecommunications and transportation monopolies, were launched to help improve a dilapidated and unreliable infrastructure. To build on the momentum achieved during the two-year period, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) approved a three-year ESAF economic program in June 1996.

By the end of 1996, Congo had made substantial progress in various areas targeted for reform. It made significant strides toward macroeconomic stabilization through improving public finances and restructuring external debt. This change was accompanied by improvements in the structure of expenditures, with a reduction in personnel expenditures. Further, Congo benefited from debt restructuring from a Paris Club agreement in July 1996.

This reform program came to a halt, however, in early June 1997 when war broke out. Denis Sassou-Nguesso, who returned to power when the war ended in October 1997, publicly expressed interest in moving forward on economic reforms and privatization and in renewing cooperation with international financial institutions. However, economic progress was badly hurt by slumping oil prices in 1998, which worsened the Republic of the Congo&#x27;s budget deficit. A second blow was the resumption of armed conflict in December 1998.

Congo&#x27;s economic prospects remain largely dependent on the country&#x27;s ability to establish political stability and democratic rule. The World Bank is considering Congo for post-conflict assistance. Priorities will be in reconstruction, basic services, infrastructure, and utilities.

Congo and the United States ratified a bilateral investment treaty designed to facilitate and protect foreign investment. The country also adopted a new investment code intended to attract foreign capital. Despite this, Congo&#x27;s investment climate is not considered favorable, offering few meaningful incentives. High costs for labor, energy, raw materials, and transportation; a restrictive labor code; low productivity and high production costs; militant labor unions; and an inadequate transportation infrastructure are among the factors discouraging investment. The recent political instability, war damage, and looting also undermined investor confidence. As a result, Congo has little American investment outside of the oil sector.

In recent years, the Republic&#x27;s economic growth has slowed because of the 2014–2016 fall in oil prices.

== Petroleum ==

The Congo&#x27;s growing petroleum sector is by far the country&#x27;s major revenue earner. In the early 1980s, rapidly rising oil revenues enabled the government to finance large-scale development projects with GDP growth averaging 5% annually, one of the highest rates in Africa. However, the government has mortgaged a substantial portion of its oil earnings, contributing to the government&#x27;s shortage of revenues. The Congolese oil sector is dominated by the French parastatal oil company Total, which accounts for 70% of the country&#x27;s annual oil production. In second position is the Italian oil firm Εni. Chevron, independent CMS Nomeco, and ExxonMobil are among the American companies active in petroleum exploration or production. Following recent discoveries and oil fields currently under development, Congo&#x27;s oil production is expected to continue to rise significantly in the next few years.

Congo plans to use the auction to grow its small oil industry, which only produces about 25,000 barrels a day from a project in the west of the country run by France’s Perenco SA. The process has drawn criticism from environmental groups for offering blocks that overlap with Congo’s peatlands, which are among the world’s most important carbon sinks. 

== Statistics ==
The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2024.

GDP:
purchasing power parity – $18.48 billion (2011 est.)

GDP – real growth rate:
4.5% (2011 est.)

GDP – per capita:
purchasing power parity – $4,600 (2011 est.)

GDP – composition by sector:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;agriculture:&quot;
4.2% (2011 est.)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;industry:&quot;
70.7% (2011 est.)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;services:&quot;
25.1% (2011 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;lowest 10%:&quot;
2.1% (2005)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;highest 10%:&quot;
37.1% (2005)

Inflation rate (consumer prices):
6% (2011 est.)

Labor force:
1.514 million (2007)

Ease of Doing Business Rank:
181st

Budget:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;revenues:&quot;
$6.938 billion (2011 est.)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;expenditures:&quot;
$3.535 billion (2011 est.)

Industries:
petroleum extraction, cement, lumber, brewing, sugar, palm oil, soap, flour, cigarettes

Industrial production growth rate:
12% (2010 est.)

Electricity – production:
452 million kWh (2008 est.)

Electricity – consumption:
534 million kWh (2008 est.)

Electricity – exports:
0 kWh (2009 est.)

Electricity – imports:
436 million kWh (2008 est.)

Agriculture – products:
cassava (tapioca), sugar, rice, maize, peanuts, vegetables, coffee, cocoa, forest products

Exports:
$12.38 billion (2011 est.)
Exports – commodities:
petroleum, lumber, plywood, sugar, Cocoa bean, coffee, diamonds

Exports – partners:
China 37.9%, United States 20%, Australia 6.2%, France 6.0%, Spain 4.8%, Italy 4.3%, Netherlands 4.3% (2011)

Imports:
$4.917 billion (2011 est.)

Imports – commodities:
capital equipment, construction materials, foodstuffs

Imports – partners:
France 17.3%, China 12.6%, India 9.5%, Italy 7.5%, Brazil 7.3%, United States 5.8% (2011)

Debt – external:
$4.955 billion (2011 est.)

Currency:
1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100 centimes

Fiscal year:
calendar year

Public debt as percentage of GDP:
61.2% (2017)

==See also==
* Republic of the Congo
* Mining in the Republic of Congo
* Transport in the Republic of the Congo
* List of companies based in the Republic of the Congo
* United Nations Economic Commission for Africa

==References==
==External links==
* Congo latest trade data on ITC Trade Map</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2603882" start="4" end="40" title="Economy of the Republic of the Congo" label="economy of the Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="69" end="76" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="274" end="282" title="forestry" label="forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q971" start="388" end="409" title="Republic of the Congo" label="Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q72468" start="615" end="626" title="bureaucracy" label="bureaucracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="717" end="727" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="1787" end="1814" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378807" start="1843" end="1847" title="ESAF" label="ESAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q461736" start="2282" end="2292" title="Paris Club" label="Paris Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q57418" start="2402" end="2422" title="Denis Sassou-Nguesso" label="Denis Sassou-Nguesso"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="2552" end="2565" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="3599" end="3610" title="trade union" label="labor union"/>
<link wikidata="Q154037" start="4507" end="4512" title="TotalEnergies" label="Total"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4625" end="4628" title="Εni" label="Εni"/>
<link wikidata="Q319642" start="4630" end="4637" title="Chevron Corporation" label="Chevron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4651" end="4661" title="CMS Nomeco" label="CMS Nomeco"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="4667" end="4677" title="ExxonMobil" label="ExxonMobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="6499" end="6506" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q873761" start="6508" end="6515" title="tapioca" label="tapioca"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="6567" end="6572" title="Cocoa bean" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="6820" end="6831" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="7007" end="7012" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q971" start="7280" end="7301" title="Republic of the Congo" label="Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865602" start="7304" end="7335" title="Mining in the Republic of Congo" label="Mining in the Republic of Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179012" start="7338" end="7376" title="Transport in the Republic of the Congo" label="Transport in the Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097696" start="7379" end="7431" title="List of companies based in the Republic of the Congo" label="List of companies based in the Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144508" start="7434" end="7479" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa" label="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25500" wikidata="Q7696078" url="?curid=25500" title="Telecommunications in the Republic of the Congo">
<text>Telecommunications in the Republic of the Congo include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.

==Radio and television==

* Radio stations: 
** Three state-owned radio stations; several privately owned radio stations; rebroadcasts of several international broadcasters are available (2007);
** 1 AM, 5 FM, and 1 shortwave stations (1999).
* Radios: 341,000 (1997).
* Television stations:
** One state-owned and several privately owned TV stations; satellite TV service is available; rebroadcasts of several international broadcasters are available (2007); 
** One station (1999).
* Television sets: 33,000 (1997).

Most citizens obtain their news from local radio or television stations as there are no nationwide radio or television stations.

Stations from nearby Kinshasa, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, can be received in Brazzaville and rebroadcasts of the BBC (103.8 FM), Radio France Internationale, and the Voice of America are available.

==Telephones==
* Calling code: +242
* International call prefix: 00
* Main lines: 
** 14,900 lines in use, 196th in the world (2012);
** 21,000 lines in use (1995).
* Mobile cellular:
** 40.79 million lines, 38th in the world (2020). 
** 1.1 million lines (2007).
* Telephone system: primary network consists of microwave radio relay and coaxial cable with services barely adequate for government use; key exchanges are in Brazzaville, Pointe-Noire, and Loubomo; intercity lines frequently out of order; fixed-line infrastructure inadequate providing less than 1 connection per 100 persons; in the absence of an adequate fixed line infrastructure, mobile-cellular subscribership has surged to 90 per 100 persons (2011). 
* Satellite earth stations: 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) (2011).
* Communications cables: West Africa Cable System (WACS), a submarine communications cable connecting countries along the west coast of Africa with each other and with the UK.

==Internet==

* Top-level domain: .cg
* Internet users: 
** 266,635 users, 145th in the world; 6.1% of the population, 182nd in the world (2012);
** 245,200 users, 136th in the world (2009).
* Fixed broadband: 393 subscriptions, 190th in the world; less than 0.05% of the population, 185th in the world (2012).
* Wireless broadband: 90,906 subscriptions, 120th in the world; 2.1% of the population, 125th in the world (2012).
* Internet hosts: 45 hosts, 215th in the world (2012).
* IPv4: 12,288 addresses allocated, less than 0.05% of the world total, 2.8 addresses per 1000 people (2012).
* Internet Service Providers (ISPs): Afripa telecom, Airtel Congo, and Ofis computers.

A growing proportion of the public, especially youth, are accessing the Internet more frequently and utilizing online social media. However, only the most affluent have Internet access in their own homes; others who accessed it use cybercafes.

===Internet censorship and surveillance===

There are no government restrictions on access to the Internet, or reports the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms. The constitution and law provide for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights. The law makes certain types of speech illegal, including incitement of ethnic hatred, violence, or civil war.

The constitution and law prohibit arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, and the government generally respects these prohibitions. The government makes no known attempts to collect personally identifiable information via the Internet.

Succeeding Congo&#x27;s independence, the constitutions of former presidents Abbe Fulbert Youlou (1960-1963) and Alphonse Massamba-Debat (1963–68) offered these guaranteed freedoms. Post-colonial administrations in practice relied on implicit bans and seize of images distributed by Congolese revolutionaries and oppositions. Restrictive censorship was especially uncompromising towards the foreign press, which was meticulously scrutinized during legislation creation. Order number 2294 prohibits the circulation of publishings by foreign origins including pamphlets, journal writings, or any association as such. Occasional success in overcoming newspaper censorship can be seen in the case of La Semaine Africaine, which consistently expresses notable messages representative of the ‘revolutionary press’. Unsuccessful efforts, however, are more common in Congo print, as seen by the failures of The Voice of the Congolese Revolution, the weekly Basali-ba-Kongo and Dipanda, and the National Youth Movement for the Revolution.

=== Intentional Shutdowns ===
The Congolese government performed a series of intentional internet shutdowns. The first was conducted in December 2011 and lasted approximately 25 days. During the 25 days, Short Message Service otherwise known as SMS was the only one affected by the shutdown. According to an article by CIPESA, &quot;One of the reasons cited by the government for blocking communication was to prevent the spread of fake results over the internet before the electoral commission announced official results&quot;

Unlike the first shutdown the second intentional shutdown had a broader range of impact.The second intentional shutdown occurred in January 2015. The Congolese government directed telecommunication companies within the country to halt all its services. Not only was SMS affected, but the entire internet itself. This action by the government came on the eve of political protest on a proposed electoral bill.

The most recent government shutdown occurred on December 19, 2016. This was an important date as President Joseph Kabila was supposed to step down as head of state. In order to quell, political upheaval the Congolese government ordered telecom operators to block social media in the country.

== See also ==

* Radiodiffusion Télévision Congolaise, state-owned national broadcaster of the Republic of the Congo.
* Media of the Republic of the Congo
* List of radio stations in Africa
* List of television stations in Africa
* List of terrestrial fibre optic cable projects in Africa

==References==
* 
==External links==
* NIC.cg, registry for .cg domain.
* &quot;ICT Policy in Congo&quot;, &quot;Africa ICT Policy Monitor&quot;, Association for Progressive Communications (APC), March 2009. 
* &quot;Republic of the Congo country report&quot;, &quot;CIA World Factbook&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7696078" start="0" end="47" title="Telecommunications in the Republic of the Congo" label="Telecommunications in the Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="151" end="165" title="Radio broadcasting" label="Radio stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q159391" start="368" end="374" title="Receiver (radio)" label="Radios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254874" start="394" end="413" title="Television broadcasting" label="Television stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075" start="609" end="623" title="Television set" label="Television set"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838" start="793" end="801" title="Kinshasa" label="Kinshasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="810" end="842" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844" start="863" end="874" title="Brazzaville" label="Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="899" end="902" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q19912" start="915" end="942" title="Radio France Internationale" label="Radio France Internationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q228389" start="952" end="968" title="Voice of America" label="Voice of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q34768" start="1002" end="1014" title="Calling code" label="Calling code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3190395" start="1023" end="1048" title="List of international call prefixes" label="International call prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q747066" start="1297" end="1318" title="microwave radio relay" label="microwave radio relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q183389" start="1323" end="1336" title="coaxial cable" label="coaxial cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844" start="1408" end="1419" title="Brazzaville" label="Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q223920" start="1421" end="1433" title="Pointe-Noire" label="Pointe-Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q246554" start="1439" end="1446" title="Loubomo" label="Loubomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="1708" end="1732" title="Communications satellite" label="Satellite earth stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="1736" end="1744" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="1746" end="1760" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248959" start="1772" end="1793" title="List of international submarine communications cables" label="Communications cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946336" start="1795" end="1819" title="WACS (cable system)" label="West Africa Cable System"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="1963" end="1979" title="Top-level domain" label="Top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q39906" start="1981" end="1984" title=".cg" label=".cg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622451" start="1987" end="2001" title="List of countries by number of Internet users" label="Internet users"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992993" start="2140" end="2155" title="List of countries by number of broadband Internet subscriptions" label="Fixed broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992993" start="2260" end="2278" title="List of countries by number of broadband Internet subscriptions" label="Wireless broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q8215105" start="2375" end="2389" title="List of countries by number of Internet hosts" label="Internet hosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11103" start="2430" end="2434" title="IPv4" label="IPv4"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="2540" end="2565" title="Internet Service Provider" label="Internet Service Provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="2744" end="2756" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q272399" start="2858" end="2867" title="cybercafe" label="cybercafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="3014" end="3020" title="e-mail" label="e-mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q574577" start="3033" end="3043" title="chat rooms" label="chat rooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="3082" end="3099" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="3104" end="3109" title="freedom of the press" label="press"/>
<link wikidata="Q653347" start="3234" end="3247" title="hate speech" label="ethnic hatred"/>
<link wikidata="Q124490" start="3249" end="3257" title="violence" label="violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8465" start="3262" end="3271" title="civil war" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702971" start="3486" end="3521" title="personally identifiable information" label="personally identifiable information"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281249" start="5822" end="5858" title="Radiodiffusion Télévision Congolaise" label="Radiodiffusion Télévision Congolaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805964" start="5925" end="5959" title="Media of the Republic of the Congo" label="Media of the Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635786" start="5962" end="5994" title="List of radio stations in Africa" label="List of radio stations in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642657" start="5997" end="6034" title="List of television stations in Africa" label="List of television stations in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642859" start="6037" end="6093" title="List of terrestrial fibre optic cable projects in Africa" label="List of terrestrial fibre optic cable projects in Africa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25501" wikidata="Q4179012" url="?curid=25501" title="Transport in the Republic of the Congo">
<text>Transport in the Republic of Congo includes land, air and water modes. Over of paved roads are in use. The two international airports are Maya-Maya Airport and Pointe Noire Airport. 

The country also has a large port on the Atlantic Ocean at Pointe-Noire, others along the Congo River at Brazzaville and Impfondo.

==Railways==
&quot;The&quot; 510 km Congo-Ocean Railway connects Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire. The road uses a 1.067-m gauge.

===Timeline===
In 2003, concessioning occurred.

In 2006, rail service was suspended by floods and oil shortages.

On 12 April 2007, a South Korean consortium agreed to build a new 800 km railway in the Congo-Brazzaville Republic in return for timber concessions. The railway would connect Brazzaville to Ouesso in the northwest Sangha region. A two-year feasibility study would take place before a final agreement with the government and starting construction work on the railway.

==Highways==
Highways span 23,324 km. 3,111 km are paved.

17,000 km of the Congo&#x27;s railways are classified as national, departmental, and routes of local interest. 6,324 km are non-classified routes.

The National Highway Network includes:

*N1 Brazzaville - Kinkala - Dolisie - Pointe Noire
*N2 Brazzaville - Owando - Ouésso
*N3 Dolisie - Border with Gabon

==Waterways==

The Congo and Ubangi (Oubangui) rivers provide 1,120 km of commercially navigable water transport. Other rivers are used for local traffic.

==Pipelines==
The country has oil (982 km), gas (232 km) and liquid petroleum gas (4km) pipeline networks.

==Ports and harbours==
===Atlantic Ocean===
*Pointe-Noire (Major seaport)

===Congo River===
*Brazzaville (River port)
*Impfondo
*Djeno (Oil terminal)

===Other rivers===
*Oyo

===Sangha River===
*Ouesso 

==Air==

The Republic of the Congo has two international airports: Maya-Maya Airport in Brazzaville and Pointe Noire Airport. As of June 2014, six airlines operated between the two airports. Both airports had direct flights to Addis Ababa, Abidjan, Casablanca, Cotonou, Douala, Libreville, Johannesburg, and Paris. Maya-Maya Airport is served by more airlines than Pointe Noire and had direct flights to various other destinations in Africa and the Middle East.

The country hosts 8 airports with paved runways. Five have runways shorter than 2,437 meters. 1 is less than 3,047 meters, while 2 have longer runways.&lt;br&gt;Ten airports have unpaved runways. Two have runways shorter than 914 meters. Nine have runways shorter than 1,523 meters, while 8 have runways as long as 2,437 meters.

==See also==
* Republic of the Congo

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4179012" start="0" end="34" title="Transport in the Republic of the Congo" label="Transport in the Republic of Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q644963" start="138" end="155" title="Maya-Maya Airport" label="Maya-Maya Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432398" start="160" end="180" title="Pointe Noire Airport" label="Pointe Noire Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q223920" start="243" end="255" title="Pointe-Noire" label="Pointe-Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503" start="274" end="285" title="Congo River" label="Congo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844" start="289" end="300" title="Brazzaville" label="Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142926" start="305" end="313" title="Impfondo" label="Impfondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069319" start="352" end="371" title="Congo-Ocean Railway" label="Congo-Ocean Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844" start="381" end="392" title="Brazzaville" label="Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q223920" start="397" end="409" title="Pointe-Noire" label="Pointe-Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q194166" start="591" end="601" title="consortium" label="consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q627885" start="748" end="754" title="Ouesso" label="Ouesso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844" start="1177" end="1188" title="Brazzaville" label="Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q667652" start="1191" end="1198" title="Kinkala" label="Kinkala"/>
<link wikidata="Q246554" start="1201" end="1208" title="Dolisie" label="Dolisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q223920" start="1211" end="1223" title="Pointe Noire" label="Pointe Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844" start="1228" end="1239" title="Brazzaville" label="Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201732" start="1242" end="1248" title="Owando" label="Owando"/>
<link wikidata="Q627885" start="1251" end="1257" title="Ouésso" label="Ouésso"/>
<link wikidata="Q246554" start="1262" end="1269" title="Dolisie" label="Dolisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="1284" end="1289" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q76048" start="1310" end="1315" title="Congo Free State" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q171649" start="1320" end="1326" title="Ubangi River" label="Ubangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q351609" start="1508" end="1528" title="liquid petroleum gas" label="liquid petroleum gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q223920" start="1600" end="1612" title="Pointe-Noire" label="Pointe-Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844" start="1649" end="1660" title="Brazzaville" label="Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142926" start="1675" end="1683" title="Impfondo" label="Impfondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5285289" start="1685" end="1690" title="Djeno" label="Djeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124895" start="1727" end="1730" title="Oyo (Congo)" label="Oyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q627885" start="1752" end="1758" title="Ouesso" label="Ouesso"/>
<link wikidata="Q644963" start="1828" end="1845" title="Maya-Maya Airport" label="Maya-Maya Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844" start="1849" end="1860" title="Brazzaville" label="Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432398" start="1865" end="1885" title="Pointe Noire Airport" label="Pointe Noire Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q971" start="2569" end="2590" title="Republic of the Congo" label="Republic of the Congo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25502" wikidata="Q458231" url="?curid=25502" title="Armed Forces of the Republic of the Congo">
<text>The Armed Forces of the Republic of the Congo (), also less formally denoted as the &quot;Forces armées congolaises&quot; or its acronym FAC, are the military forces of the Republic of the Congo. They consist of the Congolese Army, the Congolese Air Force, the , and the . The dissolution of French Equatorial Africa in 1958, and France&#x27;s impending military withdrawal from the Congo in August 1960, provided the impetus for the formation of the FAC. The FAC and state paramilitary agencies are headed by an &quot;Armed Forces Chief of General Staff&quot;, usually appointed by the President of the Republic of the Congo. Major General Guy Blanchard Okoï has served as chief of staff since 2012.

==History==
The Congolese military was created on January 16, 1961, and reflected the nature of the colonial security forces, which recruited among the country&#x27;s northern ethnic groups and were staffed by junior Bakongo officers and a handful of French senior commissioned officers. President Alphonse Massamba-Débat, who seized power in 1963, expelled all the French personnel and sidelined the military in favor of independent political militias, which were trained by Cuban troops. The militias and the Congo&#x27;s civil defense corps were later integrated with the FAC as the &quot;Armée Nationale Populaire&quot;.

Under the People&#x27;s Republic of the Congo, the FAC was again reorganized, with Mbochi career soldiers making up the bulk of the new officer corps; its effectiveness and standards, however, were gradually eroded by draconian political purges throughout the 1970s. A second major setback occurred during the 1990s, when mass desertions led to many FAC officers and enlisted troops joining regional militias. The FAC was reformed for the third time after the Second Congo War, incorporating many former rebels and militia combatants.

On 5 February 2012, there were munitions explosions at a tank regiment (seemingly &#x27;Regiment Blinde&#x27;) barracks located in Brazzaville&#x27;s fifth arrondissement, Ouenzé. Some 206 people were initially reported killed. There are five military barracks in the city, and after the explosion officials said the government had promised to move all munitions out of the capital.

==Army equipment==
===Small arms===
===Anti-tank weapons===
===Tanks===
===Scout cars===
===Armored personnel carriers===
===Artillery===
===Air defence systems===
====Towed anti-aircraft guns====
====Self-propelled anti-aircraft guns====
==Navy==

The Navy has around 800 personnel. In October 2007, the US Navy provided some training to Congolese Navy personnel in Pointe-Noire, a port city that is the second largest settlement in the country.

As of 2016 it was commanded by Rear Admiral Andre Bouagnabea-Moundanza.

As of 2019 the Navy operates a single Mil Mi-14 helicopter.

==Air Force==


After achieving independence from France in 1960, the Congolese Air Force (Force Aerienne Congolaise) was started with equipment such as the Douglas C-47s, Broussards and Bell 47Gs, these were followed by Nord Noratlas tactical transports and Sud Alouette helicopter. In the 1970s the air force switched to Soviet equipment. This included five Ilyushin IL-14 and six turboprop Antonov An-24 transports and an An-26 in return for providing bases for Cuban MiG-17 operations over Angola. These fighters and a few MiG-15UTI combat trainers were transferred to the FAC. In 1990 these fighter were replaced by 16 USSR supplied MiG-21MF/bis Fishbeds plus a couple of MiG-21US trainers. Together with a Soviet training mission which stayed until late 1991, during that time there were numerous accidents that involved both Soviet and Congolese personnel. After the Soviets left there was only limited funding for MiG operations and they were withdrawn. Six Mi-8 helicopters were delivered from Ukraine in mid-1997 before the Cobra rebel takeover.

In 1990, the Air Force was reformed into its present state. Most fighter aircraft it possessed were scrapped in 2001. France and China provided most training to the Air Force in recent times.

See the article Congolese Air Force for current inventory.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q458231" start="4" end="45" title="Armed Forces of the Republic of the Congo" label="Armed Forces of the Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q971" start="173" end="194" title="Republic of the Congo" label="Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160539" start="236" end="255" title="Congolese Air Force" label="Congolese Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q271894" start="292" end="316" title="French Equatorial Africa" label="French Equatorial Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="474" end="486" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q878300" start="587" end="625" title="List of Presidents of the Republic of the Congo" label="President of the Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="641" end="659" title="Guy Blanchard Okoï" label="Guy Blanchard Okoï"/>
<link wikidata="Q640090" start="919" end="926" title="Kongo people" label="Bakongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q740438" start="1000" end="1023" title="Alphonse Massamba-Débat" label="Alphonse Massamba-Débat"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="1178" end="1182" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152126" start="1338" end="1373" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of the Congo" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650456" start="1411" end="1417" title="Mbochi people" label="Mbochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q75756" start="1788" end="1804" title="Second Congo War" label="Second Congo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188883" start="1895" end="1915" title="Brazzaville arms dump blasts" label="munitions explosions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844" start="1995" end="2006" title="Brazzaville" label="Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q30059" start="2020" end="2034" title="arrondissement" label="arrondissement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358071" start="2036" end="2042" title="Ouenzé" label="Ouenzé"/>
<link wikidata="Q223920" start="2615" end="2627" title="Pointe-Noire" label="Pointe-Noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="4005" end="4011" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="4016" end="4021" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160539" start="4096" end="4115" title="Congolese Air Force" label="Congolese Air Force"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25503" wikidata="Q5468596" url="?curid=25503" title="Foreign relations of the Republic of the Congo">
<text>For the two decades preceding the Republic of the Congo&#x27;s 1991 National Conference, the country was firmly in the socialist camp, allied principally with the Soviet Union and other Eastern bloc nations. Educational, economic, and foreign aid links between Congo and its Eastern bloc allies were extensive, with the Congolese military and security forces receiving significant Soviet, East German, and Cuban assistance.

After the worldwide dissolution of the Soviet Union and Congo&#x27;s adoption of multi-party democracy in 1991, Congo&#x27;s bilateral relations with its former socialist allies have become relatively less important. France is now by far Congo&#x27;s principal external partner, contributing significant amounts of economic assistance, while playing a highly influential role.

Congo-Brazzaville is also a member of the International Criminal Court with a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of protection for the US-military.

Membership in international organizations includes the United Nations, Organisation of African Unity, African Development Bank, General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), Economic Commission for Central African States, Central African Customs and Economic Union, International Coffee Organization, Union of Central African States, Intelsat, International Criminal Police Organization - Interpol, Non-Aligned Movement, and Group of 77.

Disputes - international: most of the Congo River boundary with the Democratic Republic of the Congo is indefinite (no agreement has been reached on the division of the river or its islands, except in the Pool Malebo (Stanley Pool) area.

==Diplomatic relations==
List of countries which the Republic of the Congo maintains diplomatic relations with:
==Bilateral relations==
==See also==
* List of diplomatic missions in the Republic of the Congo
* List of diplomatic missions of the Republic of the Congo
* Visa requirements for Republic of the Congo citizens

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q971" start="34" end="55" title="Republic of the Congo" label="Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="163" end="175" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="186" end="198" title="Eastern bloc" label="Eastern bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="389" end="400" title="German Democratic Republic" label="East German"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="406" end="410" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="445" end="476" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="845" end="873" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="932" end="934" title="United States" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1001" end="1015" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="1017" end="1046" title="Organisation of African Unity" label="Organisation of African Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q340195" start="1048" end="1072" title="African Development Bank" label="African Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q194284" start="1074" end="1112" title="General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade" label="General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1169" end="1211" title="Economic Community of Central African States#Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa" label="Central African Customs and Economic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q48192" start="1213" end="1246" title="International Coffee Organization" label="International Coffee Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="1281" end="1289" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="1291" end="1344" title="Interpol" label="International Criminal Police Organization - Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="1346" end="1366" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q477328" start="1372" end="1383" title="Group of 77" label="Group of 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468596" start="1386" end="1411" title="Foreign relations of the Republic of the Congo" label="Disputes - international:"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503" start="1424" end="1435" title="Congo River" label="Congo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="1454" end="1486" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q750025" start="1591" end="1602" title="Pool Malebo" label="Pool Malebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616634" start="1776" end="1832" title="List of diplomatic missions in the Republic of the Congo" label="List of diplomatic missions in the Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544759" start="1835" end="1891" title="List of diplomatic missions of the Republic of the Congo" label="List of diplomatic missions of the Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935518" start="1894" end="1946" title="Visa requirements for Republic of the Congo citizens" label="Visa requirements for Republic of the Congo citizens"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25506" wikidata="Q220780" url="?curid=25506" title="Raging Bull">
<text>Raging Bull is a 1980 American biographical sports drama film directed by Martin Scorsese and starring Robert De Niro, Joe Pesci, Cathy Moriarty, Theresa Saldana, Frank Vincent, and Nicholas Colasanto in his final film role. The film is an adaptation of former middleweight boxing champion Jake LaMotta&#x27;s 1970 memoir &quot;Raging Bull: My Story&quot;. It follows the career of LaMotta, played by De Niro, his rise and fall in the boxing scene, and his turbulent personal life beset by rage and jealousy.

Scorsese was initially reluctant to develop the project, though he eventually came to relate to LaMotta&#x27;s story. Paul Schrader re-wrote Mardik Martin&#x27;s first screenplay, and Scorsese and De Niro together made uncredited contributions thereafter. Pesci was an unknown actor prior to the film, as was Moriarty, whom Pesci suggested for her role. During principal photography, each of the boxing scenes was choreographed for a specific visual style and De Niro gained approximately to portray LaMotta in his later post-boxing years. Scorsese was exacting in the process of editing and mixing the film, expecting it to be his last major feature.

&quot;Raging Bull&quot; premiered in New York City on November 14, 1980, and was released in theaters on December 19, 1980. The film had a lukewarm box office of $23.4 million against its $18 million budget. The film received mixed reviews upon its release; while De Niro&#x27;s performance and the editing were widely acclaimed, it garnered criticism due to its violent content. Despite the mixed reviews, the film was nominated for eight Academy Awards at the 53rd Academy Awards (tying with &quot;The Elephant Man&quot; as the most nominated film of the ceremony), including Best Picture and Best Director, and won two: Best Actor for De Niro (his second Oscar) and Best Editing.

After its release, &quot;Raging Bull&quot; went on to garner high critical praise, and is now considered one of the greatest films ever made. In 1990, it became the first film to be selected in its first year of eligibility for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant&quot;, and the American Film Institute ranked it as the fourth-greatest American movie of all time.

== Plot ==

In 1941, Jake LaMotta is a young, up-and-coming middleweight boxer who suffers his first loss to Jimmy Reeves after a controversial decision. Jake&#x27;s brother Joey discusses a potential shot for the middleweight title with one of his Mafia connections, Salvy Batts, but he repeatedly refuses the Mafia&#x27;s help, wanting to win the championship on his own terms. Some time after, Jake spots a fifteen-year-old girl named Vickie at a swimming pool in his Bronx neighborhood. He eventually pursues a relationship with her, although he is already married and Vickie is underage. In 1943, Jake defeats Sugar Ray Robinson, and has a rematch three weeks later. Despite Jake dominating Robinson during the bout, the judges surprisingly rule in favor of Robinson, who Joey feels won only because he was enlisting into the Army the following week. By 1945, Jake marries Vickie.

Jake is controlling and domineering over Vickie, and constantly worries that she has feelings for other men. His jealousy is evident when he brutally beats his next opponent, Tony Janiro, in front of Tommy Como, the local mob boss, and Vickie. As Joey discusses the victory with journalists at the Copacabana, he is distracted by seeing Vickie approach a table with Salvy and his crew. Joey speaks with Vickie, who implies she is dissatisfied in her marriage with Jake. Under the wrong impression that Vickie is having an affair with Salvy, Joey viciously attacks him in a fight that spills outside of the club. Como later orders them to apologize, and has Joey tell Jake that if he wants a chance at the championship title, which Como controls, he will have to take a dive first. Jake purposely loses his next match against Billy Fox, and is booed out of the building after putting up a lackluster performance. He is suspended shortly thereafter from the board on suspicion of throwing the fight, much to his anguish. He is eventually reinstated, and in 1949, wins the middleweight championship title against Marcel Cerdan.

A year later, Jake becomes increasingly paranoid that Vickie is having an affair. He asks Joey if he has had an affair with her, enraging Joey and causing him to leave. Jake later presses Vickie about whether she has had an affair, leading to her sarcastically confessing that she had sex with Joey, Salvy and Tommy. In a fit of rage, Jake, followed by Vickie, walks to Joey&#x27;s house and assaults him in front of his wife Lenora and their children before knocking Vickie unconscious. Vickie later returns to their home and threatens to leave, but they reconcile. After defending his championship belt in a grueling fifteen-round bout against Laurent Dauthuille in 1950, he calls his brother after the fight to make amends, but when Joey assumes Salvy is on the other end and starts insulting and cursing at him, Jake silently hangs up. Estranged from his brother, Jake sees his career decline and he eventually loses his title to Sugar Ray Robinson in their final encounter in 1951.

By 1956, an aged and overweight Jake has retired and moved with his family to Miami. After he stays out all night at the nightclub which he owns, Vickie tells him she wants a divorce as well as full custody of their children. She also threatens to call the police if he comes anywhere near them. He is later arrested for introducing under-age girls to men in his club. He unsuccessfully attempts to bribe his way out of his criminal case using the jewels from his championship belt. In 1957, he goes to jail, sorrowfully questioning his misfortune and crying in despair. Upon returning to New York City in 1958, he encounters Joey, who reluctantly accepts his embrace.

In 1964, Jake performs stand-up comedy at various clubs. Backstage before a show LaMotta prepares himself for his performance by shadowboxing, quoting scenes from &quot;On the Waterfront&quot; and chanting &quot;I&#x27;m the boss&quot; before taking the stage.

== Cast ==

=== LaMotta&#x27;s opponents ===
==Production==
===Development===
&quot;Raging Bull&quot; came about when Robert De Niro read the autobiography upon which the film is based while he was on the set of &quot;The Godfather Part II&quot;. Although disappointed by the book&#x27;s writing style, De Niro became fascinated by the character of Jake LaMotta. He showed the book to Martin Scorsese on the set of &quot;Alice Doesn&#x27;t Live Here Anymore&quot; in the hope that he would consider the project. Scorsese repeatedly turned down the opportunity to direct the film, claiming he had no idea what &quot;Raging Bull&quot; was about, even though he had read some of the text. Never a sports fan, when he found out what LaMotta used to do for a living, he said, &quot;A boxer? I don&#x27;t like boxing...Even as a kid, I always thought that boxing was boring... It was something I couldn&#x27;t, wouldn&#x27;t grasp.&quot; His overall opinion of sport in general is, &quot;Anything with a ball, no good.&quot; The book was then passed onto Mardik Martin, the film&#x27;s eventual co-screenwriter, who said &quot;the trouble is the damn thing has been done a hundred times before—a fighter who has trouble with his brother and his wife and the mob is after him&quot;. De Niro had even shown the book to producers Robert Chartoff and Irwin Winkler, who were willing to assist only if Scorsese agreed. After nearly dying from a drug overdose, Scorsese agreed to make the film, not only to save his own life but also to save his career. Scorsese began to relate very personally to the story of Jake LaMotta, and in it he saw how the boxing ring can be &quot;an allegory for whatever you do in life&quot;, which for him paralleled moviemaking, &quot;you make movies, you&#x27;re in the ring each time.&quot;&lt;ref name=&quot;Thompson pp.76/77&quot;&gt;Thompson, David and Christie, Ian, &quot;Scorsese on Scorsese&quot;, pp. 76/77.&lt;/ref&gt;

Preparation for the film began with Scorsese shooting some 8 mm color footage featuring De Niro boxing in a ring. One night when the footage was being shown to De Niro, Michael Chapman, and his friend and mentor, the British director Michael Powell, Powell pointed out that the color of the gloves at the time would have only been maroon, oxblood, or even black. This is one of the reasons Scorsese chose to film &quot;Raging Bull&quot; in black and white. Other reasons were to distinguish the film from other color films around the time and to acknowledge the problem of fading color film stock—an issue Scorsese recognized. Scorsese went to two matches at Madison Square Garden to aid his research, picking up on minor but essential details such as the blood sponge and subsequently, the blood on the ropes (which would later be used in the film). According to the brief comments on the inlay card of the &quot;Raging Bull&quot; DVD, Scorsese was not—and still is not—a fan of sports or boxing, which he describes as boring. When he saw the blood-soaked sponges being dipped in a bucket, he recalls thinking to himself, &quot;And they call this sport.&quot;

Multiple titles were considered for &quot;Raging Bull&quot;, including &quot;Prizefighter&quot; and &quot;The Jake La Motta Story&quot;. Scorsese stated that &quot;Prizefighter&quot; was his favorite title, but did not select it as he was afraid that people would think the film was solely about boxing.

=== Screenplay ===
Under the guidance of Chartoff and Winkler, Mardik Martin was asked to start writing the screenplay. According to De Niro, under no circumstances would United Artists accept Martin&#x27;s script. The story was based on the vision of journalist Pete Hamill of a 1930s and 1940s style, when boxing was known as &quot;the great dark prince of sports&quot;. De Niro was unimpressed when he finished reading the first draft, however. &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; screenwriter Paul Schrader was swiftly brought in to rewrite the script around August 1978. Some of the changes that Schrader made to the script included a rewrite of the scene with the undercooked steak and inclusion of LaMotta seen masturbating in a Florida cell. The character of LaMotta&#x27;s brother, Joey, was finally added, previously absent from Martin&#x27;s script. United Artists saw a massive improvement on the quality of the script. However, its chief executives, Steven Bach and David Field, met with Scorsese, De Niro, and producer Irwin Winkler in November 1978 to say they were worried that the content would be X-rated material and have no chance of finding an audience.

According to Scorsese, the script was left to him and De Niro, and they spent two and a half weeks on the island of Saint Martin extensively re-building the content of the film. The most significant change would be the entire scene when LaMotta fixes his television and then accuses his wife of having an affair. Other changes included the removal of Jake and Joey&#x27;s father; the reduction of organized crime&#x27;s role in the story and a major re-write of LaMotta&#x27;s fight with Tony Janiro. They were also responsible for the end sequence where LaMotta is all alone in his dressing room quoting the &quot;I could have been a contender&quot; scene from &quot;On the Waterfront&quot;. An extract of &quot;Richard III&quot; had been considered but Michael Powell thought it would be a bad decision within the context of an American film. According to Steven Bach, the first two screenwriters (Martin and Schrader) would receive credit, but since there was no payment to the writer&#x27;s guild on the script, De Niro and Scorsese&#x27;s work would remain uncredited.

=== Casting ===

One of Scorsese&#x27;s trademarks was casting many actors and actresses new to the profession. De Niro, who was already committed to play Jake LaMotta, began to help Scorsese track down unfamiliar names to play his on-screen brother, Joey, and wife, Vikki. The role of Joey LaMotta was the first to be cast. De Niro was watching a low budget television film called &quot;The Death Collector&quot; when he saw the part of a young career criminal played by Joe Pesci (then an unknown and struggling actor) as an ideal candidate. Prior to receiving a call from De Niro and Scorsese for the proposal to star in the film, Pesci had not worked in film for four years and was working at an Italian restaurant in New Jersey.
The role of Vikki (respelled as Vickie in the final film), Jake&#x27;s second wife, had interest across the board, but it was Pesci who suggested the then unknown Cathy Moriarty from a picture he once saw at a New Jersey disco. Both De Niro and Scorsese believed that Moriarty, then 18, could portray the role after meeting with her on several occasions and noticing her husky voice and physical maturity. The duo had to prove to the Screen Actors Guild that she was right for the role when Cis Corman showed 10 comparing pictures of both Moriarty and the real Vikki LaMotta for proof she had a resemblance. Moriarty was then asked to take a screen test which she managed—partly aided with some improvised lines from De Niro—after some confusion wondering why the crew were filming her take. Joe Pesci also persuaded his former show-biz pal and co-star in &quot;The Death Collector&quot;, Frank Vincent, to try for the role of Salvy Batts. Following a successful audition and screen test, Vincent received the call to say he had received the part.&lt;ref name=&quot;Evans pp.65/66&quot;&gt;Evans, Mike, &quot;The Making of Raging Bull&quot;, pp. 65/66.&lt;/ref&gt; Charles Scorsese, the director&#x27;s father, made his film debut as Tommy Como&#x27;s cousin, Charlie.

While in the midst of practicing a Bronx accent and preparing for his role, De Niro met both LaMotta and his ex-wife, Vikki, on separate occasions. Vikki, who lived in Florida, told stories about her life with her former husband and also showed old home movies (that later inspired a similar sequence to be done for the film). Jake LaMotta, on the other hand, served as his trainer, accompanied by Al Silvani as coach at the Gramercy club in New York City, getting him into shape. The actor found that boxing came naturally to him; he entered as a middleweight boxer, winning two of his three fights in a Brooklyn ring dubbed &quot;young LaMotta&quot; by the commentator. According to Jake LaMotta, De Niro was one of the top 20 best middleweight boxers of all time.

=== Principal photography ===

According to the production mixer, Michael Evje, the film began shooting at the Los Angeles Olympic Auditorium on April 16, 1979. Grips hung huge curtains of black duvetyne on all four sides of the ring area to contain the artificial smoke used extensively for visual effect. On May 7, the production moved to the Culver City Studio, Stage 3, and filmed there until the middle of June. Scorsese made it clear during filming that he did not appreciate the traditional way in films of showing fights from the spectators&#x27; view. He insisted that one camera operated by the Director of Photography, Michael Chapman, would be placed inside the ring as he would play the role of an opponent keeping out of the way of other fighters so that viewers could see the emotions of the fighters, including those of Jake. The precise moves of the boxers were to be done as dance routines from the information of a book about dance instructors in the mode of Arthur Murray. A punching bag in the middle of the ring was used by De Niro between takes before he aggressively came straight on to do the next scene. The initial five-week schedule for the shooting of the boxing scenes took longer than expected, putting Scorsese under pressure.

According to Scorsese, production of the film was then closed down for around four months with the entire crew being paid, so De Niro could go on a binge eating trip around northern Italy and France. When he did come back to the United States, his weight had increased from 145 to 215 pounds (66 to 97 kg). The scenes with the heftier Jake LaMotta—which include announcing his retirement from boxing and LaMotta ending up in a Florida cell—were completed while approaching Christmas 1979 between seven and eight weeks later so as not to aggravate the health issues which were already affecting De Niro&#x27;s posture, breathing, and talking.

According to Evje, Jake&#x27;s nightclub sequence was filmed in a closed-down San Pedro club on December 3. The jail cell head-banging scene was shot on a constructed set with De Niro asking for minimal crew to be present—there was not even a boom operator.

The final sequence where Jake LaMotta is in front of his mirror was filmed on the last day of shooting, requiring 19 takes, with only the 13th being used for the film. Scorsese wanted to have an atmosphere that would be so cold that the words would have an impact as he tries to come to terms with his relationship with his brother.

=== Post-production ===
The editing of &quot;Raging Bull&quot; began when production was temporarily put on hold and was completed in 1980. Scorsese worked with the editor, Thelma Schoonmaker, to achieve a final cut of the film. Their main decision was to abandon Schrader&#x27;s idea of LaMotta&#x27;s nightclub act interweaving with the flashback of his youth and instead they just followed along the lines of a single flashback where only scenes of LaMotta practicing his stand-up would be left bookending the film. A sound mix arranged by Frank Warner was a delicate process taking six months. According to Scorsese, the sound on &quot;Raging Bull&quot; was difficult because each punch, camera shot, and flash bulb would be different. Also, there was the issue of trying to balance the quality between scenes featuring dialogue and those involving boxing (which were done in Dolby Stereo). &quot;Raging Bull&quot; went through a test screening in front of a small audience including the chief executives of United Artists, Steven Bach and Andy Albeck. The screening was shown at the MGM screening room in New York around July 1980. Later, Albeck praised Scorsese by calling him a &quot;true artist&quot;.

According to the producers Robert Chartoff and Irwin Winkler, matters were made worse when United Artists decided not to distribute the film but no other studios were interested when they attempted to sell the rights. Scorsese made no secret that &quot;Raging Bull&quot; would be his &quot;Hollywood swan song&quot; and he took unusual care of its rights during post-production. Scorsese threatened to remove his credit from the film if he was not allowed to sort a reel which obscured the name of a whisky brand known as &quot;Cutty Sark&quot; which was heard in a scene. The work was completed only four days shy of the premiere.

In 2012, &quot;Raging Bull&quot; was voted by the Motion Picture Editors Guild as the best-edited film in history.

=== Copyright litigation ===
Paula Petrella, heir to Frank Petrello whose works were allegedly sources for the film, filed for copyright infringement in 2009 based on MGM&#x27;s 1991 copyright renewal of the film. In 2014, the Supreme Court held, in &quot;Petrella v. Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Inc.&quot;, that Petrella&#x27;s suit survived MGM&#x27;s defense of &quot;laches&quot;, the legal doctrine that protects defendants from unreasonable delays by potential plaintiffs. The case was remanded to lower courts, meaning that Petrella could receive a decision on the merits of her claim. MGM settled with Petrella in 2015.

== Reception ==

=== Box office ===
The brew of violence and anger, combined with the lack of a proper advertising campaign, led to the film&#x27;s lukewarm box office intake of only $23 million, when compared to its $18 million budget. By the time it left theaters, it only earned $10.1 million in theatrical rentals (equivalent to $ million in ). Scorsese became concerned for his future career and worried that producers and studios might refuse to finance his films. According to Box Office Mojo, the film grossed $23,383,987 in domestic theaters (equivalent to $ in ).

=== Critical response ===
When it first premiered in New York City on November 14, 1980, the initial release of &quot;Raging Bull&quot; was met with polarized reviews, but the film would later receive widespread critical acclaim and is widely regarded as one of Scorsese&#x27;s best works.

On the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 92% based on 149 reviews, with an average rating of 9.00/10. The site&#x27;s critical consensus reads, &quot;Arguably Martin Scorsese&#x27;s and Robert De Niro&#x27;s finest film, &quot;Raging Bull&quot; is often painful to watch, but it&#x27;s a searing, powerful work about an unsympathetic hero.&quot; Metacritic which assigns a weighted average, gave it a score of 90 out of 100, based on 28 reviews, indicating &quot;universal acclaim&quot;.

Jack Kroll of &quot;Newsweek&quot; called &quot;Raging Bull&quot; the &quot;best movie of the year&quot;. Vincent Canby of &quot;The New York Times&quot; said that Scorsese &quot;has made his most ambitious film as well as his finest&quot; and went on to praise Moriarty&#x27;s debut performance saying: &quot;either she is one of the film finds of the decade or Mr. Scorsese is Svengali. Perhaps both.&quot; &quot;Time&quot; praised De Niro&#x27;s performance since &quot;much of &quot;Raging Bull&quot; exists because of the possibilities it offers De Niro to display his own explosive art&quot;. Steven Jenkins from the British Film Institute&#x27;s (BFI) magazine, &quot;Monthly Film Journal&quot;, said &quot;&quot;Raging Bull&quot; may prove to be Scorsese&#x27;s finest achievement to date&quot;.

=== Accolades ===
The Oscars were held the day after President Ronald Reagan was shot by John Hinckley, who did it as an attempt to impress Jodie Foster, who played a child prostitute in another of Scorsese&#x27;s famous films, &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; (which also starred De Niro). Out of fear of being attacked, Scorsese went to the ceremony with FBI bodyguards disguised as guests who escorted him out before the announcement of the Academy Award for Best Picture was made (the winner being Robert Redford&#x27;s &quot;Ordinary People&quot;).

The Los Angeles Film Critics Association voted &quot;Raging Bull&quot; the best film of 1980 and De Niro best actor. The National Board of Review also voted De Niro best actor and Pesci best supporting actor. The Berlin International Film Festival chose &quot;Raging Bull&quot; to open the festival in 1981.

The 2012 Parajanov-Vartanov Institute Award honored screenwriter Mardik Martin &quot;for the mastery of his pen on iconic American films&quot; &quot;Mean Streets&quot; and &quot;Raging Bull&quot;.

=== Legacy ===
By the end of the 1980s, &quot;Raging Bull&quot; had cemented its reputation as a modern classic. It was voted the best film of the 1980s in numerous critics&#x27; polls and is regularly pointed to as both Scorsese&#x27;s best film and one of the finest American films ever made. Several prominent critics, among them Roger Ebert, declared the film to be an instant classic and the consummation of Scorsese&#x27;s earlier promise. Ebert proclaimed it the best film of the 1980s, and one of the ten greatest films of all time. The film has been deemed &quot;culturally, historically, and aesthetically significant&quot; by the United States Library of Congress and was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry in 1990.

&quot;Raging Bull&quot; was listed by &quot;Time&quot; magazine as one of the &quot;All-TIME 100 Movies&quot;. &quot;Variety&quot; magazine ranked the film number 39 on their list of the 50 greatest movies. &quot;Raging Bull&quot; was fifth on &quot;Entertainment Weekly&#x27;s&quot; list of the 100 Greatest Movies of All Time. The film tied with &quot;The Bicycle Thieves&quot; and &quot;Vertigo&quot; at number 6 on &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot; 2002 poll of the greatest movies ever. When &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot; directors&#x27; and critics&#x27; lists from that year are combined, &quot;Raging Bull&quot; gets the most votes of any movie that has been produced since 1975. In 2002, Film4 held a poll of the 100 Greatest Movies, on which &quot;Raging Bull&quot; was voted in at number 20. &quot;Halliwell&#x27;s Film Guide&quot;, a British film guide, placed &quot;Raging Bull&quot; seventh in a poll naming their selection for the &quot;Top 1,000 Movies&quot;. &quot;TV Guide&quot; also included the film on their list of the 50 best movies. &quot;Movieline&quot; magazine included the film on its list of the 100 best movies. Leonard Maltin included &quot;Raging Bull&quot; on his &quot;100 Must-See Films of the 20th Century&quot; list. &quot;Video Detective&quot; also included the film on its list of the top 100 movies of all time. Roger Ebert named &quot;Robert De Niro&#x27;s transformation from sleek boxer to paunchy nightclub owner in &quot;Raging Bull&quot;&quot; as one of the &quot;100 Greatest Movie Moments&quot;. The National Society of Film Critics ranked it #75 on their &quot;100 Essential Films&quot; list. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine ranked it #6 on their list of the &quot;100 Maverick Movies in the Last 100 Years&quot;.

A 1997 readers poll conducted by the &quot;L.A. Daily News&quot; ranked the film #64 on a list of the greatest American movies. The Writers Guild of America named the film as the 76th best screenplay of all time. &quot;Raging Bull&quot; is #7 on &quot;Time Out Film Guide&#x27;s&quot; &quot;Centenary Top 100&quot; list, and it also tied at #16 (with &quot;Lawrence of Arabia&quot;) on their 1998 readers poll. In 2008, &quot;Empire&quot; magazine held a poll of &quot;The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time&quot;, taking votes from 10,000 readers, 150 film makers, and 50 film critics in which &quot;Raging Bull&quot; was placed at number 11. It was also placed on a similar list of 1000 movies by &quot;The New York Times&quot;. In 2010, &quot;Total Film&quot; selected the film as one of &quot;The 100 Greatest Movies of All Time&quot;. FilmSite.org, a subsidiary of American Movie Classics, placed &quot;Raging Bull&quot; on their list of the 100 greatest movies. Additionally, Films101.com ranked the film as the 17th best movie of all time in a list of the 10,790 most notable.

In 2012, the Motion Picture Editors Guild listed the film as the best-edited film of all time based on a survey of its membership. In the 2012 &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot; polls, it was ranked the 53rd-greatest film ever made in the critics&#x27; poll and 12th in the directors&#x27; poll. Contemporaries of Scorsese, like Francis Ford Coppola, have included it routinely in their lists for favorite films of all time. In 2015, &quot;Raging Bull&quot; ranked 29th on BBC&#x27;s &quot;100 Greatest American Films&quot; list, voted on by film critics from around the world.

==== American Film Institute recognition ====
* AFI&#x27;s 100 Years... 100 Movies: #24
* AFI&#x27;s 100 Years... 100 Thrills: #51
* AFI&#x27;s 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition): #4
* AFI&#x27;s 10 Top 10: #1 Sports

== Soundtrack ==
Martin Scorsese decided to assemble a soundtrack made of music that was popular at the time using his personal collection of 78s. With the help of Robbie Robertson, the songs were carefully chosen so they would be the ones that a person would hear on the radio, at the pool or in bars and clubs which reflected the mood of that particular era. Some lyrics from songs would also be slipped into some dialogue. The Intermezzo from &quot;Cavalleria rusticana&quot; by Italian composer Pietro Mascagni would serve as the main theme to &quot;Raging Bull&quot; after a successful try-out by Scorsese and the editor, Thelma Schoonmaker, over the film&#x27;s opening titles. Two other Mascagni pieces were used in the film: the Barcarolle from &quot;Silvano&quot;, and the Intermezzo (&quot;Ratcliff&#x27;s Dream&quot;) from &quot;Guglielmo Ratcliff&quot;. A two-CD soundtrack was released in 2005, long after the film was released, because of earlier difficulties obtaining rights for many of the songs, which Scorsese selected from his childhood memories growing up in New York.

== Dispute over sequel ==

In 2006, &quot;Variety&quot; reported that Sunset Pictures was developing a combination sequel and prequel film entitled &quot;Raging Bull II: Continuing the Story of Jake LaMotta&quot;, chronicling LaMotta&#x27;s life before and after the events of the original film, as told in the memoir of the same name. Filming began on June 15, 2012, with William Forsythe as the older LaMotta and Mojean Aria as the younger version (before the events of the first film). The film, directed by Martin Guigui, also stars Joe Mantegna, Tom Sizemore, Penelope Ann Miller, Natasha Henstridge, Alicia Witt, Ray Wise, Harry Hamlin, and James Russo as Rocky Graziano. In July 2012, MGM, owners of United Artists, filed a lawsuit against LaMotta and the producers of the new film to block it from being released. MGM argued that they had the rights to make any authorized sequel to the original book, tracing their claim back to an agreement LaMotta and co-author Peter Savage made with Chartoff-Winkler, producers of the original film. MGM argued that the defendants were publicly claiming the film to be a sequel to the original film, which they said could &quot;tarnish&quot; the original film&#x27;s reputation. In August 2012, the suit was settled, with producers of the new film retitling it &quot;The Bronx Bull&quot; and agreeing not to market it as a sequel to &quot;Raging Bull&quot;. The film was released in 2016.

==See also==
* List of boxing films

==References==
==Works cited==
* 
* 

== External links ==
* 
* 
* &quot;Raging Bull&quot; at FilmSite.org
* 
*Raging Bull: American Minotaur an essay by Robin Robertson at The Criterion Collection
*Raging Bull: Never Got Me Down an essay by Glenn Kenny at The Criterion Collection
*&quot;Raging Bull&quot; essay by Daniel Eagan in &quot;America&#x27;s Film Legacy: The Authoritative Guide to the Landmark Movies in the National Film Registry&quot;, A&amp;C Black, 2010 , pages 768–770.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="31" end="43" title="Biographical film" label="biographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339864" start="44" end="50" title="Sports film" label="sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q130232" start="51" end="61" title="Drama (film and television)" label="drama film"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="74" end="89" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="103" end="117" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q20178" start="119" end="128" title="Joe Pesci" label="Joe Pesci"/>
<link wikidata="Q242732" start="130" end="144" title="Cathy Moriarty" label="Cathy Moriarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q448606" start="146" end="161" title="Theresa Saldana" label="Theresa Saldana"/>
<link wikidata="Q463407" start="163" end="176" title="Frank Vincent" label="Frank Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q959202" start="182" end="200" title="Nicholas Colasanto" label="Nicholas Colasanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051530" start="261" end="273" title="middleweight" label="middleweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q335855" start="290" end="302" title="Jake LaMotta" label="Jake LaMotta"/>
<link wikidata="" start="328" end="349" title="Raging Bull: My Story" label="Raging Bull: My Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q363989" start="628" end="641" title="Paul Schrader" label="Paul Schrader"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758676" start="651" end="664" title="Mardik Martin" label="Mardik Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256415" start="871" end="892" title="principal photography" label="principal photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q648877" start="1090" end="1108" title="Post-production" label="editing and mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="1603" end="1617" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q767355" start="1625" end="1644" title="53rd Academy Awards" label="53rd Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q272860" start="1663" end="1679" title="The Elephant Man (film)" label="The Elephant Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="1741" end="1753" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="1758" end="1771" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q103916" start="1786" end="1796" title="Academy Award for Best Actor" label="Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q281939" start="1832" end="1844" title="Academy Award for Best Film Editing" label="Best Editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898121" start="1963" end="1987" title="List of films considered the best" label="greatest films ever made"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="2109" end="2131" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="2139" end="2158" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="2244" end="2267" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q620121" start="2285" end="2327" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)" label="fourth-greatest American movie of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q335855" start="2351" end="2363" title="Jake LaMotta" label="Jake LaMotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051530" start="2390" end="2402" title="middleweight" label="middleweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q26035832" start="2439" end="2451" title="Jimmy Reeves" label="Jimmy Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6214439" start="2504" end="2508" title="Joey LaMotta" label="Joey"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="2579" end="2584" title="Italian-American Mafia" label="Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="2801" end="2806" title="Bronx" label="Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q316706" start="2945" end="2963" title="Sugar Ray Robinson" label="Sugar Ray Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="3161" end="3165" title="United States Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822641" start="3392" end="3403" title="Tony Janiro" label="Tony Janiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947495" start="3439" end="3447" title="mob boss" label="mob boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130938" start="3515" end="3525" title="Copacabana (nightclub)" label="Copacabana"/>
<link wikidata="Q747376" start="3986" end="3990" title="Match fixing" label="dive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912561" start="4042" end="4051" title="Billy Fox (boxer)" label="Billy Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q347201" start="4327" end="4340" title="Marcel Cerdan" label="Marcel Cerdan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3794" start="4989" end="5007" title="Laurent Dauthuille" label="Laurent Dauthuille"/>
<link wikidata="Q127433593" start="5305" end="5328" title="Sugar Ray Robinson vs. Jake LaMotta" label="final encounter in 1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="5409" end="5414" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q145806" start="6024" end="6039" title="stand-up comedy" label="stand-up comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q559615" start="6130" end="6142" title="shadowboxing" label="shadowboxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q211372" start="6170" end="6187" title="On the Waterfront" label="On the Waterfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="6381" end="6395" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6405" end="6447" title="Raging Bull: My Story" label="autobiography upon which the film is based"/>
<link wikidata="Q184768" start="6481" end="6502" title="The Godfather Part II" label="The Godfather Part II"/>
<link wikidata="Q335855" start="6612" end="6624" title="Jake LaMotta" label="Jake LaMotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="6648" end="6663" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q916431" start="6684" end="6720" title="Alice Doesn&amp;#x27;t Live Here Anymore" label="Alice Doesn&amp;#x27;t Live Here Anymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q721027" start="7584" end="7599" title="Robert Chartoff" label="Robert Chartoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q950428" start="7604" end="7617" title="Irwin Winkler" label="Irwin Winkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505252" start="7697" end="7710" title="drug overdose" label="drug overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q487094" start="8382" end="8397" title="Michael Chapman (cinematographer)" label="Michael Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q55234" start="8447" end="8461" title="Michael Powell" label="Michael Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="8872" end="8893" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758676" start="9743" end="9756" title="Mardik Martin" label="Mardik Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q219400" start="9851" end="9865" title="United Artists" label="United Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172000" start="9943" end="9954" title="Pete Hamill" label="Pete Hamill"/>
<link wikidata="Q47221" start="10134" end="10145" title="Taxi Driver" label="Taxi Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q363989" start="10165" end="10178" title="Paul Schrader" label="Paul Schrader"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="10404" end="10411" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914887" start="10631" end="10642" title="Steven Bach" label="Steven Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q950428" start="10701" end="10714" title="Irwin Winkler" label="Irwin Winkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389092" start="10783" end="10790" title="X-rated" label="X-rated"/>
<link wikidata="Q25596" start="10960" end="10972" title="Saint Martin (island)" label="Saint Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="11241" end="11256" title="organized crime" label="organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q211372" start="11512" end="11529" title="On the Waterfront" label="On the Waterfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q652011" start="11557" end="11568" title="Richard III (play)" label="Richard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q55234" start="11599" end="11613" title="Michael Powell" label="Michael Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729400" start="12307" end="12326" title="The Death Collector" label="The Death Collector"/>
<link wikidata="Q20178" start="12391" end="12400" title="Joe Pesci" label="Joe Pesci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="12641" end="12651" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q242732" start="12816" end="12830" title="Cathy Moriarty" label="Cathy Moriarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="12863" end="12873" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141037" start="13087" end="13106" title="Screen Actors Guild" label="Screen Actors Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q104414198" start="13144" end="13154" title="Cis Corman" label="Cis Corman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729400" start="13515" end="13534" title="The Death Collector" label="The Death Collector"/>
<link wikidata="Q463407" start="13542" end="13555" title="Frank Vincent" label="Frank Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066037" start="13818" end="13834" title="Charles Scorsese" label="Charles Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588197" start="13958" end="13970" title="Bronx accent" label="Bronx accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821348" start="14041" end="14046" title="Vikki LaMotta" label="Vikki"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="14091" end="14098" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704815" start="14321" end="14331" title="Al Silvani" label="Al Silvani"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="14528" end="14536" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274496" start="14852" end="14857" title="Grip (job)" label="Grips"/>
<link wikidata="Q60689195" start="14886" end="14894" title="duvetyne" label="duvetyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q493378" start="15036" end="15047" title="Culver City, California" label="Culver City"/>
<link wikidata="Q487094" start="15321" end="15336" title="Michael Chapman (cinematographer)" label="Michael Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865273" start="15669" end="15682" title="Arthur Murray" label="Arthur Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="16124" end="16138" title="northern Italy" label="northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q290356" start="16672" end="16681" title="San Pedro, California" label="San Pedro"/>
<link wikidata="Q166887" start="17360" end="17378" title="Thelma Schoonmaker" label="Thelma Schoonmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505819" start="17685" end="17695" title="bookend scene" label="bookending"/>
<link wikidata="Q19594751" start="17730" end="17742" title="Frank Warner (sound editor)" label="Frank Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q917075" start="18067" end="18079" title="Dolby Stereo" label="Dolby Stereo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914887" start="18215" end="18226" title="Steven Bach" label="Steven Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760351" start="18231" end="18242" title="Andy Albeck" label="Andy Albeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="18688" end="18697" title="Cinema in the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007961" start="18926" end="18936" title="Cutty Sark (whisky)" label="Cutty Sark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917753" start="19081" end="19109" title="Motion Picture Editors Guild" label="Motion Picture Editors Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111483" start="19403" end="19440" title="Petrella v. Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Inc." label="Petrella v. Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1048583" start="19511" end="19517" title="laches (equity)" label="laches"/>
<link wikidata="Q877435" start="20068" end="20086" title="Gross rental" label="theatrical rentals"/>
<link wikidata="Q223142" start="20253" end="20268" title="Box Office Mojo" label="Box Office Mojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="20642" end="20659" title="review aggregator" label="review aggregator"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="20660" end="20675" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="21017" end="21027" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="21180" end="21188" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q716442" start="21266" end="21279" title="Vincent Canby" label="Vincent Canby"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="21289" end="21307" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262246" start="21539" end="21547" title="Svengali" label="Svengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="21575" end="21579" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="21783" end="21805" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="22028" end="22041" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q343960" start="22054" end="22067" title="John Hinckley Jr." label="John Hinckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q41351" start="22105" end="22117" title="Jodie Foster" label="Jodie Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q47221" start="22199" end="22210" title="Taxi Driver" label="Taxi Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="22313" end="22316" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="22400" end="22430" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Academy Award for Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q503313" start="22486" end="22501" title="Ordinary People" label="Ordinary People"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638418" start="22515" end="22551" title="Los Angeles Film Critics Association" label="Los Angeles Film Critics Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133614" start="22632" end="22656" title="National Board of Review" label="National Board of Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q130871" start="22724" end="22758" title="Berlin International Film Festival" label="Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q25327066" start="22829" end="22857" title="Parajanov-Vartanov Institute" label="Parajanov-Vartanov Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758676" start="22885" end="22898" title="Mardik Martin" label="Mardik Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="23115" end="23129" title="cult film" label="modern classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="23351" end="23362" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="23673" end="23692" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="23734" end="23756" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="23811" end="23815" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738538" start="23851" end="23870" title="Time&amp;#x27;s All-TIME 100 Movies" label="All-TIME 100 Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="23884" end="23891" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="24017" end="24037" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q172837" start="24121" end="24140" title="Bicycle Thieves" label="The Bicycle Thieves"/>
<link wikidata="Q202548" start="24157" end="24164" title="Vertigo (film)" label="Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546271" start="24192" end="24209" title="Sight &amp;amp; Sound" label="Sight &amp;amp; Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108255" start="24460" end="24465" title="Film4" label="Film4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820792" start="24572" end="24599" title="Halliwell&amp;#x27;s Film Guide" label="Halliwell&amp;#x27;s Film Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="24745" end="24753" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q28222572" start="24826" end="24835" title="Movieline" label="Movieline"/>
<link wikidata="Q731195" start="24905" end="24919" title="Leonard Maltin" label="Leonard Maltin"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="25115" end="25126" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206671" start="25311" end="25343" title="National Society of Film Critics" label="National Society of Film Critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="25411" end="25424" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q499188" start="25573" end="25588" title="Los Angeles Daily News" label="L.A. Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180240" start="25662" end="25686" title="Writers Guild of America" label="Writers Guild of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657609" start="25782" end="25808" title="Time Out (magazine)" label="Time Out Film Guide&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q228186" start="25887" end="25905" title="Lawrence of Arabia (film)" label="Lawrence of Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="25956" end="25962" title="Empire (film magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="26232" end="26250" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270191" start="26273" end="26283" title="Total Film" label="Total Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449176" start="26367" end="26379" title="Filmsite.org" label="FilmSite.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q658255" start="26383" end="26393" title="subsidiary" label="subsidiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q294660" start="26397" end="26420" title="American Movie Classics" label="American Movie Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917753" start="26625" end="26653" title="Motion Picture Editors Guild" label="Motion Picture Editors Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835528" start="26750" end="26790" title="The Sight &amp;amp; Sound Greatest Films of All Time 2012" label="2012 &amp;quot;Sight &amp;amp; Sound&amp;quot; polls"/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="26936" end="26956" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="27080" end="27083" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q719345" start="27234" end="27268" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years... 100 Movies" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years... 100 Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767231" start="27276" end="27311" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years... 100 Thrills" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years... 100 Thrills"/>
<link wikidata="Q620121" start="27319" end="27380" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)"/>
<link wikidata="Q599107" start="27387" end="27407" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 10 Top 10" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 10 Top 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="27562" end="27565" title="78s" label="78s"/>
<link wikidata="Q117249" start="27584" end="27600" title="Robbie Robertson" label="Robbie Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q781470" start="27850" end="27860" title="Intermezzo" label="Intermezzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q221806" start="27872" end="27892" title="Cavalleria rusticana" label="Cavalleria rusticana"/>
<link wikidata="Q181894" start="27919" end="27934" title="Pietro Mascagni" label="Pietro Mascagni"/>
<link wikidata="Q166887" start="28047" end="28065" title="Thelma Schoonmaker" label="Thelma Schoonmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q658334" start="28157" end="28167" title="Barcarolle" label="Barcarolle"/>
<link wikidata="Q908276" start="28179" end="28186" title="Silvano (opera)" label="Silvano"/>
<link wikidata="Q578781" start="28260" end="28278" title="Guglielmo Ratcliff" label="Guglielmo Ratcliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="28553" end="28560" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772816" start="28581" end="28596" title="Sunset Pictures" label="Sunset Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q350255" start="28884" end="28900" title="William Forsythe (actor)" label="William Forsythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42300256" start="28926" end="28937" title="Mojean Aria" label="Mojean Aria"/>
<link wikidata="Q276269" start="29048" end="29060" title="Joe Mantegna" label="Joe Mantegna"/>
<link wikidata="Q349852" start="29062" end="29074" title="Tom Sizemore" label="Tom Sizemore"/>
<link wikidata="Q235002" start="29076" end="29095" title="Penelope Ann Miller" label="Penelope Ann Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q230527" start="29097" end="29115" title="Natasha Henstridge" label="Natasha Henstridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q236247" start="29117" end="29128" title="Alicia Witt" label="Alicia Witt"/>
<link wikidata="Q530646" start="29130" end="29138" title="Ray Wise" label="Ray Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q567830" start="29140" end="29152" title="Harry Hamlin" label="Harry Hamlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q978857" start="29158" end="29169" title="James Russo" label="James Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q454699" start="29173" end="29187" title="Rocky Graziano" label="Rocky Graziano"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="29203" end="29206" title="MGM" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q17478879" start="29824" end="29838" title="The Bronx Bull" label="The Bronx Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q97360066" start="29962" end="29982" title="List of boxing films" label="List of boxing films"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449176" start="30078" end="30090" title="Filmsite.org" label="FilmSite.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352748" start="30138" end="30153" title="Robin Robertson" label="Robin Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="30157" end="30181" title="The Criterion Collection" label="The Criterion Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568922" start="30226" end="30237" title="Glenn Kenny" label="Glenn Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="30404" end="30426" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
</links>
</doc>
