<doc id="28272" wikidata="Q812767" url="?curid=28272" title="Shinto">
<text>Shinto (; also called Shintoism) is a religion originating in Japan. Classified as an East Asian religion by scholars of religion, its practitioners often regard it as Japan&#x27;s indigenous religion and as a nature religion. Scholars sometimes call its practitioners &quot;Shintoists&quot;, although adherents rarely use that term themselves. There is no central authority in control of Shinto, with much diversity of belief and practice evident among practitioners.

A polytheistic and animistic religion, Shinto revolves around supernatural entities called the (神). The are believed to inhabit all things, including forces of nature and prominent landscape locations. The are worshipped at household shrines, family shrines, and &quot;jinja&quot; public shrines. The latter are staffed by priests, known as , who oversee offerings of food and drink to the specific enshrined at that location. This is done to cultivate harmony between humans and and to solicit the latter&#x27;s blessing. Other common rituals include the dances, rites of passage, and kami festivals. Public shrines facilitate forms of divination and supply religious objects, such as amulets, to the religion&#x27;s adherents. Shinto places a major conceptual focus on ensuring purity, largely by cleaning practices such as ritual washing and bathing, especially before worship. Little emphasis is placed on specific moral codes or particular afterlife beliefs, although the dead are deemed capable of becoming . The religion has no single creator or specific doctrine, and instead exists in a diverse range of local and regional forms.

Although historians debate at what point it is suitable to refer to Shinto as a distinct religion, veneration has been traced back to Japan&#x27;s Yayoi period (300 BC to 300 AD). Buddhism entered Japan at the end of the Kofun period (300 to 538 AD) and spread rapidly. Religious syncretization made worship and Buddhism functionally inseparable, a process called &quot;shinbutsu-shūgō&quot;. The came to be viewed as part of Buddhist cosmology and were increasingly depicted anthropomorphically. The earliest written tradition regarding worship was recorded in the 8th-century and . In ensuing centuries, was adopted by Japan&#x27;s Imperial household. During the Meiji era (1868 to 1912), Japan&#x27;s nationalist leadership expelled Buddhist influence from worship and formed State Shinto, which some historians regard as the origin of Shinto as a distinct religion. Shrines came under growing government influence, and citizens were encouraged to worship the emperor as a . With the formation of the Japanese Empire in the early 20th century, Shinto was exported to other areas of East Asia. Following Japan&#x27;s defeat in World War II, Shinto was formally separated from the state.

Shinto is primarily found in Japan, where there are around 100,000 public shrines, although practitioners are also found abroad. Numerically, it is Japan&#x27;s largest religion, the second being Buddhism. Most of the country&#x27;s population takes part in both Shinto and Buddhist activities, especially festivals, reflecting a common view in Japanese culture that the beliefs and practices of different religions need not be exclusive. Aspects of Shinto have been incorporated into various Japanese new religious movements.

==Definition==

There is no universally agreed definition of Shinto. According to Joseph Cali and John Dougill, if there was &quot;one single, broad definition of Shinto&quot; that could be put forward, it would be that &quot;Shinto is a belief in &quot;, the supernatural entities at the centre of the religion. The Japanologist Helen Hardacre wrote that &quot;Shinto encompasses doctrines, institutions, ritual, and communal life based on worship&quot;, while the scholar of religion Inoue Nobutaka observed that the term &quot;Shinto&quot; was &quot;often used&quot; in &quot;reference to worship and related theologies, rituals and practices&quot;. Various scholars have referred to practitioners of Shinto as &quot;Shintoists&quot;, although this term has no direct translation in the Japanese language.

Scholars have debated at what point in history it is legitimate to start talking about Shinto as a specific phenomenon. The scholar of religion Ninian Smart suggested that one could &quot;speak of the religion of Japan, which lived symbiotically with organized Buddhism, and only later was institutionalized as Shinto.&quot; While several institutions and practices now associated with Shinto existed in Japan by the 8th century, various scholars have argued that Shinto as a distinct religion was essentially &quot;invented&quot; during the 19th century, in Japan&#x27;s Meiji era. The scholar of religion Brian Bocking stressed that, especially when dealing with periods before the Meiji era, the term &quot;Shinto&quot; should &quot;be approached with caution&quot;. Inoue Nobutaka stated that &quot;Shinto cannot be considered as a single religious system that existed from the ancient to the modern period&quot;, while the historian Kuroda Toshio noted that &quot;before modern times Shinto did not exist as an independent religion&quot;.

===Categorisation===
Many scholars describe Shinto as a religion, a term first translated into Japanese as &quot;shūkyō&quot; around the time of the Meiji Restoration. Some practitioners instead view Shinto as a &quot;way&quot;, thus characterising it more as custom or tradition, partly as an attempt to circumvent the modern separation of religion and state and restore Shinto&#x27;s historical links with the Japanese state. Moreover, many of the categories of religion and religiosity defined in Western culture &quot;do not readily apply&quot; to Shinto. Unlike religions familiar in Western countries, such as Christianity and Islam, Shinto has no single founder, nor any single canonical text. Western religions tend to stress exclusivity, but in Japan, it has long been considered acceptable to practice different religious traditions simultaneously. Japanese religion is therefore highly pluralistic. Shinto is often cited alongside Buddhism as one of Japan&#x27;s two main religions, and the two often differ in focus, with Buddhism emphasising the idea of the cessation of suffering, while Shinto focuses on adapting to life&#x27;s pragmatic requirements. Shinto has integrated elements from religions imported from mainland Asia, such as Buddhism, Confucianism, Taoism, and Chinese divination practices, and shares features like its polytheism with other East Asian religions.

Scholars of religion have debated how to classify Shinto. Inoue considered it part of &quot;the family of East-Asian religions&quot;. The philosopher Stuart D. B. Picken suggested that Shinto be classed as a world religion, while the historian H. Byron Earhart called it a &quot;major religion&quot;. Shinto is also often described as an indigenous religion, although this generates debates over the different definitions of &quot;indigenous&quot; in the Japanese context. The notion of Shinto as Japan&#x27;s &quot;indigenous religion&quot; stemmed from the growth of modern nationalism between the Edo and Meiji periods; this view promoted the idea that Shinto&#x27;s origins were prehistoric and that it represented something like the &quot;underlying will of Japanese culture&quot;. The prominent Shinto theologian Sokyo Ono, for instance, said worship was &quot;an expression&quot; of the Japanese &quot;native racial faith which arose in the mystic days of remote antiquity&quot; and that it was &quot;as indigenous as the people that brought the Japanese nation into existence&quot;. Many scholars regard this classification as inaccurate. Earhart noted that Shinto, in having absorbed much Chinese and Buddhist influence, was &quot;too complex to be labelled simply [as an] indigenous religion&quot;. In the early 21st century it became increasingly common for practitioners to call Shinto a nature religion, which critics saw as a strategy to disassociate the tradition from controversial issues surrounding militarism and imperialism.

Shinto displays substantial local variation; the anthropologist John K. Nelson noted it was &quot;not a unified, monolithic entity that has a single center and system all its own&quot;. Different types of Shinto have been identified. &quot;Shrine Shinto&quot; refers to the practices centred around shrines, and &quot;Domestic Shinto&quot; to the ways in which are venerated in the home. Some scholars have used the term &quot;Folk Shinto&quot; to designate localised Shinto practices, or practices outside of an institutionalised setting. In various eras of the past, there was also a &quot;State Shinto&quot;, in which Shinto beliefs and practices were closely interlinked with the Japanese state. In representing &quot;a portmanteau term&quot; for many varied traditions across Japan, the term &quot;Shinto&quot; is similar to the term &quot;Hinduism&quot;, used to describe varied traditions across South Asia.

===Etymology===

The term &quot;Shinto&quot; is often translated into English as &quot;the way of the &quot;, although its meaning has varied throughout Japanese history. Other terms are sometimes used synonymously with &quot;Shinto&quot;; these include &#x27; (, &quot;the way of the &quot;), &#x27; (, also written or , &quot;the way of the from time immemorial&quot;), &#x27; (, &quot;the ancient way&quot;), &#x27; (, &quot;the great way&quot;), and &quot;&quot; (, &quot;the imperial way&quot;).

The term &quot;Shinto&quot; derives from the combination of two Chinese characters: &quot;shin&quot; (), which means &quot;spirit&quot; or &quot;god&quot;, and &quot;tō&quot; (), which means &quot;way&quot;, &quot;road&quot; or &quot;path&quot;. &quot;Shintō&quot; (, &quot;the Way of the Gods&quot;) was a term already used in the &quot;Book of Changes&quot; referring to the divine order of nature. Around the time of the spread of Buddhism in the Han dynasty (206 BCE – 220 CE), it was used to distinguish indigenous Chinese religions from the imported religion. Ge Hong used it in his &quot;Baopuzi&quot; as a synonym for Taoism.

The Chinese term (MC &quot;zyin dawX&quot;) was originally adopted into Japanese as &quot;Jindō&quot;; this was possibly first used as a Buddhist term to refer to non-Buddhist deities. Among the earliest known appearances of the term &quot;Shinto&quot; in Japan is in the 8th-century text, . Here, it may be a generic term for popular belief, or alternatively reference Taoism, as many Taoist practices had recently been imported from mainland Asia. In these early Japanese uses, the word &quot;Shinto&quot; did not apply to a distinct religious tradition nor to anything uniquely Japanese; the 11th century &quot;Konjaku monogatarishui&quot; for instance refers to a woman in China practicing &quot;Shinto&quot;, and also to people in India worshipping , indicating these terms were being used to describe religions outside Japan itself.

In medieval Japan, -worship was generally seen as being part of Japanese Buddhism, with the themselves often interpreted as Buddhas. At this point, the term &quot;Shinto&quot; increasingly referred to &quot;the authority, power, or activity of a , being a , or, in short, the state or attributes of a .&quot; It appears in this form in texts such as &quot;&quot; and &quot;Shintōshū&quot; tales. In the &quot;Japanese Portuguese Dictionary&quot; of 1603, &quot;Shinto&quot; is defined as referring to &quot; or matters pertaining to .&quot; The term &quot;Shinto&quot; became common in the 15th century. During the late Edo period, the scholars began using the term &quot;Shinto&quot; to describe what they believed was an ancient, enduring and indigenous Japanese tradition that predated Buddhism; they argued that &quot;Shinto&quot; should be used to distinguish worship from traditions like Buddhism, Taoism, and Confucianism. This use of the term &quot;Shinto&quot; became increasingly popular from the 18th century. The term &quot;Shinto&quot; has been commonly used only since the early 20th century, when it superseded the term (&#x27;great religion&#x27;) as the name for the Japanese state religion. In English, the religion is also called &quot;Shintoism,&quot; although some scholars have argued against the inclusion of the suffix &quot;-ism&quot; due to Shinto&#x27;s lack of codified doctrine.

==Beliefs==


Shinto is polytheistic, involving the veneration of many deities known as , or sometimes as (神祇). In Japanese, no distinction is made here between singular and plural, and hence the term refers both to individual and the collective group of . Although lacking a direct English translation, the term has sometimes been rendered as &quot;god&quot; or &quot;spirit&quot;. The historian of religion Joseph Kitagawa deemed these English translations &quot;quite unsatisfactory and misleading&quot;, and various scholars urge against translating into English. In Japanese, it is often said that there are eight million , a term which connotes an infinite number, and Shinto practitioners believe that they are present everywhere. They are not regarded as omnipotent, omniscient, or necessarily immortal.

The term is &quot;conceptually fluid&quot;, being &quot;vague and imprecise&quot;. In Japanese it is often applied to the power of phenomena that inspire a sense of wonder and awe in the beholder. Kitagawa referred to this as &quot;the nature&quot;, stating that he thought it &quot;somewhat analogous&quot; to the Western ideas of the numinous and the sacred. are seen to inhabit both the living and the dead, organic and inorganic matter, and natural disasters like earthquakes, droughts, and plagues; their presence is seen in natural forces such as the wind, rain, fire, and sunshine. Accordingly, Nelson commented that Shinto regards &quot;the &quot;actual phenomena&quot; of the world itself&quot; as being &quot;divine&quot;. This perspective has been characterised as being animistic.

In Japan, have been venerated since prehistory. During the Yayoi period they were regarded as being formless and invisible, later coming to be depicted anthropomorphically under Buddhist influence. Now, statues of the are known as . are usually associated with a specific place, often a prominent landscape feature such as a waterfall, mountain, large rock, or distinctive tree. Physical objects or places in which the are believed to have a presence are termed ; objects inhabited by the that are placed in the shrine are known as . Objects commonly chosen for this purpose include mirrors, swords, stones, beads, and inscribed tablets. These are concealed from the view of visitors, and may be hidden inside boxes so that even the priests do not know what they look like.

 are deemed capable of both benevolent and destructive deeds; if warnings about good conduct are ignored, the can mete out punishment, often illness or sudden death, called . Some , referred to as the or , are regarded as malevolent and destructive. Offerings and prayers are given to the to gain their blessings and to dissuade them from destructive actions. Shinto seeks to cultivate and ensure a harmonious relationship between humans and the and thus with the natural world. More localised may be subject to feelings of intimacy and familiarity from members of the local community that are not directed towards more widespread like Amaterasu. The of a particular community is referred to it as their , while that of a particular house is the .

 are not considered metaphysically different from humanity, with it being possible for humans to become . Ancestors and other dead humans are sometimes venerated as , being regarded as protectors. For example, Emperor Ōjin was posthumously enshrined as the Hachiman, believed to be a protector of Japan and a of war. In Western Japan, the term is used to describe the enshrined of a village founder. In some cases, living human beings were also viewed as ; these were called or . In the State Shinto system of the Meiji era, the emperor of Japan was declared to be a , while several Shinto sects have also viewed their leaders as living .

Although some are venerated only in a single location, others have shrines across many areas. Hachiman for instance has around 25,000 shrines dedicated to him, while Inari has 40,000. The act of establishing a new shrine to a who already has one is called (&quot;dividing the spirit&quot;). As part of this, the is invited to enter a new place, with the instalment ceremony known as a . The new, subsidiary shrine is known as a . Individual are not believed to have their power diminished by their residence in multiple locations, and there is no limit on the number of places a can be enshrined. In some periods, fees were charged for the right to enshrine a particular in a new place. Shrines are not necessarily always designed as permanent structures.

Many have messengers, known as or , that generally take animal forms. Inari&#x27;s messenger, for example, is a fox (&quot;kitsune&quot;), while Hachiman&#x27;s is a dove.
Shinto cosmology also includes spirits who cause malevolent acts, , a category including , , , , and . Japanese folklore also incorporates belief in the or , unquiet or vengeful spirits, particularly of those who died violently and without appropriate funerary rites. These are believed to inflict suffering on the living, meaning that they must be pacified, usually through Buddhist rites but sometimes through enshrining them as a . Other Japanese supernatural figures include the , animal-like creatures who can take human form.

===Cosmogony===

Although the narratives differ in detail, the origin of the and of Japan itself are recounted in two 8th-century texts, and . Drawing heavily on Chinese influence, these texts were commissioned by ruling elites to legitimize and consolidate their rule. Although never of great importance to Japanese religious life, in the early 20th century the government proclaimed that their accounts were factual.

The recounts that the universe started with , the separation of light and pure elements (, &quot;heaven&quot;) from heavy elements (, &quot;earth&quot;). Three then appeared: Amenominakanushi, Takamimusuhi no Mikoto, and Kamimusuhi no Mikoto. Other followed, including a brother and sister, Izanagi and Izanami. The instructed Izanagi and Izanami to create land on earth. To this end, the siblings stirred the briny sea with a jewelled spear, from which Onogoro Island was formed. Izanagi and Izanami then descended to Earth, where the latter gave birth to further . One of these was a fire , whose birth killed Izanami. Izanagi descended to to retrieve his sister, but there he saw her body putrefying. Embarrassed to be seen in this state, she chased him out of , and he closed its entrance with a boulder.

Izanagi bathed in the sea to rid himself from the pollution brought about by witnessing Izanami&#x27;s putrefaction. Through this act, further emerged from his body: Amaterasu (the sun ) was born from his left eye, Tsukuyomi (the moon ) from his right eye, and Susanoo (the storm ) from his nose. Susanoo behaved in a destructive manner, to escape him Amaterasu hid herself within a cave, plunging the earth into darkness. The other eventually succeeded in coaxing her out. Susanoo was then banished to earth, where he married and had children. According to the , Amaterasu then sent her grandson, Ninigi, to rule Japan, giving him curved beads, a mirror, and a sword: the symbols of Japanese imperial authority. Amaterasu remains probably Japan&#x27;s most venerated .

===Cosmology and afterlife===
In Shinto, the creative principle permeating all life is known as , and is associated with its own . Within traditional Japanese thought, there is no concept of an overarching duality between good and evil. The concept of encompasses misfortune, unhappiness, and disaster, although it does not correspond precisely with the Western concept of evil. There is no eschatology in Shinto. Texts such as the and portray multiple realms in Shinto cosmology. These present a universe divided into three parts: the Plane of High Heaven (), where the live; the Phenomenal or Manifested World (), where humans dwell; and the Nether World (), where unclean spirits reside. The mythological texts nevertheless do not draw firm demarcations between these realms.

Modern Shinto places greater emphasis on this life than on any afterlife, although it does espouse belief in a human spirit or soul, the or , which contains four aspects. While indigenous ideas about an afterlife were probably well-developed prior to Buddhism&#x27;s arrival, contemporary Japanese people often adopt Buddhist afterlife beliefs.
Mythological stories like the describe or as a realm of the dead, although this plays no role in modern Shinto. Modern Shinto ideas about the afterlife largely revolve around the idea that the spirit survives bodily death and continues to assist the living. After 33 years, it then becomes part of the family . These ancestral spirits are sometimes thought to reside in the mountains, from where they descend to take part in agricultural events. Shinto&#x27;s afterlife beliefs also include the , restless spirits who died in bad circumstances and often seek revenge.

===Purity and impurity===
A key theme in Shinto is the avoidance of (&quot;pollution&quot; or &quot;impurity&quot;), while ensuring (&quot;purity&quot;). In Japanese thought, humans are seen as fundamentally pure. is therefore seen as being a temporary condition that can be corrected through achieving . Rites of purification are conducted so as to restore an individual to &quot;spiritual&quot; health and render them useful to society.
This notion of purity is present in many facets of Japanese culture, such as the focus it places on bathing. Purification is for instance regarded as important in preparation for the planting season, while performers of theatre undergo a purification rite before they carry out their performances. Among the things regarded as particular pollutants in Shinto are death, disease, witchcraft, the flaying alive of an animal, incest, bestiality, excrement, and blood associated with either menstruation or childbirth. To avoid , priests and other practitioners may engage in abstinence and avoid various activities prior to a festival or ritual.
Various words, termed , are also regarded as taboo, and people avoid speaking them when at a shrine; these include (death), (illness), and (meat).

A purification ceremony known as involves the use of fresh water, salt water, or salt to remove . Full immersion in the sea is often regarded as the most ancient and efficacious form of purification. This act links with the mythological tale in which Izanagi immersed himself in the sea to purify himself after discovering his deceased wife; it was from this act that other sprang from his body. An alternative is immersion beneath a waterfall. Salt is often regarded as a purifying substance; some Shinto practitioners will for instance sprinkle salt on themselves after a funeral, while those running restaurants may put a small pile of salt outside before business commences each day. Fire, also, is perceived as a source of purification. The is a form of harae designed to prevent misfortune, while the , or &quot;ceremony of great purification&quot;, is often used for end-of-year purification rites, and is conducted twice a year at many shrines. Before the Meiji period, rites of purification were generally performed by , a type of diviner whose practices derived from the Chinese yin and yang philosophy.

===&quot;Kannagara&quot;, morality, and ethics===

Shinto incorporates morality tales and myths but no codified ethical doctrine, and thus no &quot;unified, systematized code of behaviour&quot;. An ethical system nevertheless arises from its practice, with emphasis placed on sincerity (), honesty (), hard work (), and thanksgiving () directed towards the . is regarded as a virtue, encompassing honesty, uprightness, veracity, and frankness. Shinto sometimes includes reference to four virtues known as the or , meaning &quot;purity and cheerfulness of heart&quot;, which are linked to the state of . Attitudes to sex and fertility tend to be forthright in Shinto. Shinto&#x27;s flexibility regarding morality and ethics has been a source of frequent criticism, especially from those arguing that the religion can readily become a pawn for those wishing to use it to legitimise their authority and power.

In Shinto, (&quot;way of the &quot;) is the law of the natural order, with (&quot;benign harmony&quot;) being inherent in all things. Disrupting is deemed bad, contributing to it is thought good; as such, subordination of the individual to the larger social unit has long been a characteristic of the religion. Throughout Japanese history, the notion of , or the union of religious authority and political authority, has long been prominent. In the modern world, Shinto has tended toward conservatism, as well as nationalism, an association that results in various Japanese civil liberties groups and neighboring countries regarding Shinto suspiciously. Particularly controversial has been the Yasukuni Shrine in Tokyo, devoted to Japan&#x27;s war dead. In 1979 it enshrined 14 men who had been declared Class-A defendants at the 1946 Tokyo War Crimes Trials, generating domestic and international condemnation, particularly from China and Korea.

Shinto priests face ethical conundrums. In the 1980s, for instance, priests at the Suwa Shrine in Nagasaki debated whether to invite the crew of a U.S. Navy vessel docked at the port city to their festival celebrations given the sensitivities surrounding the 1945 U.S. use of the atomic bomb on the city. In other cases, priests have opposed construction projects on shrine-owned land; at Kaminoseki in the early 2000s, a priest was pressured to resign after opposing the sale of shrine lands to build a nuclear power plant. 
In the 21st century, Shinto has increasingly been portrayed as a nature-centred spirituality with environmentalist credentials; several shrines have collaborated with local environmentalist campaigns, while an international interfaith conference on environmental sustainability was held at the Ise shrine in 2014. Critical commentators have characterised the presentation of Shinto as an environmentalist movement as a rhetorical ploy rather than a concerted effort by Shinto institutions to become environmentally sustainable.

== Practices ==
Shinto focuses on ritual behavior rather than doctrine. The philosophers James W. Boyd and Ron G. Williams stated that Shinto is &quot;first and foremost a ritual tradition&quot;, while Picken observed that &quot;Shinto is interested not in &quot;credenda&quot; but in &quot;agenda&quot;, not in things that should be believed but in things that should be done.&quot; The scholar of religion Clark B. Offner stated that Shinto&#x27;s focus was on &quot;maintaining communal, ceremonial traditions for the purpose of human (communal) well-being&quot;.
It is often difficult to distinguish Shinto practices from Japanese customs more broadly, with Picken observing that the &quot;worldview of Shinto&quot; provided the &quot;principal source of self-understanding within the Japanese way of life&quot;. Nelson stated that &quot;Shinto-based orientations and values [...] lie at the core of Japanese culture, society, and character&quot;.

===&quot;Jinja&quot; shrines===

Public spaces in which the are worshipped are often known under the generic term (&quot;-place&quot;); this term applies to the location rather than to a specific building. is usually translated as &quot;shrine&quot; in English, although in earlier literature was sometimes translated as &quot;temple&quot;, a term now more commonly reserved for Japan&#x27;s Buddhist structures. There are around 100,000 public shrines in Japan; about 80,000 are affiliated with the Association of Shinto Shrines, with another 20,000 being unaffiliated. They are found all over the country, from isolated rural areas to dense metropolitan ones. More specific terms are sometimes used for certain shrines depending on their function; some of the grand shrines with imperial associations are termed , those devoted to the war dead are termed , and those linked to mountains deemed to be inhabited by are .

Jinja typically consist of complexes of multiple buildings, with the architectural styles of shrines having largely developed by the Heian period. The inner sanctuary in which the lives is the . Inside the may be stored material belonging to the ; known as , this can include artworks, clothing, weapons, musical instruments, bells, and mirrors. Typically, worshippers carry out their acts outside of the . Near the can sometimes be found a subsidiary shrine, the , to another ; the inhabiting this shrine is not necessarily perceived as being inferior to that in the . At some places, halls of worship have been erected, termed . On a lower level can be found the hall of offerings, known as a . Together, the building housing the , , and is called a . In some shrines, there is a separate building in which to conduct additional ceremonies, such as weddings, known as a , or a specific building in which the dance is performed, known as the . Collectively, the central buildings of a shrine are known as the , while its precincts are known as the or . This precinct is surrounded by the fence, with entry via a gate, which can be closed at night.

Shrine entrances are marked by a two-post gateway with either one or two crossbeams atop it, known as . The exact details of these varies and there are at least twenty different styles. These are regarded as demarcating the area where the resides; passing under them is often viewed as a form of purification. More broadly, are internationally recognised symbols of Japan. Their architectural form is distinctly Japanese, although the decision to paint most of them in vermillion reflects a Chinese influence dating from the Nara period. Also set at the entrances to many shrines are , statues of lion or dog like animals perceived to scare off malevolent spirits; typically these will come as a pair, one with its mouth open, the other with its mouth closed.

Shrines are often set within gardens or wooded groves called (&quot;forest of the tutelary&quot; ), which vary in size from just a few trees to sizeable areas of woodland. Large lanterns, known as , are often found within these precincts. Shrines often have an office, known as a , a where priests undergo forms of abstinence and purification prior to conducting rituals, and other buildings such as a priests&#x27; quarters and a storehouse. Various kiosks often sell amulets to visitors. Since the late 1940s, shrines have had to be financially self-sufficient, relying on the donations of worshippers and visitors. These funds are used to pay the wages of the priests, to finance the upkeep of the buildings, to cover the shrine&#x27;s membership fees of various regional and national Shinto groups, and to contribute to disaster relief funds.

In Shinto, it is seen as important that the places in which are venerated be kept clean and not neglected. Through to the Edo period, it was common for shrines to be demolished and rebuilt at a nearby location in order to remove any pollutants and ensure purity. This has continued into recent times at certain sites, such as the Ise Grand Shrine, which is moved to an adjacent site every two decades. Separate shrines can also be merged in a process known as , while the act of transferring the from one building to another is called . Shrines may have legends about their foundation, which are known as . These sometimes also record miracles associated with the shrine. From the Heian period on, the were often retold on picture scrolls known as .

====Priesthood and ====

Shrines may be cared for by priests, by local communities, or by families on whose property the shrine is found. Shinto priests are known in Japanese as , meaning &quot;proprietor of &quot;, or alternatively as or . Many take on the role in a line of hereditary succession traced down specific families. In contemporary Japan, there are two main training universities for those wishing to become , at Kokugakuin University in Tokyo and at Kogakkan University in Mie Prefecture. Priests can rise through the ranks over the course of their careers. The number of priests at a particular shrine can vary; some shrines can have dozens, and others have none, instead being administered by local lay volunteers. Some priests administer to multiple small shrines, sometimes over ten.

Priestly regalia is largely based on the clothes worn at the imperial court during the Heian period. It includes a tall, rounded hat known as an , and black lacquered wooden clogs known as . The outer garment worn by a priest, usually colored black, red, or light blue, is the , or the . A white silk version of the , used for formal occasions, is known as the . Another priestly robe is the , which is modelled on Heian-style hunting garments. Also part of standard priestly attire is a fan, while during rituals, priests carry a flat piece of wood known as a . This regalia is generally more ornate than the sombre garments worn by Japanese Buddhist monks.
The chief priest at a shrine is the . Larger shrines may also have an assistant head priest, the . As with teachers, instructors, and Buddhist clergy, Shinto priests are often referred to as by lay practitioners. Historically, there were female priests although they were largely pushed out of their positions in 1868. During the Second World War, women were again allowed to become priests to fill the void caused by large numbers of men being enlisted in the military. By the late 1990s, around 90% of priests were male, 10% female, contributing to accusations that Shinto discriminates against women. Priests are free to marry and have children. At smaller shrines, priests often have other full-time jobs, and serve only as priests during special occasions.
Before certain major festivals, priests may undergo a period of abstinence from sexual relations. Some of those involved in festivals also abstain from a range of other things, such as consuming tea, coffee, or alcohol, immediately prior to the events.

The priests are assisted by , sometimes referred to as &quot;shrine-maidens&quot; in English. These are typically unmarried, although not necessarily virgins. In many cases they are the daughters of a priest or a practitioner. They are subordinate to the priests in the shrine hierarchy. Their most important role is in the dance, known as . receive only a small salary but gain respect from members of the local community and learn skills such as cooking, calligraphy, painting, and etiquette which can benefit them when later searching for employment or a marriage partner. They generally do not live at the shrines. Sometimes they fill other roles, such as being secretaries in the shrine offices or clerks at the information desks, or as waitresses at the feasts. They also assist in ceremonial rites.

==== Visits to shrines ====

Visits to the shrine are termed , or . Some individuals visit the shrines daily, often on their morning route to work; they typically take only a few minutes. Usually, a worshipper will approach the honden, placing a monetary offering in a box and then ringing a bell to call the &#x27;s attention. Then, they bow, clap, and stand while silently offering a prayer. The clapping is known as or ; the prayers or supplications as . This individual worship is known as . More broadly, ritual prayers to the are called , while the coins offered are . At the shrine, individuals offering prayers are not necessarily praying to a specific . A worshipper may not know the name of a residing at the shrine nor how many are believed to dwell there. Unlike in certain other religions, Shinto shrines do not have weekly services that practitioners are expected to attend.

Some Shinto practitioners do not offer their prayers to the directly, but rather request that a priest offer them on their behalf; these prayers are known as . Many individuals approach the asking for pragmatic requests. Requests for rain, known as (&quot;rain-soliciting&quot;) have been found across Japan, with Inari a popular choice for such requests.
Other prayers reflect more contemporary concerns. For instance, people may ask that the priest approaches the so as to purify their car in the hope that this will prevent it from being involved in an accident; the (&quot;purification for road safety&quot;). Similarly, transport companies often request purification rites for new buses or airplanes which are about to go into service. Before a building is constructed, it is common for either private individuals or the construction company to employ a Shinto priest to come to the land being developed and perform the , or earth sanctification ritual. This purifies the site and asks the to bless it.

People often ask the to help offset inauspicious events that may affect them. For instance, in Japanese culture, the age 33 is seen as being unlucky for women and the age 42 for men, and thus people can ask the to offset any ill-fortune associated with being this age. Certain directions can also be seen as being inauspicious for certain people at certain times and thus people can approach the asking them to offset this problem if they have to travel in one of these unlucky directions.

Pilgrimage has long been important in Japanese religion, with pilgrimages to Shinto shrines called . A round of pilgrimages, whereby individuals visit a series of shrines and other sacred sites that are part of an established circuit, is known as a . An individual leading these pilgrims, is sometimes termed a . For many centuries, people have also visited the shrines for primarily cultural and recreational reasons, as opposed to spiritual ones. Many of the shrines are recognised as sites of historical importance and some are classified as UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Shrines such as Shimogamo Jinja and Fushimi Inari Taisha in Kyoto, Meiji Jingū in Tokyo, and Atsuta Jingū in Nagoya are among Japan&#x27;s most popular tourist sites. Many shrines have a unique rubber-stamp seal which visitors can get printed into their stamp book, demonstrating the different shrines they have visited.

=== and ===
Shinto rituals begin with a process of purification, or . Using fresh water or salt water, this is known as . At shrines, this entails sprinkling this water onto the face and hands, a procedure known as , using a font known as a . Another form of purification at the start of a Shinto rite entails waving a white paper streamer or wand known as the . When not in use, the is usually kept in a stand. The priest waves the horizontally over a person or object being purified in a movement known as (&quot;left-right-left&quot;). Sometimes, instead of a , the purification is carried out with an , a branch of evergreen to which strips of paper have been attached. The waving of the is often followed by an additional act of purification, the , in which the priest sprinkles water, salt, or brine over those assembled from a wooden box called the or .

The acts of purification accomplished, petitions known as are spoken to the . This is followed by an appearance by the , who commence in a slow circular motion before the main altar. Offerings are then presented to the by being placed on a table. This act is known as ; the offerings themselves as or . Historically, the offerings given the included food, cloth, swords, and horses. In the contemporary period, lay worshippers usually give gifts of money to the while priests generally offer them food, drink, and sprigs of the sacred tree. Animal sacrifices are not considered appropriate offerings, as the shedding of blood is seen as a polluting act that necessitates purification. The offerings presented are sometimes simple and sometimes more elaborate; at the Grand Shrine of Ise, for instance, 100 styles of food are laid out as offerings. The choice of offerings will often be tailored to the specific and occasion.

Offerings of food and drink are specifically termed .
Sake, or rice wine, is a very common offering to the . After the offerings have been given, people often sip rice wine known as . Drinking the wine is seen as a form of communion with the . On important occasions, a feast is then held, known as , inside a banquet hall attached to the shrine complex.

The are believed to enjoy music. One style of music performed at shrines is . Instruments used include three reeds (, , and ), the , and the &quot;three drums&quot; (, , and ). Other musical styles performed at shrines can have a more limited focus. At shrines such as Ōharano Shrine in Kyoto, (&quot;eastern entertainment&quot;) music is performed on 8 April. Also in Kyoto, various festivals make use of the style of music and dance, which originated from rice-planting songs. During rituals, people visiting the shrine are expected to sit in the style, with their legs tucked beneath their bottom. To avoid cramps, individuals who hold this position for a lengthy period of time may periodically move their legs and flex their heels.

===Home shrines===

Having seen their popularity increase in the Meiji era, many Shinto practitioners also have a family shrine, or (&quot; shelf&quot;), in their home. These usually consist of shelves placed at an elevated position in the living room. can also be found in workplaces, restaurants, shops, and ocean-going ships. Some public shrines sell entire .

Along with the , many Japanese households also have , Buddhist altars enshrining the ancestors of the family; ancestral reverence remains an important aspect of Japanese religious tradition. In the rare instances where Japanese individuals are given a Shinto funeral rather than a Buddhist one, a , , or shrine may be erected in the home in place of a . This will be typically placed below the and include symbols of the resident ancestral spirit, for instance a mirror or a scroll.

 often enshrine the of a nearby public shrine as well as a tutelary associated with the house&#x27;s occupants or their profession. They can be decorated with miniature and and include amulets obtained from public shrines. They often contain a stand on which to place offerings; daily offerings of rice, salt, and water are placed there, with sake and other items also offered on special days. These domestic rituals often take place early in the morning, and prior to conducting them, practitioners often bathe, rinse their mouth, or wash their hands as a form of purification.

Household Shinto can focus attention on the , who are perceived to be ancestral to the or extended kinship group. A small shrine for the ancestors of a household are known as . Small village shrines containing the tutelary of an extended family are known as . In addition to the shrines and the household shrines, Shinto also features small wayside shrines known as . Other open spaces used for the worship of are , an area surrounded by sacred rocks.

===, divination, and amulets===

A common feature of Shinto shrines is the provision of , small wooden plaques onto which practitioners will write a wish or desire that they would like to see fulfilled. The practitioner&#x27;s message is written on one side of the plaque, while on the other is usually a printed picture or pattern related to the shrine itself. are provided both at Shinto shrines and Buddhist temples in Japan; unlike most amulets, which are taken away from the shrine, the are typically left there as a message for the resident . Those administering the shrine will then often burn all of the collected at new year.

Divination is the focus of many Shinto rituals, with various forms of divination used by its practitioners, some introduced from China. Among the ancient forms of divination found in Japan are and . Several forms of divination entailing archery are also practiced in Shintō, known as , , and . Kitagawa stated that there could be &quot;no doubt&quot; that various types of &quot;shamanic diviners&quot; played a role in early Japanese religion. A form of divination previously common in Japan was or , which often used tortoise shells; it is still used in some places.

A form of divination that is popular at Shinto shrines are the . These are small slips of paper which are obtained from the shrine (for a donation) and which are then read to reveal a prediction for the future. Those who receive a bad prediction often then tie the to a nearby tree or frame set up for the purpose. This act is seen as rejecting the prediction, a process called , and thus avoiding the misfortune it predicted.
The use of amulets are widely sanctioned and popular in Japan. These may be made of paper, wood, cloth, metal, or plastic.
 act as amulets to keep off misfortune and also serve as talismans to bring benefits and good luck. They typically comprise a tapering piece of wood onto which the name of the shrine and its enshrined are written or printed. The is then wrapped inside white paper and tied up with a colored thread. are provided both at Shinto shrines and Buddhist temples. Another type of amulet provided at shrines and temples are the , which are traditionally small, brightly colored drawstring bags with the name of the shrine written on it. and are sometimes placed within a charm bag known as a , typically worn by small children.

At new year, many shrines sell (an &quot;evil-destroying arrows&quot;), which people can purchase and keep in their home over the coming year to bring good luck.
A is a round, paper doll of the Indian monk, Bodhidharma. The recipient makes a wish and paints one eye; when the goal is accomplished, the recipient paints the other eye. While this is a Buddhist practice, darumas can be found at shrines, as well. These dolls are very common.
Other protective items include , which are earthenware bells that are used to pray for good fortune. These bells are usually in the shapes of the zodiacal animals. are paper dogs that are used to induce and to bless good births. Collectively, these talismans through which home to manipulate events and influence spirits, as well as related mantras and rites for the same purpose, are known as .

===&quot;Kagura&quot;===

 describes the music and dance performed for the ; the term may have originally derived from (&quot;seat of the &quot;). Throughout Japanese history, dance has played an important culture role and in Shinto it is regarded as having the capacity to pacify . There is a mythological tale of how dance came into existence. According to the and the , Ame-no-Uzume performed a dance to entice Amaterasu out of the cave in which she had hidden herself.

There are two broad types of kagura. One is Imperial kagura, also known as . This style was developed in the imperial court and is still performed on imperial grounds every December. It is also performed at the Imperial harvest festival and at major shrines such as Ise, Kamo, and Iwashimizu Hachiman-gū. It is performed by singers and musicians using wooden clappers, a , a flute, and a six-stringed zither. The other main type is , descended from and performed at shrines across Japan. Depending on the style, it is performed by or by actors wearing masks to portray various mythological figures. These actors are accompanied by a band using flutes and drums. There are also other, regional types of kagura.

===Festivals===

Public festivals are commonly termed , although this term has varied meanings—&quot;festival&quot;, &quot;worship&quot;, &quot;celebration&quot;, &quot;rite&quot;, or &quot;prayer&quot;—and no direct translation into English. Picken suggested that the festival was &quot;the central act of Shinto worship&quot; because Shinto was a &quot;community- and family-based&quot; religion. Most mark the seasons of the agricultural year and involve offerings being directed to the in thanks. According to a traditional lunar calendar, Shinto shrines should hold their festival celebrations on or &quot;clear days&quot;, the days of the new, full, and half moons. Other days, known as , were generally avoided for festivities. However, since the late 20th century, many shrines have held their festival celebrations on the Saturday or Sunday closest to the date so that fewer individuals will be working and will be able to attend. Each town or village often has its own festival, centred on a local shrine. For instance, the Aoi Matsuri festival, held on 15 May to pray for an abundant grain harvest, takes place at shrines in Kyoto, while the Chichibu Night Festival takes place on 2–3 December in Chichibu.

Spring festivals are called and often incorporate prayers for a good harvest. They sometimes involve ceremonies, in which rice is ritually planted. Summer festivals are termed and are usually focused on protecting the crops against pests and other threats. Autumn festivals are known as and primarily focus on thanking the for the rice or other harvest. The , or festival of new rice, is held across many Shinto shrines on 23 November. The emperor also conducts a ceremony to mark this festival, at which he presents the first fruits of the harvest to the at midnight. Winter festivals, called often feature on welcoming in the spring, expelling evil, and calling in good influences for the future. There is little difference between winter festivals and specific new year festivals.
The season of the new year is called . On the last day of the year (31 December), , practitioners usually clean their household shrines in preparation for New Year&#x27;s Day (1 January), . Many people visit public shrines to celebrate new year; this &quot;first visit&quot; of the year is known as or . There, they buy amulets and talismans to bring them good fortune over the coming year. To celebrate this festival, many Japanese put up rope known as on their homes and places of business. Some also put up (&quot;gateway pine&quot;), an arrangement of pine branches, plum tree, and bamboo sticks. Also displayed are , which are smaller and more colourful; their purpose is to keep away misfortune and attract good fortune. In many places, new year celebrations incorporate (&quot;naked festivals&quot;) in which men dressed only in a loincloth engage in a particular activity, such as fighting over a specific object or immersing themselves in a river.

A common feature of festivals are processions or parades known as . These can be raucous, with many participants being drunk; Breen and Teeuwen characterised them as having a &quot;carnivalesque atmosphere&quot;. They are often understood as having a regenerative effect on both the participants and the community. During these processions, the travel in portable shrines known as . In various cases the undergo (&quot;going down to the beach&quot;), a process by which they are carried to the sea shore and sometimes into the sea, either by bearers or a boat. For instance, in the Okunchi festival held in the southwestern city of Nagasaki, the of the Suwa Shrine are paraded down to Ohato, where they are placed in a shrine there for several days before being paraded back to Suwa. These sort of celebrations are often organized largely by members of the local community rather than by the priests themselves.

===Rites of passage===
The formal recognition of events is given great importance in Japanese culture. A common ritual, the , entails a child&#x27;s first visit to a Shinto shrine. A tradition holds that, if a boy he should be brought to the shrine on the thirty-second day after birth, and if a girl she should be brought on the thirty-third day. Historically, the child was commonly brought to the shrine not by the mother, who was considered impure after birth, but by another female relative; since the late 20th century it has been more common for the mother to do so. Another rite of passage, the or , is a coming of age ritual marking the transition to adulthood and occurs when an individual is around twenty. Wedding ceremonies are often carried out at Shinto shrines; these are called (&quot;a wedding before the &quot;). Prior to the Meiji period, weddings were commonly performed in the home, although shrines now regard them as an important source of income.

In Japan, funerals tend to take place at Buddhist temples and involve cremation, with Shinto funerals being rare. Bocking noted that most Japanese people are &quot;still &#x27;born Shinto&#x27; yet &#x27;die Buddhist&#x27;.&quot; In Shinto thought, contact with death is seen as imparting impurity (); the period following this contact is known as and is associated with various taboos. In cases when dead humans are enshrined as , the physical remains of the dead are not stored at the shrine. Although not common, there have been examples of funerals conducted through Shinto rites. The earliest examples are known from the mid-17th century; these occurred in certain areas of Japan and had the support of the local authorities.
Following the Meiji Restoration, in 1868 the government recognised specifically Shinto funerals for Shinto priests. Five years later, this was extended to cover the entire Japanese population. Despite this Meiji promotion of Shinto funerals, the majority of the population continued to have Buddhist funeral rites. In recent decades, Shinto funerals have usually been reserved for Shinto priests and for members of certain Shinto sects. After cremation, the normal funerary process in Japan, the ashes of a priest may be interred near to the shrine, but not inside its precincts.

Ancestral reverence remains an important part of Japanese religious custom. The invocation of the dead, and especially the war dead, is known as . Various rites reference this. For instance, at the largely Buddhist festival of Bon, the souls of the ancestors are believed to visit the living, and are then sent away in a ritual called , by which lanterns are inserted into small boats, often made of paper, and placed in a river to float downstream.

===Spirit mediumship and healing===

Shinto practitioners believe that the can possess a human being and then speak through them, a process known as . Several new religious movements drawing upon Shinto, such as Tenrikyo and Oomoto, were founded by individuals claiming to be guided by a possessing . The is an oracle that is passed from the via the medium.

The and are blind women who train to become spiritual mediums, traditionally in Japan&#x27;s northern Tohoku region. train under other from childhood, memorialising sacred texts and prayers, fasting, and undertaking acts of severe asceticism, through which they are believed to cultivate supernatural powers. In an initiation ceremony, a is believed to possess the young woman, and the two are then ritually &quot;married&quot;. After this, the becomes her tutelary spirit and she will henceforth be able to call upon it, and a range of other spirits, in the future. Through contacting these spirits, she is able to convey their messages to the living. usually carry out their rituals independent of the shrine system. Japanese culture also includes spiritual healers known as whose work involves invoking both and Buddhas.

==History==
===Early development===

Earhart commented that Shinto ultimately &quot;emerged from the beliefs and practices of prehistoric Japan&quot;, although Kitagawa noted that it was questionable whether prehistoric Japanese religions could be accurately termed &quot;early Shinto&quot;. It was the Yayoi period of Japanese prehistory which first left traces of material and iconography prefiguring that later included in Shinto. were worshipped at various landscape features during this period; at this point, their worship consisted largely of beseeching and placating them, with little evidence that they were viewed as compassionate entities. Archaeological evidence suggests that bronze bells, bronze weapons, and metal mirrors played an important role in -based ritual during the Yayoi period.

In this early period, Japan was not a unified state; by the Kofun period it was divided among (clans), each with their own tutelary , the . Korean migration during the Kofun period brought Confucianism and Buddhism to Japan. Buddhism had a particular impact on the cults. Migrant groups and Japanese who increasingly aligned with these foreign influences built Buddhist temples in various parts of the Japanese islands. Several rival clans who were more hostile to these foreign influences began adapting the shrines of their to more closely resemble the new Buddhist structures. In the late 5th century, the imperial dynasty leader Yūryaku declared himself &quot;&quot; (&quot;great king&quot;) and established hegemony over much of Japan. From the early 6th century CE, the style of ritual favored by the Yamato began spreading to other shrines around Japan as the Yamato extended their territorial influence. Buddhism was also growing. According to the , in 587 Emperor Yōmei converted to Buddhism and under his sponsorship Buddhism spread.

In the mid-7th century, a legal code called was adopted to establish a Chinese-style centralised government. As part of this, the Jingikan (&quot;Council of &quot;) was created to conduct rites of state and coordinate provincial ritual with that in the capital. This was done according to a code of law called the &quot;Jingiryō&quot;, itself modelled on the Chinese &quot;Book of Rites&quot;. The Jingikan was located in the palace precincts and maintained a register of shrines and priests. An annual calendar of state rites were introduced to help unify Japan through worship. These legally mandated rites were outlined in the Yōrō Code of 718, and expanded in the &quot;Jogan Gishiki&quot; of circa 872 and the &quot;Engi Shiki&quot; of 927. Under the Jingikan, some shrines were designated as (&quot;official shrines&quot;) and given specific privileges and responsibilities. Hardacre saw the Jingikan as &quot;the institutional origin of Shinto&quot;.

In the early 8th century, the Emperor Tenmu commissioned a compilation of the legends and genealogies of Japan&#x27;s clans, resulting in the completion of the in 712. Designed to legitimate the ruling dynasty, this text created a fixed version of various stories previously circulating in oral tradition. The omits any reference to Buddhism, in part because it sought to ignore foreign influences and emphasise a narrative stressing indigenous elements of Japanese culture. Several years later, the &quot;Nihon shoki&quot; was written. Unlike the , this made various references to Buddhism, and was aimed at a foreign audience. Both of these texts sought to establish the imperial clan&#x27;s descent from the sun Amaterasu, although there were many differences in the cosmogonic narrative they provided. Quickly, the &quot;Nihon shoki&quot; eclipsed the in terms of its influence. Other texts written at this time also drew on oral traditions regarding the . The &quot;Sendari kuji hongi&quot; for example was probably composed by the Mononobe clan while the &quot;Kogoshui&quot; was probably put together for the Imbe clan, and in both cases they were designed to highlight the divine origins of these respective lineages. A government order in 713 called on each region to produce , records of local geography, products, and stories, with the latter revealing more traditions about the which were present at this time.

From the 8th century, worship and Buddhism were thoroughly intertwined in Japanese society. While the emperor and court performed Buddhist rites, they also performed others to honor the . Tenmu for example appointed a virginal imperial princess to serve as the , a form of priestess, at the Ise Shrine on his behalf, a tradition continued by subsequent emperors. From the 8th century onward up until the Meiji era, the were incorporated into a Buddhist cosmology in various ways. One view is that the realised that like all other life-forms, they too were trapped in the cycle of samsara (rebirth) and that to escape this they had to follow Buddhist teachings. Alternative approaches viewed the as benevolent entities who protected Buddhism, or that the were themselves Buddhas, or beings who had achieved enlightenment. In this, they could be either , the pure spirits of the Buddhas, or , transformations of the Buddhas in their attempt to help all sentient beings.

===Nara period===
This period hosted many changes to the country, government, and religion. The capital is moved again to Heijō-kyō (modern-day Nara), in AD 710 by Empress Genmei due to the death of the emperor. This practice was necessary due to the Shinto belief in the impurity of death and the need to avoid this pollution. However, this practice of moving the capital due to &quot;death impurity&quot; is then abolished by the Taihō Code and rise in Buddhist influence. The establishment of the imperial city in partnership with Taihō Code is important to Shinto as the office of the Shinto rites becomes more powerful in assimilating local clan shrines into the imperial fold. New shrines are built and assimilated each time the city is moved. All of the grand shrines are regulated under Taihō and are required to account for incomes, priests, and practices due to their national contributions.

===Meiji era and the Empire of Japan===
Breen and Teeuwen characterise the period between 1868 and 1915, during the Meiji era, as being the &quot;formative years&quot; of modern Shinto. It is in this period that various scholars have argued that Shinto was essentially &quot;invented&quot;.
Fridell argues that scholars call the period from 1868 to 1945 the &quot;State Shinto period&quot; because, &quot;during these decades, Shinto elements came under a great deal of overt state influence and control as the Japanese government systematically utilized shrine worship as a major force for mobilizing imperial loyalties on behalf of modern nation-building.&quot; However, the government had already been treating shrines as an extension of government before Meiji; see for example the Tenpō Reforms. Moreover, according to the scholar Jason Ānanda Josephson, It is inaccurate to describe shrines as constituting a &quot;state religion&quot; or a &quot;theocracy&quot; during this period since they had neither organization, nor doctrine, and were uninterested in conversion.

The Meiji Restoration of 1868 was fuelled by a renewal of Confucian ethics and imperial patriotism among Japan&#x27;s ruling class. Among these reformers, Buddhism was seen as a corrupting influence that had undermined what they envisioned as Japan&#x27;s original purity and greatness. They wanted to place a renewed emphasis on worship as an indigenous form of ritual, an attitude that was also fuelled by anxieties about Western expansionism and fear that Christianity would take hold in Japan.

In 1868, all shrine priests were placed under the authority of the new Jingikan, or Council of Kami Affairs. A project of forcibly separating worship from Buddhism was implemented, with Buddhist monks, deities, buildings, and rituals banned from shrines. Much Buddhist material was destroyed. In 1871, a new hierarchy of shrines was introduced, with imperial and national shrines at the top. Hereditary priesthoods were abolished and a new state-sanctioned system for appointing priests was introduced.
In 1872, the Jingikan was replaced with the Kyobusho, or Ministry of Edification. This coordinated a campaign whereby (&quot;national evangelists&quot;) were sent through the country to promote Japan&#x27;s &quot;Great Teaching&quot;, which included respect for the and obedience to the emperor. This campaign was discontinued in 1884. In 1906, thousands of village shrines were merged so that most small communities had only a single shrine, where rites in honor of the emperor could be held. Shinto effectively became the state cult, one promoted with growing zeal in the build-up to the Second World War.

In 1882, the Meiji government designated 13 religious movements that were neither Buddhist nor Christian to be forms of &quot;Sect Shinto&quot;. The number and name of the sects given this formal designation varied; often they merged ideas with Shinto from Buddhism, Christian, Confucian, Daoist, and Western esoteric traditions. In the Meiji period, many local traditions died out and were replaced by nationally standardised practices encouraged from Tokyo.

===Post-war===

During the U.S. occupation, a new Japanese constitution was drawn up. This enshrined freedom of religion and separated religion from the state, a measure designed to eradicate State Shinto. The emperor declared that he was not a ; Shinto rituals performed by the imperial family became their own private affair. This disestablishment ended government subsidies to shrines and gave them renewed freedom to organise their own affairs. In 1946 many shrines formed a voluntary organisation, the Association of Shinto Shrines (). In 1956 the association issued a creedal statement, the (&quot;general characteristics of a life lived in reverence of the &quot;), to summarise what they regarded as Shinto&#x27;s principles. By the late 1990s around 80% of Japan&#x27;s Shinto shrines were part of this association.

In the post-war decades, many Japanese blamed Shinto for encouraging the militarism which had led to defeat and occupation. Others remained nostalgic for State Shinto, and concerns were repeatedly expressed that sectors of Japanese society were conspiring to restore it. Various legal debates revolved around the involvement of public officials in Shinto. In 1965, for instance, the city of Tsu, Mie Prefecture, paid four Shinto priests to purify the site where the municipal athletic hall was to be built. Critics brought the case to court, claiming it contravened the constitutional separation of religion and state; in 1971 the high court ruled that the city administration&#x27;s act had been unconstitutional, although this was overturned by the Supreme Court in 1977.

During the post-war period, Shinto themes often blended into Japanese new religious movements. Of the Sect Shinto groups, Tenrikyo was probably the most successful, although in 1970 it repudiated its Shinto identity. Shinto perspectives also influenced popular culture. The film director Hayao Miyazaki of Studio Ghibli for instance acknowledged Shinto influences on his films such as &quot;Spirited Away&quot;. Shinto also spread abroad through both emigration and conversion by non-Japanese. The Tsubaki Grand Shrine in Suzuka, Mie Prefecture, was the first to establish a branch abroad: the Tsubaki Grand Shrine of America, initially located in California and then moved to Granite Falls, Washington.

During the 20th century, most academic research on Shinto was conducted by Shinto theologians, often priests, bringing accusations that it often blurred theology with historical analysis. From the 1980s onward, there was a renewed academic interest in Shinto both in Japan and abroad.

==Demographics==

Most Japanese participate in several religious traditions, with Breen and Teeuwen noting that, &quot;with few exceptions&quot;, it is not possible to differentiate between Shintoists and Buddhists in Japan. The main exceptions are members of minority religious groups, including Christianity, which promote exclusivist worldviews. Determining the proportions of the country&#x27;s population who engage in Shinto activity is hindered by the fact that, if asked, Japanese people will often say &quot;I have no religion&quot;. Many Japanese avoid the term &quot;religion&quot;, in part because they dislike the connotations of the word which most closely matches it in the Japanese language, . The latter term derives from (&quot;sect&quot;) and (&quot;doctrine&quot;).

Official statistics show Shinto to be Japan&#x27;s largest religion, with over 80 per cent of its population engaging in Shinto activities. Conversely, in questionnaires only a small minority of Japanese describe themselves as &quot;Shintoists.&quot; This indicates that a far larger number of people engage in Shinto activities than cite Shinto as their religious identity. There are no formal rituals to become a practitioner of &quot;folk Shinto&quot;. Thus, &quot;Shinto membership&quot; is often estimated counting only those who do join organized Shinto sects. Shinto has about 81,000 shrines and about 85,000 priests in the country. According to surveys carried out in 2006 and 2008, less than 40% of the population of Japan identifies with an organised religion: around 35% are Buddhists, 30% to 40% are members of Shinto sects and derived religions. In 2008, 26% of the participants reported often visiting Shinto shrines, while only 16.2% expressed belief in the existence of in general.

===Shinto outside Japan ===
The end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th centuries were marked by the expansion of the Empire of Japan, which also led to the spread of Shinto in the colonized territories. In total, from 1868 to 1945, 1,640 shrines were built in territories under Japanese control. In addition, starting in 1885, Japanese began to move to Hawaii, most of whom left Japan for economic reasons; Since 1908, emigration to Brazil also began, where the Japanese worked on coffee plantations. The emigrants built shrines to preserve their culture and worship traditional deities.

 outside Japan are termed (&quot;overseas shrines&quot;), a term coined by . When the Japanese Empire collapsed in the 1940s, there were over 600 within its conquered territories, many of which were later disbanded. Japanese migrants have also established in countries like Brazil, while Shinto&#x27;s lack of doctrinal focus has attracted interest from non-Japanese; in the United States, for example, European Americans have played a significant role in introducing Shinto.

==See also==
* Azusa yumi
* Dōsojin
* Hama yumi
* Hari-Kuyo
* Iwakura (Shinto)
* Kodama (spirit)
* List of Japanese deities
* Nyonin Kinsei
* Raijin
* Ryukyuan religion
* Shide (Shinto)
* Shinto architecture
* Shinto in popular culture
* Shinto in Taiwan
* Shinto music
* Twenty-Two Shrines
* Yōsei
==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* Bestor, Victoria, Theodore C. Bestor, &amp; Akiko Yamagata. &quot;Routledge Handbook of Japanese Culture and Society&quot;. Routledge, 2011. , 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Skya, Walter. &quot;Japan&#x27;s holy war: the ideology of radical Shintō ultranationalism&quot;. Durham: Duke University Press, 2009.
* 
==External links==

* Shinto at Encyclopedia Britannica
* Jinja Honcho – English – The Official Japanese Organization of 80,000 Shinto Shrines
* Kokugakuin University Encyclopedia of Shinto and its Japanese Shinto Jinja Database </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="0" end="6" title="Shinto" label="Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="22" end="31" title="Shinto" label="Shintoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="38" end="46" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="62" end="67" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262635" start="86" end="105" title="East Asian religions" label="East Asian religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q34187" start="109" end="129" title="Religious studies" label="scholars of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q85769343" start="181" end="200" title="indigenous religion" label="indigenous religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12291451" start="210" end="225" title="nature religion" label="nature religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9163" start="472" end="484" title="polytheism" label="polytheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="489" end="498" title="animism" label="animistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q845945" start="733" end="765" title="Shinto shrine" label="&amp;quot;jinja&amp;quot; public shrines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131696" start="1034" end="1050" title="rites of passage" label="rites of passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q15974353" start="1056" end="1070" title="Japanese festivals" label="kami festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="1107" end="1117" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q131557" start="1156" end="1162" title="amulet" label="amulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q207858" start="1757" end="1769" title="Yayoi period" label="Yayoi period"/>
<link wikidata="Q847618" start="1790" end="1798" title="Chinese Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q459939" start="1831" end="1843" title="Kofun period" label="Kofun period"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="1880" end="1904" title="Syncretism" label="Religious syncretization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279088" start="1980" end="1995" title="shinbutsu-shūgō" label="shinbutsu-shūgō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308653" start="2036" end="2054" title="Buddhist cosmology" label="Buddhist cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="2086" end="2105" title="Anthropomorphism" label="anthropomorphically"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="2275" end="2284" title="Meiji era" label="Meiji era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331440" start="2314" end="2325" title="Japanese nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197248" start="2389" end="2401" title="State Shinto" label="State Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="2573" end="2580" title="Emperor of Japan" label="emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="2614" end="2629" title="Japanese Empire" label="Japanese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2739" end="2751" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q859563" start="2773" end="2797" title="Secular state" label="separated from the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q831454" start="3145" end="3161" title="Culture of Japan" label="Japanese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263926" start="3293" end="3325" title="Japanese new religions" label="Japanese new religious movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129615" start="3658" end="3672" title="Helen Hardacre" label="Helen Hardacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q969889" start="3814" end="3828" title="Inoue Nobutaka" label="Inoue Nobutaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="4118" end="4135" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359123" start="4282" end="4294" title="Ninian Smart" label="Ninian Smart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="4710" end="4719" title="Meiji era" label="Meiji era"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827765" start="5076" end="5089" title="Kuroda Toshio" label="Kuroda Toshio"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="5239" end="5247" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="5332" end="5349" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q82821" start="5453" end="5462" title="tradition" label="tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="5510" end="5542" title="separation of religion and state" label="separation of religion and state"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="5683" end="5698" title="Western world" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="5799" end="5811" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="5816" end="5821" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002426" start="6080" end="6091" title="Religious pluralism" label="pluralistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="6125" end="6133" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="6443" end="6455" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="6457" end="6463" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q123461793" start="6469" end="6487" title="Chinese fortune telling" label="Chinese divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262635" start="6550" end="6570" title="East Asian religions" label="East Asian religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626949" start="6723" end="6742" title="Stuart D. B. Picken" label="Stuart D. B. Picken"/>
<link wikidata="Q54073114" start="6781" end="6795" title="world religion" label="world religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q32539204" start="6817" end="6833" title="H. Byron Earhart" label="H. Byron Earhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q85769343" start="6911" end="6930" title="indigenous religion" label="indigenous religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="7173" end="7176" title="Edo period" label="Edo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12291451" start="7973" end="7988" title="nature religion" label="nature religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3952369" start="8305" end="8330" title="Shinto sects and schools" label="Different types of Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197248" start="8711" end="8723" title="State Shinto" label="State Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="8964" end="8972" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959372" start="9627" end="9631" title="Shen (Chinese religion)" label="shin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190393" start="9703" end="9705" title="Dao" label="tō"/>
<link wikidata="Q181937" start="9875" end="9890" title="Book of Changes" label="Book of Changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="9971" end="9979" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="9987" end="9998" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="10046" end="10074" title="Chinese folk religion" label="indigenous Chinese religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q553678" start="10103" end="10110" title="Ge Hong" label="Ge Hong"/>
<link wikidata="Q831242" start="10132" end="10139" title="Baopuzi" label="Baopuzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="10163" end="10169" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="10176" end="10183" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016252" start="10190" end="10192" title="Middle Chinese" label="MC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507085" start="10786" end="10808" title="Konjaku Monogatarishū" label="Konjaku monogatarishui"/>
<link wikidata="Q736311" start="11076" end="11093" title="Japanese Buddhism" label="Japanese Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q56247062" start="11136" end="11143" title="Buddhas" label="Buddhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616931" start="11385" end="11394" title="Shintōshū" label="Shintōshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q723637" start="11421" end="11451" title="Nippo Jisho" label="Japanese Portuguese Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q158646" start="12361" end="12365" title="-ism" label="-ism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9163" start="12445" end="12457" title="polytheism" label="polytheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185165" start="12830" end="12845" title="Joseph Kitagawa" label="Joseph Kitagawa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13034" end="13047" title="Indefinite and fictitious numbers#Specific values used as indefinite" label="eight million"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141803" start="13184" end="13194" title="omnipotence" label="omnipotent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424662" start="13196" end="13206" title="omniscience" label="omniscient"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="13223" end="13231" title="immortality" label="immortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219103" start="13570" end="13578" title="numinous" label="numinous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="13587" end="13593" title="sacred" label="sacred"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="14016" end="14025" title="animism" label="animistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207858" start="14087" end="14099" title="Yayoi period" label="Yayoi period"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="15572" end="15586" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysically"/>
<link wikidata="Q317997" start="15762" end="15774" title="Emperor Ōjin" label="Emperor Ōjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q261637" start="15809" end="15817" title="Hachiman" label="Hachiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q692111" start="17072" end="17079" title="kitsune" label="kitsune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842779" start="18249" end="18265" title="Amenominakanushi" label="Amenominakanushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q125400" start="18267" end="18289" title="Takamimusubi" label="Takamimusuhi no Mikoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275901" start="18295" end="18315" title="Kamimusubi" label="Kamimusuhi no Mikoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q813858" start="18365" end="18372" title="Izanagi" label="Izanagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q682306" start="18377" end="18384" title="Izanami" label="Izanami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985158" start="18528" end="18542" title="Onogoro Island" label="Onogoro Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q455602" start="19050" end="19059" title="Amaterasu" label="Amaterasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q595520" start="19099" end="19108" title="Tsukuyomi" label="Tsukuyomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q272993" start="19145" end="19152" title="Susanoo" label="Susanoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056017" start="19482" end="19488" title="Ninigi" label="Ninigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q170337" start="20046" end="20057" title="eschatology" label="eschatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q62744" start="23668" end="23680" title="yin and yang" label="yin and yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059081" start="24657" end="24670" title="cosmos" label="natural order"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="25176" end="25191" title="civil liberties" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q242803" start="25296" end="25311" title="Yasukuni Shrine" label="Yasukuni Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q320680" start="25437" end="25460" title="Tokyo War Crimes Trials" label="Tokyo War Crimes Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q84028" start="25633" end="25644" title="Suwa Shrine (Nagasaki)" label="Suwa Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="25648" end="25656" title="Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25809" end="25853" title="Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki#Nagasaki" label="1945 U.S. use of the atomic bomb on the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203220" start="25939" end="25949" title="Kaminoseki" label="Kaminoseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q134447" start="26054" end="26073" title="nuclear power plant" label="nuclear power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="26174" end="26190" title="environmentalism" label="environmentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427367" start="26628" end="26675" title="Orthopraxy" label="focuses on ritual behavior rather than doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q908077" start="28058" end="28087" title="Association of Shinto Shrines" label="Association of Shinto Shrines"/>
<link wikidata="Q193292" start="28613" end="28625" title="Heian period" label="Heian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q737438" start="30099" end="30109" title="vermillion" label="vermillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q189178" start="30155" end="30166" title="Nara period" label="Nara period"/>
<link wikidata="Q495330" start="32416" end="32437" title="Kokugakuin University" label="Kokugakuin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797584" start="32454" end="32473" title="Kogakkan University" label="Kogakkan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q128196" start="32477" end="32491" title="Mie Prefecture" label="Mie Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="37665" end="37675" title="Pilgrimage" label="Pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="38210" end="38216" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="38217" end="38237" title="World Heritage Sites" label="World Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q701620" start="38255" end="38270" title="Shimogamo Jinja" label="Shimogamo Jinja"/>
<link wikidata="Q714828" start="38275" end="38295" title="Fushimi Inari Taisha" label="Fushimi Inari Taisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q287165" start="38306" end="38317" title="Meiji Jingū" label="Meiji Jingū"/>
<link wikidata="Q482065" start="38332" end="38344" title="Atsuta Jingū" label="Atsuta Jingū"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142916" start="39964" end="39980" title="Animal sacrifice" label="Animal sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q170219" start="40403" end="40407" title="Sake" label="Sake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3594020" start="40974" end="40988" title="Ōharano Shrine" label="Ōharano Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429" start="44197" end="44204" title="archery" label="archery"/>
<link wikidata="Q131557" start="44968" end="44974" title="amulet" label="amulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q187172" start="45908" end="45919" title="Bodhidharma" label="Bodhidharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="46832" end="46844" title="mythology" label="mythological"/>
<link wikidata="Q462803" start="46911" end="46923" title="Ame-no-Uzume" label="Ame-no-Uzume"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797685" start="47162" end="47178" title="Three Palace Sanctuaries" label="imperial grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306606" start="47283" end="47287" title="Kamo Shrines" label="Kamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q710098" start="47293" end="47315" title="Iwashimizu Shrine" label="Iwashimizu Hachiman-gū"/>
<link wikidata="Q185688" start="48251" end="48265" title="lunar calendar" label="lunar calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q773085" start="48757" end="48768" title="Aoi Matsuri" label="Aoi Matsuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="48859" end="48864" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q11596116" start="48876" end="48899" title="Chichibu Night Festival" label="Chichibu Night Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q647079" start="48931" end="48939" title="Chichibu, Saitama" label="Chichibu"/>
<link wikidata="Q701398" start="49730" end="49752" title="Japanese New Year" label="season of the new year"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="51316" end="51324" title="Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q84028" start="51337" end="51348" title="Suwa Shrine (Nagasaki)" label="Suwa Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q207315" start="53744" end="53753" title="cremation" label="cremation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154888" start="54109" end="54112" title="Bon Festival" label="Bon"/>
<link wikidata="Q737323" start="54545" end="54553" title="Tenrikyo" label="Tenrikyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q385517" start="54558" end="54564" title="Oomoto" label="Oomoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q217123" start="54644" end="54650" title="oracle" label="oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q583271" start="54736" end="54753" title="mediumship" label="spiritual mediums"/>
<link wikidata="Q129465" start="54794" end="54800" title="Tohoku" label="Tohoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q207858" start="55820" end="55832" title="Yayoi period" label="Yayoi period"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="56168" end="56182" title="Archaeology" label="Archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q207858" start="56307" end="56319" title="Yayoi period" label="Yayoi period"/>
<link wikidata="Q459939" start="56382" end="56394" title="Kofun period" label="Kofun period"/>
<link wikidata="Q909452" start="56931" end="56947" title="Imperial House of Japan" label="imperial dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q357235" start="56955" end="56962" title="Emperor Yūryaku" label="Yūryaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q640605" start="57129" end="57135" title="Yamato people" label="Yamato"/>
<link wikidata="Q349281" start="57287" end="57300" title="Emperor Yōmei" label="Emperor Yōmei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264720" start="57497" end="57505" title="Jingikan" label="Jingikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q862758" start="57740" end="57753" title="Book of Rites" label="Book of Rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575743" start="57997" end="58006" title="Yōrō Code" label="Yōrō Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342448" start="58088" end="58098" title="Engi Shiki" label="Engi Shiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q335181" start="58364" end="58369" title="Tenmu" label="Tenmu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716751" start="59297" end="59315" title="Kujiki" label="Sendari kuji hongi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755836" start="59363" end="59371" title="Mononobe" label="Mononobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q531555" start="59393" end="59401" title="Kogoshui" label="Kogoshui"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189229" start="59442" end="59451" title="Imbe clan" label="Imbe clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="60154" end="60163" title="Meiji (era)" label="Meiji era"/>
<link wikidata="Q173324" start="60330" end="60337" title="samsara" label="samsara"/>
<link wikidata="Q56247062" start="60520" end="60527" title="Buddhas" label="Buddhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q862509" start="60841" end="60850" title="Heijō-kyō" label="Heijō-kyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q169134" start="60863" end="60867" title="Nara, Nara" label="Nara"/>
<link wikidata="Q233224" start="60883" end="60897" title="Empress Genmei" label="Empress Genmei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059892" start="61151" end="61161" title="Taihō Code" label="Taihō Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059892" start="61514" end="61519" title="Taihō Code" label="Taihō"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367979" start="62408" end="62421" title="Tenpō Reforms" label="Tenpō Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q105020362" start="62458" end="62480" title="Jason Josephson Storm" label="Jason Ānanda Josephson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="62703" end="62720" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264720" start="63269" end="63277" title="Jingikan" label="Jingikan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63745" end="63753" title="Kyobusho" label="Kyobusho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197248" start="63800" end="63810" title="Great Promulgation Campaign" label="a campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532150" start="64436" end="64447" title="Sect Shinto" label="Sect Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="64611" end="64627" title="Western esotericism" label="Western esoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q237082" start="64817" end="64842" title="Constitution of Japan" label="new Japanese constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="64872" end="64891" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q908077" start="65278" end="65307" title="Association of Shinto Shrines" label="Association of Shinto Shrines"/>
<link wikidata="Q203027" start="65988" end="65991" title="Tsu, Mie" label="Tsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142255" start="66348" end="66361" title="Supreme Court of Japan" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q477544" start="66442" end="66464" title="new religious movement" label="new religious movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q737323" start="66494" end="66502" title="Tenrikyo" label="Tenrikyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55400" start="66660" end="66674" title="Hayao Miyazaki" label="Hayao Miyazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q182950" start="66678" end="66691" title="Studio Ghibli" label="Studio Ghibli"/>
<link wikidata="Q155653" start="66763" end="66776" title="Spirited Away" label="Spirited Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541617" start="66870" end="66890" title="Tsubaki Grand Shrine" label="Tsubaki Grand Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q207311" start="66894" end="66900" title="Suzuka, Mie" label="Suzuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q840967" start="66966" end="66997" title="Tsubaki Grand Shrine of America" label="Tsubaki Grand Shrine of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506731" start="67049" end="67074" title="Granite Falls, Washington" label="Granite Falls, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="68936" end="68945" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68973" end="69007" title="Shinto sects and schools#Shintō inspired religions" label="Shinto sects and derived religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="69269" end="69284" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="69505" end="69511" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144461" start="69571" end="69591" title="Japanese Brazilians" label="emigration to Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q43103" start="70144" end="70162" title="European Americans" label="European Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833134" start="70233" end="70243" title="Azusa yumi" label="Azusa yumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q269515" start="70246" end="70253" title="Dōsojin" label="Dōsojin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15968031" start="70256" end="70265" title="Hama yumi" label="Hama yumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585326" start="70268" end="70277" title="Hari-Kuyo" label="Hari-Kuyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11587880" start="70280" end="70296" title="Iwakura (Shinto)" label="Iwakura (Shinto)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515938" start="70299" end="70314" title="Kodama (spirit)" label="Kodama (spirit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240847" start="70317" end="70341" title="List of Japanese deities" label="List of Japanese deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q11446290" start="70344" end="70357" title="Nyonin Kinsei" label="Nyonin Kinsei"/>
<link wikidata="Q12808082" start="70360" end="70366" title="Raijin" label="Raijin"/>
<link wikidata="Q892785" start="70369" end="70386" title="Ryukyuan religion" label="Ryukyuan religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657982" start="70389" end="70403" title="Shide (Shinto)" label="Shide (Shinto)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080012" start="70406" end="70425" title="Shinto architecture" label="Shinto architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497797" start="70428" end="70453" title="Shinto in popular culture" label="Shinto in popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497796" start="70456" end="70472" title="Shinto in Taiwan" label="Shinto in Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328761" start="70475" end="70487" title="Shinto music" label="Shinto music"/>
<link wikidata="Q215320" start="70490" end="70508" title="Twenty-Two Shrines" label="Twenty-Two Shrines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133632" start="70511" end="70516" title="Yōsei" label="Yōsei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781722" start="70650" end="70668" title="Theodore C. Bestor" label="Theodore C. Bestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="70963" end="70986" title="Encyclopedia Britannica" label="Encyclopedia Britannica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28273" wikidata="Q224038" url="?curid=28273" title="Shell">
<text>Shell may refer to:
==Architecture and design==
* Shell (structure), a thin structure
** Concrete shell, a thin shell of concrete, usually with no interior columns or exterior buttresses
** Thin-shell structure

==Science==
===Biology===
* Seashell, a hard outer layer of a marine animal, found on beaches
* Eggshell
* Nutshell
* Exoskeleton, an external covering of some animals
** Mollusc shell
*** Bivalve shell
*** Gastropod shell
** Shell, of a brachiopod
* Turtle shell
* Armadillo shell

===Physics and chemistry===
* Electron shell or a principal energy level of electrons outside an atom&#x27;s nucleus
* Nuclear shell model, a principal energy level of nucleons within an atom&#x27;s nucleus
* On shell and off shell, quantum field theory concepts depending on whether classical equations of motion are obeyed

===Mathematics===
* Spherical shell

==Organisations==
* Shell plc formerly Royal Dutch Shell plc, a British multinational oil and gas company
** Shell Oil Company or Shell USA
** Shell Australia
** Shell Canada
** Shell Nigeria
* Shell corporation, a type of company that serves as a vehicle for business transactions

==Computing==
* Shell (computing), a type of user interface
** Command-line interface, sometimes referred to as command shell
** List of command-line interpreters, programs occasionally referred to as shells
** Web shell, interface that enables a web server to be remotely accessed
* Read–eval–print loop, also known as a language shell
* Shell account, a user account on a remote server
* Secure Shell, cryptographic network protocol
* Shellsort or Shell sort, a sorting algorithm by Donald Shell
* Shell, an empty expert system

==Entertainment==
* &quot;Shell&quot; (2012 film), an independent drama film 
* &quot;Shell&quot; (2024 film), an American thriller film
* Shell (theater), a curved surface for reflecting sound
* The Shells, a musical group
* &quot;Shells&quot; (&quot;Angel&quot;), a TV episode
* &quot;The Shell&quot; (&quot;The Amazing World of Gumball&quot;), a TV episode
* Shell, a receptacle used in the Shell game
* &quot;Shell&quot;, a song by Arrested Development from &quot;Zingalamaduni&quot;

==Places==
* Shell, Ecuador
* Shell, Worcestershire, England
* Shell, Wyoming, United States
* Shell Lake (disambiguation), several places

==Weaponry==
* Shell (projectile), an explosive device fired from artillery
* Shotgun shell, a type of shotgun ammunition

==Persons with the surname Shell==
* Art Shell (born 1946), American football player and coach
* Brandon Shell (born 1992), American football player
* Donald Shell (1924–2015), American computer scientist
* Donnie Shell (born 1952), American football player
* George Shell (disambiguation)
* Karl Shell (born 1938), American economist
* Rita Shell (1863–1950), British magazine editor

==Other uses==
* Racing shell, a watercraft
* Shell (machinery), each half of a two-piece plain bearing

* Coverage shell, the number of defenders guarding the deep portion of the field in American football
*Conchiglie, a type of pasta

==See also==
* Shell suit, a descendant of the tracksuit
* Shel 
* Shels (disambiguation)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q224038" start="0" end="5" title="Shell" label="Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2230313" start="50" end="67" title="Shell (structure)" label="Shell (structure)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737546" start="89" end="103" title="Concrete shell" label="Concrete shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2230313" start="190" end="210" title="Thin-shell structure" label="Thin-shell structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q213096" start="240" end="248" title="Seashell" label="Seashell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731253" start="308" end="316" title="Eggshell" label="Eggshell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070552" start="319" end="327" title="Nutshell" label="Nutshell"/>
<link wikidata="Q191944" start="330" end="341" title="Exoskeleton" label="Exoskeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445670" start="383" end="396" title="Mollusc shell" label="Mollusc shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511295" start="401" end="414" title="Bivalve shell" label="Bivalve shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003497" start="419" end="434" title="Gastropod shell" label="Gastropod shell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="450" end="460" title="brachiopod#Shells and their mechanisms" label="brachiopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q13486671" start="463" end="475" title="Turtle shell" label="Turtle shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840543" start="478" end="493" title="Armadillo shell" label="Armadillo shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q193793" start="525" end="539" title="Electron shell" label="Electron shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q600617" start="614" end="633" title="Nuclear shell model" label="Nuclear shell model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132926" start="704" end="726" title="On shell and off shell" label="On shell and off shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q12137" start="841" end="856" title="Spherical shell" label="Spherical shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="878" end="887" title="Shell plc" label="Shell plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240764" start="967" end="984" title="Shell USA" label="Shell Oil Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493635" start="1001" end="1016" title="Shell Australia" label="Shell Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360622" start="1020" end="1032" title="Shell Canada" label="Shell Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493681" start="1036" end="1049" title="Shell Nigeria" label="Shell Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q290000" start="1052" end="1069" title="Shell corporation" label="Shell corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109" start="1157" end="1174" title="Shell (computing)" label="Shell (computing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="1204" end="1226" title="Command-line interface" label="Command-line interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q55437472" start="1270" end="1303" title="List of command-line interpreters" label="List of command-line interpreters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839599" start="1352" end="1361" title="Web shell" label="Web shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032810" start="1425" end="1445" title="Read–eval–print loop" label="Read–eval–print loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783200" start="1480" end="1493" title="Shell account" label="Shell account"/>
<link wikidata="Q170460" start="1531" end="1543" title="Secure Shell" label="Secure Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q848955" start="1578" end="1587" title="Shellsort" label="Shellsort"/>
<link wikidata="Q184609" start="1657" end="1670" title="expert system" label="expert system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959351" start="1692" end="1721" title="Shell (2012 film)" label="&amp;quot;Shell&amp;quot; (2012 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q124214428" start="1752" end="1781" title="Shell (2024 film)" label="&amp;quot;Shell&amp;quot; (2024 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q780777" start="1811" end="1826" title="Shell (theater)" label="Shell (theater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763758" start="1868" end="1878" title="The Shells" label="The Shells"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086092" start="1898" end="1936" title="Shells (Angel)" label="&amp;quot;Shells&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Angel&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953529" start="1953" end="2017" title="The Shell (The Amazing World of Gumball)" label="&amp;quot;The Shell&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Amazing World of Gumball&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025099" start="2066" end="2076" title="Shell game" label="Shell game"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072383" start="2140" end="2153" title="Zingalamaduni" label="Zingalamaduni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5762444" start="2174" end="2188" title="Shell, Ecuador" label="Shell, Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q122984206" start="2191" end="2212" title="Shell, Worcestershire" label="Shell, Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q460703" start="2224" end="2238" title="Shell, Wyoming" label="Shell, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127104" start="2256" end="2283" title="Shell Lake (disambiguation)" label="Shell Lake (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="2316" end="2334" title="Shell (projectile)" label="Shell (projectile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763371" start="2379" end="2392" title="Shotgun shell" label="Shotgun shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q638456" start="2461" end="2470" title="Art Shell" label="Art Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957058" start="2521" end="2534" title="Brandon Shell" label="Brandon Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q93133" start="2575" end="2587" title="Donald Shell" label="Donald Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296690" start="2631" end="2643" title="Donnie Shell" label="Donnie Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q51883804" start="2684" end="2713" title="George Shell (disambiguation)" label="George Shell (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733015" start="2716" end="2726" title="Karl Shell" label="Karl Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q88468489" start="2761" end="2771" title="Rita Shell" label="Rita Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q606305" start="2827" end="2839" title="Racing shell" label="Racing shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18830" start="2856" end="2873" title="Shell (machinery)" label="Shell (machinery)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073934" start="2917" end="2931" title="Coverage shell" label="Coverage shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q19962" start="3018" end="3028" title="Conchiglie" label="Conchiglie"/>
<link wikidata="Q608441" start="3062" end="3072" title="Shell suit" label="Shell suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q97738492" start="3106" end="3110" title="Shel" label="Shel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493929" start="3114" end="3136" title="Shels (disambiguation)" label="Shels (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28278" wikidata="Q1764682" url="?curid=28278" title="Scottish Rite">
<text>The Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry is a rite within the broader context of Freemasonry. It is the most widely practiced Rite in the world. In some parts of the world, and in the Droit Humain, it is a concordant body and oversees all degrees from the 1st to 33rd degrees, while in other areas, a Supreme Council oversees the 4th to 33rd degrees.

It is most commonly referred to as the Scottish Rite. Sometimes, as in England and Australia, it is called the Rose Croix, though this is just one of its degrees, and is not to be confused with other Masonic related Rosicrucian societies such as the Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia. Its name may vary slightly in various jurisdictions and constitutions. For example, the English and Irish Constitutions omit the word &quot;Scottish&quot;.

The Scottish Rite stands as a full Rite of Freemasonry and not an appendant body. Master Masons from other rites may, in some countries, join the Scottish Rite&#x27;s upper degrees starting from the 4th degree due to its popularity. This Rite builds upon the ethical teachings and philosophy offered in the Craft (or Blue) Lodge through dramatic presentations of its individual degrees. The term &quot;Blue Lodge&quot; refers to the first three degrees of Masonry, regardless of the Rite being practiced. In the Scottish Rite system, the first three degrees are considered Blue Lodge degrees rather than &quot;Red Lodge&quot;.

== History ==

===Scots Master Degree===
There are records of lodges conferring the degree of &quot;Scots Master&quot; or &quot;Scotch Master&quot; as early as 1733. A lodge at the Devil (Tavern), Temple Bar in London is the earliest such lodge on record. Other lodges include a lodge at Bath in 1735, and the French lodge, St. George de l&#x27;Observance No. 49 at Covent Garden in 1736. The references to these few occasions indicate that these were special meetings held for the purpose of performing unusual ceremonies, probably by visiting Freemasons. The Copiale cipher, dating from the 1740s says, &quot;The rank of a Scottish master is an entirely new invention...&quot;

=== Myth of Jacobite origins ===
French writers Jean-Marie Ragon (1781–1862) and Emmanuel Rebold, in their Masonic histories, first claimed that the high degrees were created and practiced in Lodge Canongate Kilwinning at Edinburgh, which is entirely false.

===Estienne Morin===
A French trader, by the name of Estienne Morin, had been involved in high-degree Masonry in Bordeaux since 1744 and, in 1747, founded an &quot;Écossais&quot; lodge (Scottish Lodge) in the city of Le Cap Français, on the north coast of the French colony of Saint-Domingue, now Haiti. Over the next decade, high-degree Freemasonry was carried by French men to other cities in the Western hemisphere. The high-degree lodge at Bordeaux warranted or recognized seven Écossais lodges there.

In Paris in the year 1761, a patent was issued to Estienne Morin, dated 27 August, creating him &quot;Grand Inspector for all parts of the New World&quot;. This Patent was signed by officials of the Grand Lodge at Paris and appears to have originally granted him power over the craft lodges only, and not over the high, or &quot;Écossais&quot;, degree lodges. Later copies of this Patent appear to have been embellished, probably by Morin, to improve his position over the high-degree lodges in the West Indies.

Morin returned to the West Indies in 1762 or 1763, to Saint-Domingue. Based on his new Patent, he assumed powers to constitute lodges of all degrees, spreading the high degrees throughout the West Indies and North America. Morin stayed in Saint-Domingue until 1766, when he moved to Jamaica. At Kingston, Jamaica, in 1770, Morin created a &quot;Grand Chapter&quot; of his new Rite, the Grand Council of Jamaica. Morin died in 1771 and was buried in Kingston.

===Rite of 25 Degrees===
Early writers long believed that a &quot;Rite of Perfection&quot; consisting of 25 degrees, itself the predecessor of the Scottish Rite, had been formed in Paris by a high-degree council calling itself &quot;The Council of Emperors of the East and West&quot;. The title &quot;Rite of Perfection&quot; first appeared in the Preface to the &quot;Grand Constitutions of 1786&quot;, the authority for which is now known to be faulty. The highest degree in this rite was the &quot;Sublime Prince of the Royal Secret&quot;.

It is now generally accepted that this Rite of twenty-five degrees was compiled by Estienne Morin and is more properly called &quot;The Rite of the Royal Secret&quot;, or &quot;Morin&#x27;s Rite&quot;.

However, it was known as &quot;The Order of Prince of the Royal Secret&quot; by the founders of the Scottish Rite, who mentioned it in their &quot;Circular throughout the two Hemispheres&quot; or &quot;Manifesto&quot;, issued on December 4, 1802.

===Henry Andrew Francken and his manuscripts===
Henry Andrew Francken, a naturalized French subject born as &quot;Hendrick Andriese Franken&quot; of Dutch origin, was most important in assisting Morin in spreading the degrees in the New World. Morin appointed him Deputy Grand Inspector General (DGIG) as one of his first acts after returning to the West Indies. Francken worked closely with Morin and, in 1771, produced a manuscript book giving the rituals for the 15th through the 25th degrees. Francken produced at least four such manuscripts. In addition to the 1771 manuscript, there is a second which can be dated to 1783; a third manuscript, of uncertain date, written in Francken&#x27;s handwriting, with the rituals 4–25°, which was found in the archives of the Provincial Grand Lodge of Lancashire in Liverpool in approximately 1984; and a fourth, again of uncertain date, with rituals 4–24°, which was known to have been given by H. J. Whymper to the District Grand Lodge of the Punjab and rediscovered about 2010. Additionally, there is a French manuscript dating from 1790 to 1800 which contains the 25 degrees of the Order of the Royal Secret with additional detail, as well as three other &quot;Hauts Grades&quot; rituals; its literary structure suggests it is derived from a common source as the Francken Manuscripts.

===Scottish Perfection Lodges===
A Loge de Parfaits d&#x27; Écosse was formed on 12 April 1764 at New Orleans, becoming the first high-degree lodge on the North American continent. Its life, however, was short, as the Treaty of Paris (1763) ceded New Orleans to Spain, and the Catholic Spanish crown had been historically hostile to Freemasonry. Documented Masonic activity ceased for a time. It did not return to New Orleans until the late 1790s, when French refugees from the revolution in Saint-Domingue settled in the city.

Francken traveled to New York in 1767 where he granted a Patent, dated 26 December 1767, for the formation of a Lodge of Perfection at Albany, which was called &quot;Ineffable Lodge of Perfection&quot;. This marked the first time the Degrees of Perfection (the 4th through the 14th) were conferred in one of the Thirteen British colonies in North America. This Patent, and the early minutes of the Lodge, are extant and are in the archives of Supreme Council, Northern Jurisdiction. The minutes of Ineffable Lodge of Perfection reveal that it ceased activity on December 5, 1774. It was revived by Giles Fonda Yates about 1820 or 1821, and came under authority of the Supreme Council, Southern Jurisdiction until 1827. That year it was transferred to the Supreme Council, Northern Jurisdiction.

While in New York City, Francken also communicated the degrees to Moses Michael Hays, a Jewish businessman, and appointed him as a Deputy Inspector General. In 1781, Hays made eight Deputy Inspectors General, four of whom were later important in the establishment of Scottish Rite Freemasonry in South Carolina:
*Isaac Da Costa Sr., D.I.G. for South Carolina;
*Abraham Forst, D.I.G. for Virginia;
*Joseph M. Myers, D.I.G. for Maryland;
*Barend M. Spitzer, D.I.G. for Georgia.

Da Costa returned to Charleston, South Carolina, where he established the &quot;Sublime Grand Lodge of Perfection&quot; in February 1783. After Da Costa&#x27;s death in November 1783, Hays appointed Myers as Da Costa&#x27;s successor. Joined by Forst and Spitzer, Myers created additional high-degree bodies in Charleston.

Physician Hyman Isaac Long from the island of Jamaica, who settled in New York City, went to Charleston in 1796 to appoint eight French men; he had received his authority through Spitzer. These men had arrived as refugees from Saint-Domingue, where the slave revolution was underway that would establish Haiti as an independent republic in 1804. They organized a Consistory of the 25th Degree, or &quot;Princes of the Royal Secret,&quot; which Masonic historian Brigadier ACF Jackson says became the first Supreme Council of the Scottish Rite. According to Fox, by 1801, the Charleston bodies were the only extant bodies of the Rite in North America.

===Birth of the Scottish Rite – 1801===
Although most of the thirty-three degrees of the Scottish Rite existed in parts of previous degree systems, the Scottish Rite did not come into being until the formation of the Mother Supreme Council at Charleston, South Carolina, in May 1801 at Shepheard&#x27;s Tavern at the corner of Broad and Church Streets (the tavern had been the location of the founding of Freemasonry in South Carolina in 1754). The Founding Fathers of the Scottish Rite who attended became known as &quot;The Eleven Gentlemen of Charleston&quot; and included, John Mitchell, first Grand Commander of the Supreme Council, Frederick Dalcho, Alexandre Francois Auguste de Grasse, Jean-Baptiste Marie de La Hogue, Thomas Bartholemew Bowen, Abraham Alexander, Emanuel de la Motta, Isaac Auld, Israel de Lieben, Moses Clava Levy, James Moultrie and Isaac Da Costa.

Da Costa in particular had been commissioned to establish Morin&#x27;s Rite of the Royal Secret in other countries; he formed the constituent bodies of the Rite in South Carolina in 1783, which in 1801, became the Supreme Council of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, Southern Jurisdiction. All regular Scottish Rite bodies today derive their heritage from this body. Subsequently, other Supreme Councils were formed in Saint-Domingue (now Haiti) in 1802, in France in 1804, in Italy in 1805, and in Spain in 1811.

On May 1, 1813, an officer from the Supreme Council at Charleston initiated several New York Masons into the Thirty-third Degree and organized a Supreme Council for the &quot;Northern Masonic District and Jurisdiction&quot;. On May 21, 1814, this Supreme Council reopened and proceeded to &quot;nominate, elect, appoint, install and proclaim in due, legal and ample form&quot; the elected officers &quot;as forming the &quot;second&quot; Grand and Supreme Council...&quot;. Finally, the charter of this organization (written January 7, 1815) added, “We think the &quot;Ratification&quot; ought to be dated 21st day May 5815.&quot;

Officially, the Supreme Council, 33°, N.M.J. dates itself from May 15, 1867. This was the date of the &quot;Union of 1867&quot;, when it merged with the competing Cerneau &quot;Supreme Council&quot; in New York. The current Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, Northern Masonic Jurisdiction of the United States, was thus formed.

===Albert Pike===

Born in Boston, Massachusetts on December 29, 1809, Albert Pike is asserted within the Southern Jurisdiction as the man most responsible for the growth and success of the Scottish Rite from an obscure Masonic Rite in the mid-19th century to the international fraternity that it became. Pike received the 4th through the 32nd Degrees in March 1853 from Albert Mackey, in Charleston, South Carolina, and was appointed Deputy Inspector for Arkansas that same year.

In 1857 Pike completed his first revision of the 4°-32° ritual and printed 100 copies. This revision, which Mackey dubbed the &quot;Magnum Opus&quot;, was never adopted by the Supreme Council. According to Arturo de Hoyos, 33°, the Scottish Rite&#x27;s Grand Historian, the Magnum Opus became the basis for future ritual revisions.

In March 1858, Pike was elected a member of the Supreme Council for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States, and in January 1859 he became its Grand Commander. The American Civil War interrupted his work on the Scottish Rite rituals. Around 1870, he, and the Supreme Council, moved to Washington, DC. In 1884 his revision of the rituals was complete.

Scottish Rite Grand Archivist and Grand Historian de Hoyos created the following chart of Pike&#x27;s ritual revisions:
Pike also wrote lectures about all the degrees, which were published in 1871 under the title &quot;Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry&quot;.

==General organization and degree structure ==
The Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite is a rite comprising 33 degrees. The first three degrees are administered by &quot;blue lodges&quot; or &quot;symbolic lodges.&quot; They are called &quot;Blue degree&quot; and not &quot;Red degrees&quot;. The Scottish rite is by far the most practiced rite worldwide. The next thirty degrees (from the 4th to the 33rd), the high or side degrees - a further development and complement to the first three - are administered by the &quot;Supreme Councils of the 33rd and final degree of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite.&quot; However, the name can slightly vary depending on the jurisdictions.

There is no international governing body aside from Le Droit Humain, which is an international order; all of the other Supreme Councils in each country are sovereign unto themselves in their own jurisdictions. The thirty-three degrees of the Scottish Rite are conferred by several controlling bodies. The first of these is the Craft Blue Lodge, which confers the Entered Apprentice, Fellowcraft, and Master Mason degrees. Craft Blue lodges operate under the authority of national (or in the US, state) Grand Lodges, not the Supreme Council.

It is important to note that there is no higher degree in Freemasonry than the third degree, that of Master Mason. That is why the degrees with a number higher than the third must be considered as “side” degrees, (even when called High degrees), they are seen as degrees of instruction or improvement, and not as “higher” degrees, that is, implying a particular power that a Master Mason could claim to be above the others. The hierarchical structure of Freemasonry can be likened to a three-tiered edifice, with the third tier, the Master Mason, being the highest. Attaining this level grants a Freemason access to the corridors of the third tier, where he can delve deeper into his Masonic education and broaden his understanding of the craft. They represent a lateral movement in Masonic education rather than an upward movement and are degrees of instruction rather than rank.

=== Degree progression in the Scottish Rite ===
Inspired by the Solomonic Tradition and centered on the construction of the Temple of Jerusalem, the Scottish Rite closely combines the criterion of duration, as characteristic of the initiatory process, with the criterion of construction, which commits the adept to the path laid out by the Rite. Building oneself in the AASR system is seen as a long process which is accomplished on the path of truth, justice and wisdom.

This long and lengthy process to obtain the degrees can be found within the foundational documents of the AASR, the Constitution and Regulation of 1762, that is present on the altar of every Lodge in the Southern Jurisdiction. The foundational document proscribes the following minimum time allowed to receive the degrees: &quot;&quot;All these degrees, into which one can only be initiated in a mysterious number of months, to arrive at each degree in due succession, make the number, in all, of 81 months.&quot;
Thus, almost seven years was the minimum allowed time to obtain the 25 degrees, in the foundational document of the AASR.

The process cannot be a solitary, silent quest for self-fulfillment; the collective project must always prevail over individual pretensions in the AASR system.

=== The Motto of the Scottish Rite: Ordo ab Chao ===
This motto is probably found for the first time in the patent of February 1, 1802 issued by the brother, Alexandre, Auguste comte De Grasse, marquis de Tilly.

The motto &quot;ordo ab chao&quot; implies the action of a principle of order, the chaos from which each of us comes symbolizing the suffering and disarray of the human spirit that precedes the path to a spiritual life of peace and brotherhood.

It is explained as denoting the mission as Masons is to bring order out of chaos. It becomes a source of hope for those in darkness, who aspire to the Light.

===The Craft Degrees of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite===
The Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite is a full Masonic Rite and has its own distinctive versions of the Craft or Blue Lodge rituals which includes the Entered Apprentice, Fellow Craft, and Master Mason degrees. It is the most practiced Rite in the world thus most Master Masons are made thought the Scottish Rite system with the exception of the United States of America where most Lodges do not work the first three degrees in the Scottish Rite but rather join after the attainment of the third degree in their own systems.

However, some U.S. Lodges do practice the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite blue degrees, and, in recent years, they have grown in number. There are 11 lodges in New Orleans (Historically all located in the district 16 they recently approved a new one district 20), 16 in New York City as well as Washington DC, Hawaii and California, that work in the Scottish Rite Craft degrees. Nonetheless, they might not be utilizing the Rituals of either the Southern or Northern jurisdictions, as they might have their own distinctive Scottish Rite Rituals.

The Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite blue degrees are more common in Europe, Asia, Africa and Latin-American jurisdictions. All lodges in the International Order of Freemasonry for Men &amp; Women, Le Droit Humain, work &quot;seamlessly from the first to the thirty-third degree and practice only the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite. These two characteristics define it as an Order and not as an Obedience&quot;. Most lodges under the jurisdiction of the Grande Loge de France use these degrees, as do a few of the lodges under the jurisdiction of the Grande Loge Nationale Française. It is also a dominant ritual, out of the other rituals in use, in the Grand Lodge of Spain. There are two Lodges in Australia that practice the AASR Craft degrees, The Zetland Lodge of Australia No. 9 and Lodge France 1021, both of which are under the United Grand Lodge of New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory.

An hypothesis from Masonic historian Alain Bernheim, Belgian Masonic scholar Pierre Noël hypothesized in a 2002 paper that the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite Craft degrees might be derived from a French translation of the Masonic exposé &quot;Three Distinct Knocks&quot;, issued in London in 1760. But this theory is heavily debated among Masonic Scholars.
=== Degree names ===
In 2000, the Southern Jurisdiction in the United States completed a revision of its ritual scripts. The current ritual is based upon Pike&#x27;s, but with some differences. Generally, the current titles of the degrees and their arrangement in the Southern Jurisdiction remains substantially unchanged since the time of Pike.

In 2004, the Northern Jurisdiction in the United States rewrote and reorganized its degrees. Further changes have occurred in 2006. During those two revisions, the names of 21 out of the 33 degrees were changed.

The list of degrees for the Supreme Councils of Australia, England and Wales, and most other jurisdictions largely agrees with that of the Southern Jurisdiction of the U.S. However, the list of degrees for the Northern Jurisdiction of the United States is now somewhat different and is given in the table below. The list of degrees of the Supreme Council of Canada reflects a mixture of the two, with some unique titles as well:

==Exceptions, specificities, and disagreements==
In many jurisdictions, there are also specificities, generally minor but sometimes more significant. These mainly concern which degrees are actually practiced, with other degrees being transmitted through &quot;communication,&quot; following the common 18th-century practice, meaning that the ritual for the degree is not actually performed. Today, in some jurisdictions, it is common to have only the 4th, 9th, 12th, 13th and 14th performed by the Lodge of perfection (Green degrees),17th and 18th performed by the Chapters (Red degrees), 22nd, 26th, 28th and 30th on the Areopagus or (Black degrees) and the 31st, 32nd, 33rd degrees on a Consistory (White degree) level. Although some valleys or jurisdictions confers many more, while some other jurisdictions confer all of the degrees insisting on communicating none.

Moreover, the U.S. and Canadian system progresses much more rapidly than in other countries, allowing one to reach the 32nd degree in a relatively short span, whereas in Europe and South America, such progression requires diligent practice over more than two decades. For this reason, several European and South American jurisdictions do not automatically recognize the high degrees received by their members during their stay in the United States and will sometime bar U.S. 32nd degree members from attending their meetings.

== The Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite by country ==
=== General practices ===
In most parts of the world the Scottish Rite is practiced as a full Rite, starting with the Blue Lodge degrees, under the jurisdiction of a Grand Lodge, then becomes an invitation only body for &quot;upper&quot; degrees divided in groups; the candidate must then wait a period of time after being made a Master Mason of three to five years depending on the jurisdiction (sometimes must be past-master), then may be honored with an invitation to the Green Lodges (4th–14th); if the brother shows diligence and hard work he may then become invited to the Red Lodges (15th–18th) and receive the degree; again after hard work and dedication he may be invited to the Black Lodges (19th–30th) and receive the degrees, then be invited to the White Lodges (31st–33rd). This process takes an average of 25 years to accomplish if the brother is invited to every group and only a very small fraction can make it all the way to 33rd degree. It is worth noting that in the United States of America, the Scottish Rite process is a lot different than the rest of the world and tend to be a lot faster (only a few days or weeks), and the Master Mason can petition to receive the upper degrees, although a new observant movement is developing, and the idea of forming an &quot;observant Valley&quot; that would take more time and be more selective is being explored to curb falling membership numbers.

The Droit Humain does not make a jurisdictional distinction between Blue degrees to upper degrees and holds an international jurisdiction over its Scottish Rite system.

=== Scottish Rite Masonic Calendar ===
The Scottish Rite Masonic calendar celebrates the creation of the world (Anno Mundi), 3760/3761 years before the beginning of the Common Era (C.E.) and is based upon the older, Hebraic (Hebrew) calendar, which begins the civil year in September rather than the Gregorian calendar which begins the new year in January (current date +3760), thus after September of the current year, add 1 year more (date +3760 +1), as by example displayed in &quot;&#x27;The book of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry&quot;&#x27; (revised and enlarged edition, 1899, chapter: Hebrew Calendar, page 612), written by Charles T. Mcclenachan, 33°, Grand Master General of Ceremonies of the Supreme Council, Northern Masonic Jurisdiction, U.S. A.

== Europe ==
=== Austria ===
====Growth and challenge in the 19th century====

In the aftermath of the ratification of Scottish Rite bodies, the Rite experienced steady growth in Austria during the late 1700s and early 1800s. However, anti-Masonic sentiments arose in the mid-19th century, as occurred in other European countries, constraining Masonic activity. The Catholic Church exerted political pressure on Masonic organizations, associating the Scottish Rite with anti-religious conspiracy theories. In 1894, these pressures resulted in the Emperor Franz Joseph officially suspending all Masonic lodges in Austria, forcing the Scottish Rite underground until 1918.

====Resilience and reemergence in the 20th century====

After the fall of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, the Scottish Rite swiftly reestablished itself under the new Republic of German-Austria. Bick (2016) explains how the Scottish Rite provided a philosophical beacon during volatile social circumstances in the interwar period in Vienna and Austria in the early 20th century. Moreover, the Scottish Rite upheld ideals of religious unity, morality, and service as Austria rebuilt.

While antisemitism and nationalism eventually permeated Austria in World War II, the Scottish Rite lodges centered humanism. After the war, the Supreme Council based in Vienna continued operating, despite Communist pressures in Eastern bloc countries. From the post-war period until present day, the Scottish Rite persevered as a bastion of moral enlightenment in Austria even given wider sociocultural trends.

====The Austrian Scottish Rite in the 21st century====

Presently, the Scottish Rite tradition remains intact in Austria with approximately 3,000 Freemasons participating in lodges across the country. The Supreme Council serves as an international representation of the Scottish Rite by upholding universal values articulated across 33 degrees of initiation. Through moral education and philanthropy, Austrian Scottish Rite bodies perpetuate esoteric knowledge to endorse peace, community improvement, and individual actualization.

==== Current situation ====
Austria contends with persistent fragmentation within its Freemasonry landscape, hindering a revival of a tradition that once flourished. In Scandinavia, a distinct Masonic tradition prevails, setting it apart from the broader Scottish Rite family.

===France===
==== History ====
When Comte de Grasse-Tilly returned to France in 1804, he worked to establish the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite there. He founded the first Supreme Council in France that same year.

The Grand Orient of France signed a treaty of union in December 1804 with the Supreme Council of the 33rd Degree in France; the treaty declared that &quot;the Grand Orient united to itself&quot; the Supreme Council in France. This accord was applied until 1814. Thanks to this treaty, the Grand Orient of France took ownership, as it were, of the Scottish Rite.

From 1805 to 1814, the Grand Orient of France administered the first 18 degrees of the Rite, leaving the Supreme Council of France to administer the last 15. In 1815, five of the leaders of the Supreme Council founded the &quot;Suprême Conseil des Rites&quot; within the Grand Orient of France. The original Supreme Council of France fell dormant from 1815 to 1821.

The &quot;Suprême Conseil des Isles d&#x27;Amérique&quot; (founded in 1802 by Grasse-Tilly and revived around 1810 by his father-in-law Delahogue, who had also returned from the United States) breathed new life into the Supreme Council for the 33rd Degree in France. They merged into a single organization: the Supreme Council of France. This developed as an independent and sovereign Masonic power. It created symbolic lodges (those composed of the first three degrees, which otherwise would be federated around a Grand Lodge or a Grand Orient).

The (emerging from the Supreme Council of 1804 and restored in 1821 by the Supreme Council of the &quot;Isles d&#x27;Amérique&quot; founded in 1802 in Saint-Domingue, the modern Haiti)
In 1894, the Supreme Council of France created the Grand Lodge of France. It became fully independent in 1904, when the Supreme Council of France ceased chartering new lodges. The Supreme Council of France still considers itself the overseer of all 33 degrees of the Rite. Relations between the two structures remain close, as shown by their organizing two joint meetings a year.

France has two additional Supreme Councils:
* The &quot;Suprême Conseil Grand Collège du Rite écossais ancien accepté&quot; (emerging from the Supreme Council on 1804 and constituted in 1815), affiliated with the Grand Orient de France.
* The &quot;Suprême Conseil pour la France&quot; (emerging from the Supreme Council of the Netherlands, constituted in 1965), affiliated with the Grande Loge Nationale Française. In 1964, the Sovereign Grand Commander Charles Riandey, along with 400 to 500 members, left the jurisdiction of the Supreme Council of France and joined the Grande Loge Nationale Française. Because of his resignation and withdrawal of hundreds of members, there was no longer a Supreme Council of France. Riandey then reinitiated the 33 degrees of the rite in Amsterdam. With the support of the Supreme Council of the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States, he founded a new Supreme Council in France, called the &quot;Suprême Conseil pour la France&quot;.
The distinction between the symbolic degrees (1st-3rd) and the high/side degrees (4th-33rd) has not always been as clearly defined as it is today, especially in France, where symbolic lodges practice the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite from the first degree onward. Nowadays, some of the rituals for certain high degrees still make reference to &quot;prerogatives&quot; dating back to their origins, predating the establishment of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite.

In 2004, a noteworthy milestone was achieved when the AASR officially commemorated its establishment in France, marked by the founding of the Supreme Council under the leadership of de Grasse-Tilly. This momentous occasion marked the beginning of a developmental trajectory intricately linked with the activities of Masonic obediences in the country, resulting in a richly diverse and multifaceted network.

The year 2015 witnessed a pivotal commemoration, namely the AASR&#x27;s historic alignment with the Grand Orient de France (GODF) in 1815. This event provided historians with a valuable opportunity to engage in a comprehensive and scholarly examination of the AASR&#x27;s evolution in France, tracing its roots back to 1804. International symposiums, notably hosted by the Supreme Council and the Grand College of the REAA-GODF in cities such as Lyon and Paris, featured distinguished speakers who represented both the Southern Jurisdiction and the Supreme Council for France. These symposia were conceived with the overarching objective of transcending partisan debates and fostering a platform for erudite discourse within the Masonic community.

Beyond France, this distinctive pattern is observed in Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, and Switzerland, where the AASR demonstrates relative vitality, albeit in proportionate terms.

==== Practices ====
In France and Belgium, depending on the jurisdictions, the degrees typically practiced and initiated include the 4th, 9th, 12th, 13th, 14th, 15th, 17th, 18th, 22nd, 26th, 28th, 30th, 31st, 32nd, and 33rd degrees. In some Belgian jurisdictions, initiation into the 5th and 29th degrees are also conducted. Differences in the number of degrees practiced exist from one jurisdiction and country to another. Generally, French jurisdictions practice fewer Areopagus degrees than Belgian jurisdictions and prioritize capitular degrees.

In present-day the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite has been growing rapidly in France, which prompted some changes to make it more difficult to be invited, in 2023, the G.N.L.F. changed the requirement from three years as a Master Mason to being a Past-Master to be invited into the Scottish Rite&#x27;s upper degrees (4th onwards).

===Ireland===
The Ancient and Accepted Rite for Ireland was established in Ireland in 1824 by the Southern Jurisdiction of the USA, following dramatic American expansion. Its Supreme Council operates from the Freemasons&#x27; Hall in Dublin, which also serves as the headquarters for the Grand Lodge of Ireland. In Ireland, membership of the Ancient and Accepted Rite is strictly by invitation only. Canvassing for, or requesting, membership results in automatic disqualification.

A number of prominent Irish freemasons have served as Sovereign and Commander of the Supreme Council of the Ancient and Accepted Rite for Ireland, including Sir Charles Cameron and Gerald FitzGibbon.

=== Italy ===
==== Current situation ====
Italy, boasting a lineage of Scottish Jurisdiction dating back to 1805, sustains the dynamism of the AASR, preserving its enduring legacy and growing at a rapid pace.

===Romania===
The Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite was established in Romania in 1881, a year after the National Grand Lodge of Romania was founded. On 27 December 1922, the Supreme Council of Scottish Rite of Romania, received the recognition of the Supreme Council of France in 1922, and recognition from the Supreme Council, Southern Jurisdiction of the United States in 1925.

Between 1948 and 1989 all of Romanian Freemasonry, including the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Romania, was banned by the Communist regime.

The Supreme Council of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Romania was reconsecrated in 1993.

===United Kingdom===

In England and Wales, whose Supreme Council was warranted by that of the Northern Masonic Jurisdiction of the USA (in 1845), the Rite is known colloquially as the &quot;Rose Croix&quot; although this is just one of the degrees. More formally, it is known as &quot;The Ancient and Accepted Rite for England and Wales and its Districts and Chapters Overseas&quot;. In England, the adjective &quot;Scottish&quot; is generally left out, although in continental European jurisdictions, they retain the &quot;Écossais&quot;.

There are 25,000 members of the Supreme Council out of the 160,000 members of the United Grand Lodge of England. England and Wales are divided into Districts, which administer the Rose Croix Chapters within their District. There are also some eighteen Districts overseas, as well as some &#x27;unattached&#x27; Chapters in a further nine countries. All candidates for membership must have been Master masons for at least six months.

Many degrees are conferred in name only, and degrees beyond the 18° are conferred only by the Supreme Council itself. In England and Wales, the candidate is perfected in the 18th degree with the preceding degrees awarded in name only. Continuing to the 30th degree is restricted to those who have served in the chair of the Chapter. Degrees beyond the 30th are conferred only upon a very small number of individuals.

In Scotland, the 18th and 30th degree are practised. A minimum of a two-year interval is required before continuing to the 30th degree, again with the intervening degrees awarded by name only. Elevation beyond that is by invitation only, and numbers are severely restricted.

The Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite is also practiced from the 1st to the 33rd degree by the British Federation of Le Droit Humain, and from the 1st to the 3rd degree by the all-male lodge The White Swan, No. 1348, of the Grande Loge de France in London, as well as by the mixed lodge Marco Polo of the Gran Loggia d&#x27;Italia.

== North America ==
===Canada===
In Canada, whose Supreme Council was warranted in 1874 by that of England and Wales, the Rite is known as Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite. The council is called &quot;Supreme Council 33° Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry of Canada&quot;. Canada&#x27;s Supreme Council office is located at 4 Queen Street South in Hamilton, Ontario. There are 45 local units or &quot;Valleys&quot; across Canada.

===United States===
In the United States of America there are three Supreme Councils: one in Washington, D.C. (which controls the Southern Jurisdiction), one in Lexington, Massachusetts (which controls the Northern Masonic Jurisdiction) as well as the Supreme Council of Louisiana. They each have particular characteristics that make them different. In the United States, members of the Scottish Rite can be elected to receive the 33° by the Supreme Council and is conferred on members who have made major contributions to society or to Masonry in general.

====Southern Jurisdiction====
Based in Washington, D.C., the Southern Jurisdiction (often referred to as the &quot;Mother Supreme Council of the World&quot;) was founded in Charleston, South Carolina, in 1801. It oversees the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite in 35 states, which are referred to as &quot;Orients&quot;, which are divided into regions called &quot;Valleys&quot;, each containing individual bodies.

In the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States, the Supreme Council consists of no more than 33 members, called Active members, and is presided over by a Sovereign Grand Commander, and since 2019, Illustrious Brother James D. Cole, 33°. Other members of the Supreme Council are called &quot;Sovereign Grand Inspectors General&quot; (S.G.I.G.), and each is the head of the AASR bodies in his respective Orient (or state). Other heads of the various Orients who are not members of the Supreme Council are called &quot;Deputies of the Supreme Council&quot;. The Supreme Council of the Southern Jurisdiction meets every odd year during the month of August at the House of the Temple, Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry Southern Jurisdiction Headquarters, in Washington, D.C. During this conference, the Valley of Washington D.C. confers the 33° for those elected to receive it or others of the degree who desire to watch it. There are closed meetings between the Grand Commander and the S.G.I.G.s, and many members of the fraternity from all over the world attend the open ceremony on the 5th of 6 council meeting days.

==Scottish Rite Honors==
In the Southern Jurisdiction, a member who has been a 32° Scottish Rite Mason for 46 months or more is eligible to be elected to be invested with the &quot;rank and decoration&quot; of Knight Commander of the Court of Honour (K.C.C.H.) This Honor was established by Albert Pike in 1878 for recognition of outstanding service. These members are easily recognized by their red caps with a passion cross embroidered on them. This ceremony is open to the public in some Orients but privately done in other Orients. This investiture is only done at the Orient level.

Originally the 33rd degree was only conferred on those who would be active members of the Supreme Council. Now, after 46 months of serving as a K.C.C.H. a man is then eligible to be elected to the receive the 33rd degree, upon approval of the Supreme Council and Sovereign Grand Commander. These members are called Inspectors General Honorary (IGH). The member may elect to go to the Biennial Meeting of Scottish Rite in Washington D.C. for conferral of the degree or he may choose to receive it in his Orient at a specific Scottish Rite Valley where it is regularly conferred. These members are recognized by their white caps with Patriarchal/Cross Lorraine embroidery. 

The highest award achievable in the Scottish Rite of Freemasonry is the Grand Cross of the Court of Honor. This honor is invested with members who have demonstrated exemplary service to Freemasonry in general or humanity at large. This honor was established by Albert Pike at the same time as the Knight Commander of the Court of Honor.

These members are recognizable with their white hats with blue band and a Teutonic Cross embroidery. 

=== Northern Jurisdiction ===

The Lexington, Massachusetts-based Northern Masonic Jurisdiction, formed in 1813, and inactive from 1832 to 1845, oversees the bodies in fifteen states: Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Indiana, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Jersey, New Hampshire, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Wisconsin and Vermont. The Northern Jurisdiction is only divided into &quot;Valleys&quot;, not Orients. Each Valley has up to four Scottish Rite bodies, and each body confers a set of degrees.

In the Northern Jurisdiction, the Supreme Council consists of no more than 66 members, led by the Sovereign Grand Commander, currently Ill. Walter F. Wheeler, 33°, who was elected to the position in 2023. Those who are elected to membership on the Supreme Council are then designated &quot;Active.&quot; In the Northern Jurisdiction all recipients of the 33rd Degree are honorary members of the Supreme Council, and all members are referred to as a &quot;Sovereign Grand Inspectors General.&quot; The head of the Rite in each State of the Northern Jurisdiction is called a &quot;Deputy of the Supreme Council.&quot; Thus, the highest-ranking Scottish Rite officer in Ohio, is titled, &quot;Deputy for Ohio&quot;, and so forth for each state. Additionally, each Deputy has one or more &quot;Actives&quot; to assist him in the administration of the state. Active members of the Supreme Council who have served faithfully for ten years, or reach the age of 75, may be designated &quot;Active, Emeritus&quot;. The Northern Jurisdiction Supreme Council meets yearly, in the even years by an executive session, and in the odd years, with the full membership invited. The 33rd Degree is conferred on the odd years at the Annual Meeting.

In the Northern Jurisdiction, there is a 46-month requirement for eligibility to receive the 33rd degree, and while there is a Meritorious Service Award (as well as a Distinguished Service Award), they are not required intermediate steps towards the 33°.
=== Supreme Council of Louisiana ===
The Supreme Council of Louisiana was founded in New Orleans in 1839 in the aftermath of the Morgan Affair. During this time, the Northern Jurisdiction consisted of John James Joseph Gourgas and Giles Fonda Yates who were &quot;effectively a Supreme Council of two people.&quot; Likewise, the Grand Commander of the Southern Jurisdiction, Moses Holbrook longed to &quot;relinquish his responsibilities as Sovereign Grand Commander&quot; moving to the rural frontier of Florida to serve as a doctor.

It was during this period that the Supreme Council of Louisiana emerged, which claimed its authority via &quot;Cerneauism&quot; – a type of Scottish Rite Masonry without ties to the either the Northern or Southern Jurisdictions. After the Civil War, the Grand Orient of France recognized the Supreme Council of Louisiana.New Orleans educator and Civil Rights activist George Longe was the head of this council for nearly five decades, from 1938 to 1985. Under his watch the Supreme Council of Louisiana tripled in size and expanded to other states. His papers are held at the Amistad Research Center of Tulane University. As of 2023, the Most Powerful Sovereign Grand Commander of the Supreme Council of Louisiana is Ill. Bro. Eddie L. Gabriel Sr. 33°.

=== Criticism of the American System ===
Traditionally, in most international jurisdictions, the Scottish Rite degrees are conferred gradually over many years, with candidates being individually invited to progress based on their demonstrated understanding and mastery of each degree&#x27;s teachings.
The original constitutions of the Scottish Rite, which formed the basis for both the Northern and Southern Jurisdictions in the United States, prescribed a minimum interval between degrees and required approximately 81 months (seven years) to complete the original 25 degrees. However, many U.S. jurisdictions now confer degrees from the 4th to the 32nd in concentrated one or two-day sessions. Some international jurisdictions reportedly decline to recognize American Scottish Rite Masons in their upper bodies, citing concerns about adequate mastery of the degree material.

In response to these criticisms and as an attempt to save the U.S. Scottish Rite from disappearing, some American Scottish Rite Masons have advocated for a return to more traditional, observant practices aligned with international standards.

==See also==
* Esotericism
* Grand College of Rites – A U.S. appendant body dedicated to preserving disused Masonic rituals and the rites of defunct Masonic societies.
* High Masonic degrees
* List of Masonic Rites
* Masonic bodies – An explanation of groups attached to &quot;Blue Lodge&quot; Freemasonry
* Rite of Memphis-Misraim – A European Masonic order dating from the 19th century, including degrees based on the three Blue Lodge and thirty-three Scottish Rite degrees, as well as additional esoteric degrees.
* Rite of Baldwyn – A rite of seven degrees, practised only in Bristol, UK.
* Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia - An esoteric masonic society (known as the SRICF in the US).
* York Rite – Another masonic rite or concordant body.

==References==
==External links==

*Supreme Council 33°, Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, Southern Jurisdiction, US
*Supreme Council 33°, Ancient Accepted Scottish Rite, Northern Masonic Jurisdiction
*Supreme Council 33° for England and Wales
*The Supreme Council for Scotland of the A&amp;ASR
*Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry of Canada
*Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Romania
*Supreme Council of the Ancient &amp; Accepted Scottish Rite for Australia
*Scottish Rite Founding Fathers
*Supreme Council of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite for Russia
*Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry historical marker
*Learning Centres for Children in Canada</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1764682" start="4" end="53" title="Scottish Rite" label="Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131154844" start="59" end="63" title="List of Masonic rites" label="rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="94" end="105" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131154844" start="139" end="143" title="List of Masonic rites" label="Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q731738" start="197" end="209" title="Droit Humain" label="Droit Humain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297317" start="219" end="234" title="Masonic bodies" label="concordant body"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764682" start="404" end="418" title="Scottish Rite" label="Scottish Rite."/>
<link wikidata="Q1764682" start="476" end="486" title="Scottish Rite" label="Rose Croix"/>
<link wikidata="Q194267" start="581" end="592" title="Rosicrucian" label="Rosicrucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473888" start="615" end="646" title="Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia" label="Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q592857" start="1994" end="2008" title="Copiale cipher" label="Copiale cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838795" start="2161" end="2177" title="Jean-Marie Ragon" label="Jean-Marie Ragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="2335" end="2344" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="2485" end="2493" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q216835" start="2589" end="2604" title="Cap-Haïtien" label="Le Cap Français"/>
<link wikidata="Q861551" start="2649" end="2663" title="Saint-Domingue" label="Saint-Domingue"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="2669" end="2674" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="2882" end="2887" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="3378" end="3389" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="3675" end="3682" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q34692" start="3687" end="3704" title="Kingston, Jamaica" label="Kingston, Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="6280" end="6291" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q156211" start="6400" end="6422" title="Treaty of Paris (1763)" label="Treaty of Paris (1763)"/>
<link wikidata="Q861551" start="6674" end="6688" title="Saint-Domingue" label="Saint-Domingue"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="6846" end="6852" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249869" start="7573" end="7591" title="Moses Michael Hays" label="Moses Michael Hays"/>
<link wikidata="Q5956372" start="8318" end="8334" title="Hyman Isaac Long" label="Hyman Isaac Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="8354" end="8361" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q861551" start="8535" end="8549" title="Saint-Domingue" label="Saint-Domingue"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="8612" end="8617" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="9203" end="9213" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="9215" end="9229" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q526030" start="9616" end="9652" title="Alexandre Francois Auguste de Grasse" label="Alexandre Francois Auguste de Grasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="10282" end="10287" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q366639" start="11391" end="11402" title="Albert Pike" label="Albert Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603993" start="11691" end="11704" title="Albert Mackey" label="Albert Mackey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="12306" end="12324" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076228" start="12713" end="12786" title="Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry" label="Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378781" start="13983" end="13994" title="Grand Lodge" label="Grand Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077486" start="14124" end="14136" title="Master Mason ritual" label="Master Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436090" start="16405" end="16417" title="ordo ab chao" label="ordo ab chao"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="17208" end="17232" title="United States" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="17551" end="17562" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="17661" end="17674" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504956" start="17837" end="17845" title="Supreme Council, Scottish Rite (Southern Jurisdiction, USA)" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456657" start="17849" end="17857" title="Supreme Council, Scottish Rite, Northern Jurisdiction, USA" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q731738" start="18138" end="18153" title="Le Droit Humain" label="Le Droit Humain"/>
<link wikidata="Q959344" start="18398" end="18419" title="Grande Loge de France" label="Grande Loge de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542968" start="18495" end="18526" title="Grande Loge Nationale Française" label="Grande Loge Nationale Française"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080485" start="18598" end="18618" title="Grand Lodge of Spain" label="Grand Lodge of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887828" start="18780" end="18854" title="United Grand Lodge of New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory" label="United Grand Lodge of New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829562" start="18894" end="18908" title="Alain Bernheim" label="Alain Bernheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="21992" end="22004" title="Master Mason" label="Master Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090786" start="22077" end="22088" title="Past Master (Masonic)" label="past-master"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="22648" end="22672" title="United States of America" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q731738" start="23078" end="23090" title="Le Droit Humain" label="Droit Humain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275310" start="24262" end="24274" title="Anti-Masonry" label="anti-Masonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q228197" start="24338" end="24356" title="List of sovereign states and dependent territories in Europe" label="European countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="24393" end="24408" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="25186" end="25198" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="25203" end="25214" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="25385" end="25394" title="Communism" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="25705" end="25712" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q82821" start="26259" end="26268" title="tradition" label="tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="26294" end="26305" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542667" start="26626" end="26648" title="Grand Orient of France" label="Grand Orient of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542667" start="27008" end="27030" title="Grand Orient of France" label="Grand Orient of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q861551" start="28051" end="28065" title="Saint-Domingue" label="Saint-Domingue"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="28078" end="28083" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q959344" start="28136" end="28157" title="Grand Lodge of France" label="Grand Lodge of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542667" start="28679" end="28701" title="Grand Orient de France" label="Grand Orient de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542968" start="28849" end="28880" title="Grande Loge Nationale Française" label="Grande Loge Nationale Française"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542968" start="29039" end="29070" title="Grande Loge Nationale Française" label="Grande Loge Nationale Française"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="30022" end="30028" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504956" start="32250" end="32282" title="Supreme Council, Scottish Rite (Southern Jurisdiction, USA)" label="Southern Jurisdiction of the USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355596" start="32440" end="32462" title="Grand Lodge of Ireland" label="Grand Lodge of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076065" start="32791" end="32810" title="Charles Cameron (physician)" label="Sir Charles Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q17626674" start="32815" end="32832" title="Gerald FitzGibbon (judge, born 1837)" label="Gerald FitzGibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="35075" end="35083" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q731738" start="35466" end="35481" title="Le Droit Humain" label="Le Droit Humain"/>
<link wikidata="Q959344" start="35573" end="35594" title="Grande Loge de France" label="Grande Loge de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774329" start="35654" end="35679" title="Gran Loggia d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Gran Loggia d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="36223" end="36239" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q929667" start="36291" end="36315" title="Lexington, Massachusetts" label="Lexington, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q121775470" start="36382" end="36410" title="Supreme Council of Louisiana" label="Supreme Council of Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504956" start="36749" end="36770" title="Supreme Council, Scottish Rite (Southern Jurisdiction, USA)" label="Southern Jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q21015903" start="39365" end="39371" title="Albert Pike Memorial Temple" label="Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q929667" start="39976" end="39985" title="Lexington, Massachusetts" label="Lexington"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="39987" end="40000" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456657" start="40007" end="40036" title="Supreme Council, Scottish Rite, Northern Jurisdiction, USA" label="Northern Masonic Jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="40125" end="40136" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="40138" end="40146" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="40148" end="40156" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="40158" end="40165" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="40167" end="40172" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="40174" end="40187" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="40189" end="40197" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="40199" end="40209" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="40211" end="40224" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="40226" end="40234" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="40236" end="40240" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="40242" end="40254" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="40256" end="40268" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="40270" end="40279" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="40284" end="40291" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456657" start="40498" end="40513" title="Supreme Council, Scottish Rite, Northern Jurisdiction, USA" label="Supreme Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q121775470" start="41991" end="42019" title="Supreme Council of Louisiana" label="Supreme Council of Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106776" start="42079" end="42092" title="William Morgan (anti-Mason)" label="Morgan Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="42725" end="42734" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542667" start="42740" end="42762" title="Grand Orient de France" label="Grand Orient of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="42832" end="42844" title="Civil rights movement" label="Civil Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q28855234" start="43062" end="43085" title="Amistad Research Center" label="Amistad Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193547" start="43089" end="43106" title="Tulane University" label="Tulane University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="44377" end="44388" title="Western esotericism" label="Esotericism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594452" start="44391" end="44413" title="Grand College of Rites" label="Grand College of Rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q123112199" start="44532" end="44552" title="High Masonic degrees" label="High Masonic degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q131154844" start="44555" end="44576" title="List of Masonic Rites" label="List of Masonic Rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297317" start="44579" end="44593" title="Masonic bodies" label="Masonic bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559000" start="44670" end="44693" title="Rite of Memphis-Misraim" label="Rite of Memphis-Misraim"/>
<link wikidata="Q21017108" start="44881" end="44896" title="Rite of Baldwyn" label="Rite of Baldwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="44942" end="44949" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473888" start="44957" end="44988" title="Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia" label="Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131302282" start="45033" end="45038" title="Societas Rosicruciana in Civitatibus Foederatis" label="SRICF"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="45046" end="45048" title="US" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621834" start="45053" end="45062" title="York Rite" label="York Rite"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28279" wikidata="Q247655" url="?curid=28279" title="Sandman (disambiguation)">
<text>The [[Sandman]] is a figure in folklore who brings good sleep and dreams.

Sandman may also refer to:
==People==
*Sandman (surname)
*Sandmann, German-language surname
*Mariano Rivera (born 1969), Panamanian-American baseball player nicknamed &quot;Sandman&quot;
*Adam Sandler (born 1966), American comedian and actor nicknamed &quot;The Sandman&quot; by fans
*Howard Sims (1917–2003), African-American tap dancer nicknamed &quot;Sandman&quot;
*Steve Abbott (comedian) or The Sandman, Australian comedian
*The Sandman (wrestler), a ring name of retired professional wrestler Jim Fullington (born 1963)
*Homeboy Sandman, American rapper

==Arts, entertainment and media==

===Audio dramas===
*&quot;The Sandman&quot; (Doctor Who audio drama), a 2002 &quot;Doctor Who&quot; monthly adventure
*&quot;The Sandman&quot; (podcast), a 2020 adaptation of Neil Gaiman&#x27;s comic books

===Fictional characters===
*Sandman (DC Comics), the name of many superhero characters published by DC Comics
**Sandman (Wesley Dodds), a comic book superhero first appearing in the 1930s
**Sandman (Sandy Hawkins), former sidekick of Wesley Dodds
**Dream (Sandman), a godlike entity and personification of dreaming
*Sandman (&quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;), a creature in the &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; series
*Sandman (Marvel Comics), a comic book super villain who can transform his body into sand
*Mr. Sandman (Punch-Out!!), a character in the video game &quot;Punch-Out!!&quot;
*Christian &quot;The Sandman&quot; Naylor, a villain in &quot;Death Warrant&quot;
*Klein Sandman, the leader of the protagonists from &quot;Gravion&quot;
*Sandman, a character on Bubba the Love Sponge&#x27;s radio show
*Sandman, a character in &quot;Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 3&quot;
*Sandman, a profession in &quot;Logan&#x27;s Run&quot;
*Sandman, a character in &quot;Rise of the Guardians&quot;
*Sandman, a character in &quot;The Real Ghostbusters&quot; episode &quot;Sandman, Dream Me A Dream&quot;
*Sandman, a character in &quot;The Santa Clause 2&quot;
*Sandmen, parasites in &quot;Dark•Matter&quot; for the roleplaying game &quot;Alternity&quot;
*The Sandman, a drug dealer in &quot;&quot;
*The Sandman, a lead character in &quot;Sleepstalker&quot;
*The title character of &quot;Nilus the Sandman&quot;, a 1990s Canadian animated series
*Sandmen, the carnivorous, rheum-infected zombies in the &quot;Doctor Who&quot; episode &quot;Sleep No More&quot;

===Film===
* &quot;Sandmann – Historien om en sosialistisk supermann&quot; (2005), a Norwegian documentary film by Jannicke Systad Jacobsen
* &quot;The Sandman&quot; (1932 film) a French drama film directed by André Hugon
* &quot;The Sandman&quot; (1991 film), a short horror stop-motion animation film
* &quot;The Sandman&quot; (1995 film), an American horror thriller film
* &quot;The Sandman&quot; (2000 film), a short film by the Brothers Quay
*&quot;S&amp;Man&quot; (2006) or &quot;Sandman&quot;, an American pseudo-documentary film on horror films
* &quot;The Sandman&quot; (2007 film), a Spanish romantic drama film
* &quot;The Sandman&quot; (2011 film), a Swiss romantic comedy
* &quot;The Sandman&quot; (2017 film), an American horror film

===Television===
====Episodes====
* &quot;Sabrina, the Sandman&quot;, &quot;Sabrina the Teenage Witch&quot; (1996) season 3, episode 23 (1999) 
* &quot;Sandman&quot;, &quot;Pacific Blue&quot; season 3, episode 6 (1997)
* &quot;Sandman&quot;, &quot;Spider-Man&quot; (2017) season 1, episode 6 (2017)
* &quot;Sandman&quot;, &quot;Urban Gothic&quot; series 2, episode 1 (2001)
* &quot;The Sandman&quot;, &quot;C-16: FBI&quot; episode 4 (1997)
* &quot;The Sandman&quot;, &quot;Conrad Nagel Theater&quot; episode 14 (1955)
* &quot;The Sandman&quot;, &quot;Criminal Minds&quot; season 11, episode 17 (2016)
* &quot;The Sandman&quot;, &quot;Mr. Mom&quot; episode 4 (2019)
* &quot;The Sandman&quot;, &quot;Mona the Vampire&quot; season 4, episode 11a (2004)
* &quot;The Sandman&quot;, &quot;Naked City&quot; season 1, episode 32 (1959)
* &quot;The Sandman&quot;, &quot;Prisoners of Gravity&quot; season 5, episode 3 (1993)
* &quot;The Sandman&quot;, &quot;Space Ghost&quot; episode 3b (1966)
* &quot;The Sandman&quot;, &quot;T.H.E. Cat&quot; episode 2 (1966)
====Shows====
* &quot;The Sandman&quot; (TV series), an American television series

===Literature===
*&quot;The Sandman&quot; (book), a 2008 children&#x27;s book by Ralph Fletcher
*&quot;The Sandman&quot; (novel), a 1984 novel by Miles Gibson
*&quot;The Sandman&quot; (comic book), a DC Vertigo comic book series by Neil Gaiman (1989 onwards)
*&quot;The Sandman&quot; (short story), an 1817 story by E.T.A. Hoffmann

===Music===
*The Sandmen, a Danish rock band best known from the film Nattevagten
*&quot;Sandman&quot; (album), a 1976 album by Harry Nilsson
*&quot;Sandman&quot; (magazine), a British music magazine

====Songs====
*&quot;Sandman&quot; or &quot;Enter Sandman&quot;, by Metallica
*&quot;Mr. Sandman&quot;, written by Pat Ballard, also recorded as &quot;Sandman&quot;
*&quot;Sandman&quot;, by America from the debut album &quot;America&quot;
*&quot;Sandman&quot;, by Beatallica from the 2007 album &quot;Sgt. Hetfield&#x27;s Motorbreath Pub Band&quot;
*&quot;Sandman&quot;, by English band Hurts from the album &quot;Exile&quot;
*&quot;The Sandman&quot;, by Heavenly from the 2001 album &quot;Sign of the Winner&quot;
*&quot;Sandman&quot;, performed by Kirsty McGee
*&quot;Sandman&quot;, by Yung Lean from the album &quot;Unknown Memory&quot;
*&quot;Sandman&quot;, by Ed Sheeran from the album &quot;=&quot;
*&quot;Sandman&quot;, by ASAP Rocky from the album &quot;Live. Love. ASAP&quot;
*&quot;Sandmann&quot;, by Oomph! from the album &quot;Monster&quot;

===Games===
* &quot;&quot;, a 1985 table-top role-playing game

==Other uses==
*Sandman Hotels, a group of Canadian hotels and restaurant companies
*Sandman Centre, a multi-purpose arena in Kamloops, British Columbia, Canada
*Holden Sandman, a sports package for the 1970s Holden Kingswood and 2015 Holden Commodore

==See also==
*Mr. Sandman (disambiguation)
*&quot;Sandmännchen&quot;, two different German children&#x27;s bedtime television programs starting in 1958</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q247655" start="4" end="15" title="Sandman (disambiguation)" label="[[Sandman]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q247655" start="75" end="82" title="Sandman (disambiguation)" label="Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q28737220" start="114" end="131" title="Sandman (surname)" label="Sandman (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q37067299" start="133" end="141" title="Sandmann" label="Sandmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q382303" start="168" end="182" title="Mariano Rivera" label="Mariano Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q132952" start="263" end="275" title="Adam Sandler" label="Adam Sandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141591" start="360" end="371" title="Howard Sims" label="Howard Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611749" start="444" end="467" title="Steve Abbott (comedian)" label="Steve Abbott (comedian)"/>
<link wikidata="Q532927" start="505" end="527" title="The Sandman (wrestler)" label="The Sandman (wrestler)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139635" start="602" end="617" title="Homeboy Sandman" label="Homeboy Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q23043159" start="691" end="739" title="The Sandman (Doctor Who audio drama)" label="&amp;quot;The Sandman&amp;quot; (Doctor Who audio drama)"/>
<link wikidata="Q128987945" start="790" end="823" title="The Sandman (podcast)" label="&amp;quot;The Sandman&amp;quot; (podcast)"/>
<link wikidata="Q72512" start="906" end="925" title="Sandman (DC Comics)" label="Sandman (DC Comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q338182" start="990" end="1012" title="Sandman (Wesley Dodds)" label="Sandman (Wesley Dodds)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773836" start="1068" end="1091" title="Sandman (Sandy Hawkins)" label="Sandman (Sandy Hawkins)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528136" start="1127" end="1142" title="Dream (Sandman)" label="Dream (Sandman)"/>
<link wikidata="Q113443316" start="1194" end="1238" title="Sandman (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)" label="Sandman (&amp;quot;Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049890" start="1301" end="1324" title="Sandman (Marvel Comics)" label="Sandman (Marvel Comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595223" start="1391" end="1416" title="Mr. Sandman (Punch-Out!!)" label="Mr. Sandman (Punch-Out!!)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027678" start="1534" end="1547" title="Death Warrant" label="Death Warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641567" start="1612" end="1619" title="Gravion" label="Gravion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982181" start="1651" end="1672" title="Bubba the Love Sponge" label="Bubba the Love Sponge"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1692" end="1699" title="List of characters in Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 3" label="Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131423" start="1791" end="1807" title="Logan&amp;#x27;s Run" label="Logan&amp;#x27;s Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q136625" start="1845" end="1866" title="Rise of the Guardians" label="Rise of the Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q733938" start="1904" end="1925" title="The Real Ghostbusters" label="The Real Ghostbusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469426" start="2009" end="2027" title="The Santa Clause 2" label="The Santa Clause 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223813" start="2063" end="2074" title="Dark•Matter" label="Dark•Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4359887" start="2212" end="2224" title="Sleepstalker" label="Sleepstalker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7037485" start="2261" end="2278" title="Nilus the Sandman" label="Nilus the Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q21139706" start="2413" end="2426" title="Sleep No More (Doctor Who)" label="Sleep No More"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416422" start="2453" end="2502" title="Sandmann – Historien om en sosialistisk supermann" label="Sandmann – Historien om en sosialistisk supermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224271" start="2576" end="2611" title="The Sandman (1932 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Sandman&amp;quot; (1932 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333337" start="2658" end="2693" title="The Sandman (1991 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Sandman&amp;quot; (1991 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q131578132" start="2739" end="2774" title="The Sandman (1995 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Sandman&amp;quot; (1995 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762228" start="2811" end="2846" title="The Sandman (2000 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Sandman&amp;quot; (2000 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386987" start="2889" end="2898" title="S&amp;amp;Man" label="S&amp;amp;Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q117599112" start="2990" end="3025" title="The Sandman (2007 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Sandman&amp;quot; (2007 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q693722" start="3059" end="3094" title="The Sandman (2011 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Sandman&amp;quot; (2011 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65161453" start="3122" end="3157" title="The Sandman (2017 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Sandman&amp;quot; (2017 film)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3254" end="3319" title="List of Sabrina the Teenage Witch episodes#ep73" label="&amp;quot;Sabrina the Teenage Witch&amp;quot; (1996) season 3, episode 23"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3351" end="3395" title="List of Pacific Blue episodes#ep41" label="&amp;quot;Pacific Blue&amp;quot; season 3, episode 6"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3426" end="3475" title="List of Spider-Man (2017 TV series) episodes#ep7" label="&amp;quot;Spider-Man&amp;quot; (2017) season 1, episode 6"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3506" end="3550" title="Urban Gothic (TV series)#ep14" label="&amp;quot;Urban Gothic&amp;quot; series 2, episode 1"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3585" end="3616" title="C-16: FBI#ep4" label="&amp;quot;C-16: FBI&amp;quot; episode 4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3651" end="3694" title="Conrad Nagel Theater#ep14" label="&amp;quot;Conrad Nagel Theater&amp;quot; episode 14"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3729" end="3777" title="Criminal Minds season 11#ep250" label="&amp;quot;Criminal Minds&amp;quot; season 11, episode 17"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3812" end="3841" title="Mr. Mom (TV series)#ep4" label="&amp;quot;Mr. Mom&amp;quot; episode 4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3876" end="3926" title="List of Mona the Vampire episodes#ep63" label="&amp;quot;Mona the Vampire&amp;quot; season 4, episode 11a"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3961" end="4004" title="Naked City (TV series)#ep32" label="&amp;quot;Naked City&amp;quot; season 1, episode 32"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4039" end="4091" title="List of Prisoners of Gravity episodes#ep522803" label="&amp;quot;Prisoners of Gravity&amp;quot; season 5, episode 3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4126" end="4160" title="Space Ghost (TV series)#ep3" label="&amp;quot;Space Ghost&amp;quot; episode 3b"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4195" end="4227" title="T.H.E. Cat#ep2" label="&amp;quot;T.H.E. Cat&amp;quot; episode 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q92590789" start="4251" end="4286" title="The Sandman (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Sandman&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762231" start="4337" end="4367" title="The Sandman (book)" label="&amp;quot;The Sandman&amp;quot; (book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762232" start="4416" end="4447" title="The Sandman (novel)" label="&amp;quot;The Sandman&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q827099" start="4479" end="4515" title="The Sandman (comic book)" label="&amp;quot;The Sandman&amp;quot; (comic book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q798227" start="4579" end="4616" title="The Sandman (short story)" label="&amp;quot;The Sandman&amp;quot; (short story)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12339106" start="4665" end="4676" title="The Sandmen" label="The Sandmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416417" start="4735" end="4762" title="Sandman (album)" label="&amp;quot;Sandman&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416418" start="4795" end="4825" title="Sandman (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Sandman&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q66057605" start="4897" end="4910" title="Enter Sandman" label="Enter Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q931296" start="4938" end="4949" title="Mr. Sandman" label="Mr. Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q463081" start="5078" end="5085" title="America (America album)" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7459773" start="5154" end="5195" title="Sgt. Hetfield&amp;#x27;s Motorbreath Pub Band" label="Sgt. Hetfield&amp;#x27;s Motorbreath Pub Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790215" start="5267" end="5272" title="Exile (Hurts album)" label="Exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483574" start="5343" end="5361" title="Sign of the Winner" label="Sign of the Winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416174" start="5403" end="5415" title="Kirsty McGee" label="Kirsty McGee"/>
<link wikidata="Q18713482" start="5472" end="5486" title="Unknown Memory" label="Unknown Memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q108152382" start="5550" end="5551" title="= (album)" label="="/>
<link wikidata="Q3283183" start="5615" end="5631" title="Live. Love. ASAP" label="Live. Love. ASAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q572174" start="5664" end="5670" title="Oomph!" label="Oomph!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416419" start="5787" end="5801" title="Sandman Hotels" label="Sandman Hotels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046708" start="5856" end="5870" title="Sandman Centre" label="Sandman Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450851" start="5980" end="5996" title="Holden Kingswood" label="Holden Kingswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q317181" start="6006" end="6022" title="Holden Commodore (VF)" label="Holden Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327177" start="6038" end="6066" title="Mr. Sandman (disambiguation)" label="Mr. Sandman (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q615195" start="6074" end="6086" title="Sandmännchen" label="Sandmännchen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28284" wikidata="Q5320" url="?curid=28284" title="Switch">
<text>In electrical engineering, a switch is an electrical component that can disconnect or connect the conducting path in an electrical circuit, interrupting the electric current or diverting it from one conductor to another. The most common type of switch is an electromechanical device consisting of one or more sets of movable electrical contacts connected to external circuits. When a pair of contacts is touching current can pass between them, while when the contacts are separated no current can flow.

Switches are made in many different configurations; they may have multiple sets of contacts controlled by the same knob or actuator, and the contacts may operate simultaneously, sequentially, or alternately. A switch may be operated manually, for example, a light switch or a keyboard button, or may function as a sensing element to sense the position of a machine part, liquid level, pressure, or temperature, such as a thermostat. Many specialized forms exist, such as the toggle switch, rotary switch, mercury switch, push-button switch, reversing switch, relay, and circuit breaker. A common use is control of lighting, where multiple switches may be wired into one circuit to allow convenient control of light fixtures. Switches in high-powered circuits must have special construction to prevent destructive arcing when they are opened.

==Description==
The most familiar form of switch is a manually operated electromechanical device with one or more sets of electrical contacts, which are connected to external circuits. Each set of contacts can be in one of two states: either &quot;closed&quot; meaning the contacts are touching and electricity can flow between them, or &quot;open&quot;, meaning the contacts are separated and the switch is nonconducting. The mechanism actuating the transition between these two states (open or closed) is usually (there are other types of actions) either an &quot;alternate action&quot; (flip the switch for continuous &quot;on&quot; or &quot;off&quot;) or &quot;momentary&quot; (push for &quot;on&quot; and release for &quot;off&quot;) type.

A switch may be directly manipulated by a human as a control signal to a system, such as a computer keyboard button, or to control power flow in a circuit, such as a light switch. Automatically operated switches can be used to control the motions of machines, for example, to indicate that a garage door has reached its full open position or that a machine tool is in a position to accept another workpiece. Switches may be operated by process variables such as pressure, temperature, flow, current, voltage, and force, acting as sensors in a process and used to automatically control a system. For example, a thermostat is a temperature-operated switch used to control a heating process. A switch that is operated by another electrical circuit is called a relay. Large switches may be remotely operated by a motor drive mechanism. Some switches are used to isolate electric power from a system, providing a visible point of isolation that can be padlocked if necessary to prevent accidental operation of a machine during maintenance, or to prevent electric shock.

An ideal switch would have no voltage drop when closed, and would have no limits on voltage or current rating. It would have zero rise time and fall time during state changes, and would change state without &quot;bouncing&quot; between on and off positions.

Practical switches fall short of this ideal; as the result of roughness and oxide films, they exhibit contact resistance, limits on the current and voltage they can handle, finite switching time, etc. The ideal switch is often used in circuit analysis as it greatly simplifies the system of equations to be solved, but this can lead to a less accurate solution. Theoretical treatment of the effects of non-ideal properties is required in the design of large networks of switches, as for example used in telephone exchanges.

==Contacts==
In the simplest case, a switch has two conductive pieces, often metal, called &quot;contacts&quot;, connected to an external circuit, that touch to complete (make) the circuit, and separate to open (break) the circuit. The contact material is chosen for its resistance to corrosion, because most metals form insulating oxides that would prevent the switch from working. Contact materials are also chosen on the basis of electrical conductivity, hardness (resistance to abrasive wear), mechanical strength, low cost and low toxicity. The formation of oxide layers at contact surface, as well as surface roughness and contact pressure, determine the contact resistance, and wetting current of a mechanical switch. Sometimes the contacts are plated with noble metals, for their excellent conductivity and resistance to corrosion. They may be designed to wipe against each other to clean off any contamination. Nonmetallic conductors, such as conductive plastic, are sometimes used. To prevent the formation of insulating oxides, a minimum wetting current may be specified for a given switch design.


===Contact terminology===
In electronics, switches are classified according to the arrangement of their contacts. A pair of contacts is said to be &quot;&quot;closed&quot; when current can flow from one to the other. When the contacts are separated by an insulating air gap, they are said to be &quot;open&quot;, and no current can flow between them at normal voltages. The terms &quot;make&quot; for closure of contacts and &quot;break&quot; for opening of contacts are also widely used.

The terms pole and throw are also used to describe switch contact variations. The number of &quot;poles&quot; is the number of electrically separate switches which are controlled by a single physical actuator. For example, a &quot;2-pole&quot; switch has two separate, parallel sets of contacts that open and close in unison via the same mechanism. The number of &quot;throws&quot;&quot; is the number of separate wiring path choices other than &quot;open&quot; that the switch can adopt for each pole. A single-throw switch has one pair of contacts that can either be closed or open. A double-throw switch has a contact that can be connected to either of two other contacts, a triple-throw has a contact which can be connected to one of three other contacts, etc.
In a switch where the contacts remain in one state unless actuated, such as a push-button switch, the contacts can either be normally open (abbreviated &quot;n.o.&quot; or &quot;no&quot;) until closed by operation of the switch, or normally closed (&quot;n.c.&quot; or &quot;nc&quot;) and opened by the switch action. A switch with both types of contact is called a &quot;changeover switch&quot; or &quot;double-throw switch&quot;. These may be &quot;make-before-break&quot; (&quot;MBB&quot; or shorting) which momentarily connects both circuits, or may be &quot;break-before-make&quot; (&quot;BBM&quot; or non-shorting) which interrupts one circuit before closing the other.

These terms have given rise to abbreviations for the types of switch which are used in the electronics industry such as &quot;single-pole, single-throw&quot; (SPST) (the simplest type, &quot;on or off&quot;) or &quot;single-pole, double-throw&quot; (SPDT), connecting either of two terminals to the common terminal. In electrical power wiring (i.e., house and building wiring by electricians), names generally involve the suffix &quot;-way&quot;; however, these terms differ between British English and American English (i.e., the terms &quot;two way&quot; and &quot;three way&quot; are used with different meanings).

Switches with larger numbers of poles or throws can be described by replacing the &quot;S&quot; or &quot;D&quot; with a number (e.g. 3PST, SP4T, etc.) or in some cases the letter &quot;T&quot; (for &quot;triple&quot;) or &quot;Q&quot; (for &quot;quadruple&quot;). In the rest of this article the terms &quot;SPST&quot;, &quot;SPDT&quot; and &quot;intermediate&quot; will be used to avoid the ambiguity.

===Contact bounce===
==== Bounce ====

Contact bounce (also called &quot;chatter&quot;) is a common problem with mechanical switches, relays and battery contacts, which arises as the result of electrical contact resistance (ECR) phenomena at interfaces. Switch and relay contacts are usually made of springy metals. When the contacts strike together, their momentum and elasticity act together to cause them to bounce apart one or more times before making steady contact. The result is a rapidly pulsed electric current instead of a clean transition from zero to full current. The effect is usually unimportant in power circuits, but causes problems in some analogue and logic circuits that respond fast enough to misinterpret the on‑off pulses as a data stream. In the design of micro-contacts, controlling surface structure (surface roughness) and minimizing the formation of passivated layers on metallic surfaces are instrumental in inhibiting chatter.

In the Hammond organ, multiple wires are pressed together under the piano keys of the manuals. Their bouncing and non-synchronous closing of the switches is known as &quot;Hammond Click&quot; and compositions exist that use and emphasize this feature. Some electronic organs have a switchable replica of this sound effect.

==== Debouncing ====

The effects of contact bounce can be eliminated by:
* Use of mercury-wetted contacts, but these are now infrequently used because of the hazards of mercury.
* Alternatively, contact circuit voltages can be low-pass filtered to reduce or eliminate multiple pulses from appearing.
* In digital systems, multiple samples of the contact state can be taken at a low rate and examined for a steady sequence, so that contacts can settle before the contact level is considered reliable and acted upon. See .
* Bounce in SPDT (&quot;single-pole, double-throw&quot;) switch contacts signals can be filtered out using an SR flip-flop (latch) or Schmitt trigger.
All of these methods are referred to as &#x27;debouncing&#x27;.

===Arcs and quenching===
When the power being switched is sufficiently large, the electron flow across opening switch contacts is sufficient to ionize the air molecules across the tiny gap between the contacts as the switch is opened, forming a gas plasma, also known as an electric arc. The plasma is of low resistance and is able to sustain power flow, even with the separation distance between the switch contacts steadily increasing. The plasma is also very hot and is capable of eroding the metal surfaces of the switch contacts (the same true for vacuum switches). Electric current arcing causes significant degradation of the contacts and also significant electromagnetic interference (EMI), requiring the use of arc suppression methods.

Where the voltage is sufficiently high, an arc can also form as the switch is closed and the contacts approach. If the voltage potential is sufficient to exceed the breakdown voltage of the air separating the contacts, an arc forms which is sustained until the switch closes completely and the switch surfaces make contact.

In either case, the standard method for minimizing arc formation and preventing contact damage is to use a fast-moving switch mechanism, typically using a spring-operated tipping-point mechanism to assure quick motion of switch contacts, regardless of the speed at which the switch control is operated by the user. Movement of the switch control lever applies tension to a spring until a tipping point is reached, and the contacts suddenly snap open or closed as the spring tension is released.

As the power being switched increases, other methods are used to minimize or prevent arc formation. A plasma is hot and will rise due to convection air currents. The arc can be quenched with a series of non-conductive blades spanning the distance between switch contacts, and as the arc rises, its length increases as it forms ridges rising into the spaces between the blades, until the arc is too long to stay sustained and is extinguished. A &quot;puffer&quot; may be used to blow a sudden high velocity burst of gas across the switch contacts, which rapidly extends the length of the arc to extinguish it quickly.

Extremely large switches often have switch contacts surrounded by something other than air to more rapidly extinguish the arc. For example, the switch contacts may operate in a vacuum, immersed in mineral oil, or in sulfur hexafluoride.

In AC power service, the current periodically passes through zero; this effect makes it harder to sustain an arc on opening. Manufacturers may rate switches with lower voltage or current rating when used in DC circuits.

===Power switching===
When a switch is designed to switch significant power, the transitional state of the switch as well as the ability to withstand continuous operating currents must be considered. When a switch is in the on state, its resistance is near zero and very little power is dropped in the contacts; when a switch is in the off state, its resistance is extremely high and even less power is dropped in the contacts. However, when the switch is flicked, the resistance must pass through a state where a quarter of the load&#x27;s rated power (or worse if the load is not purely resistive) is briefly dropped in the switch.

For this reason, power switches intended to interrupt a load current have spring mechanisms to make sure the transition between on and off is as short as possible regardless of the speed at which the user moves the rocker.

Power switches usually come in two types. A momentary on‑off switch (such as on a laser pointer) usually takes the form of a button and only closes the circuit when the button is depressed. A regular on‑off switch (such as on a flashlight) has a constant on-off feature. Dual-action switches incorporate both of these features.

===Inductive loads===
When a strongly inductive load such as an electric motor is switched off, the current cannot drop instantaneously to zero; a spark will jump across the opening contacts. Switches for inductive loads must be rated to handle these cases. The spark will cause electromagnetic interference if not suppressed; a snubber network of a resistor and capacitor in series will quell the spark.

===Incandescent loads===
When turned on, an incandescent lamp draws a large inrush current of about ten times the steady-state current; as the filament heats up, its resistance rises and the current decreases to a steady-state value. A switch designed for an incandescent lamp load can withstand this inrush current.

===Wetting current===
&quot;Wetting current&quot; is the minimum current needing to flow through a mechanical switch while it is operated to break through any film of oxidation that may have been deposited on the switch contacts. The film of oxidation occurs often in areas with high humidity. Providing a sufficient amount of wetting current is a crucial step in designing systems that use delicate switches with small contact pressure as sensor inputs. Failing to do this might result in switches remaining electrically &quot;open&quot; due to contact oxidation.

==Actuator==
The moving part that applies the operating force to the contacts is called the &quot;actuator&quot;, and may be a toggle or &quot;dolly&quot;, a rocker, a push-button or any type of mechanical linkage &quot;(see photo).&quot;

===Biased switches===
A switch normally maintains its set position once operated. A biased switch contains a mechanism that springs it into another position when released by an operator. The momentary push-button switch is a type of biased switch. The most common type is a &quot;push-to-make&quot; (or normally-open or NO) switch, which makes contact when the button is pressed and breaks when the button is released. Each key of a computer keyboard, for example, is a normally-open &quot;push-to-make&quot; switch. A &quot;push-to-break&quot; (or normally-closed or NC) switch, on the other hand, breaks contact when the button is pressed and makes contact when it is released. An example of a push-to-break switch is a button used to release a door held closed by an electromagnet. The interior lamp of a household refrigerator is controlled by a switch that is held open when the door is closed.

===Rotary switch===

A rotary switch operates with a twisting motion of the operating handle with at least two positions. One or more positions of the switch may be momentary (biased with a spring), requiring the operator to hold the switch in the position. Other positions may have a detent to hold the position when released. A rotary switch may have multiple levels or &quot;decks&quot; in order to allow it to control multiple circuits.

One form of rotary switch consists of a spindle or &quot;rotor&quot; that has a contact arm or &quot;spoke&quot; which projects from its surface like a cam. It has an array of terminals, arranged in a circle around the rotor, each of which serves as a contact for the &quot;spoke&quot; through which any one of a number of different electrical circuits can be connected to the rotor. The switch is layered to allow the use of multiple poles, each layer is equivalent to one pole. Usually such a switch has a detent mechanism so it &quot;clicks&quot; from one active position to another rather than stalls in an intermediate position. Thus a rotary switch provides greater pole and throw capabilities than simpler switches do.

Other types use a cam mechanism to operate multiple independent sets of contacts.

Rotary switches were used as channel selectors on television receivers until the early 1970s, as range selectors on electrical metering equipment, as band selectors on multi-band radios and other similar purposes. In industry, rotary switches are used for control of measuring instruments, switchgear, or in control circuits. For example, a radio controlled overhead crane may have a large multi-circuit rotary switch to transfer hard-wired control signals from the local manual controls in the cab to the outputs of the remote control receiver.

===Toggle switch===


A toggle switch or tumbler switch is a class of electrical switches that are manually actuated by a mechanical lever, handle, or rocking mechanism.

Toggle switches are available in many different styles and sizes, and are used in numerous applications. Many are designed to provide the simultaneous actuation of multiple sets of electrical contacts, or the control of large amounts of electric current or mains voltages.

The word &quot;toggle&quot; is a reference to a kind of mechanism or joint consisting of two arms, which are almost in line with each other, connected with an elbow-like pivot. However, the phrase &quot;toggle switch&quot; is applied to a switch with a short handle and a positive snap-action, whether it actually contains a toggle mechanism or not. Similarly, a switch where a definitive click is heard, is called a &quot;positive on-off switch&quot;. A very common use of this type of switch is to switch lights or other electrical equipment on or off. Multiple toggle switches may be mechanically interlocked to prevent forbidden combinations.

In some contexts, particularly computing, a toggle switch, or the action of toggling, is understood in the different sense of a mechanical or software switch that alternates between two states each time it is activated, regardless of mechanical construction. For example, the caps lock key on a computer causes all letters to be generated in capitals after it is pressed once; pressing it again reverts to lower-case letters.

==Special types==
Switches can be designed to respond to any type of mechanical stimulus: for example, vibration (the trembler switch), tilt, air pressure, fluid level (a float switch), the turning of a key (key switch), linear or rotary movement (a limit switch or microswitch), or presence of a magnetic field (the reed switch). Many switches are operated automatically by changes in some environmental condition or by motion of machinery. A limit switch is used, for example, in machine tools to interlock operation with the proper position of tools. In heating or cooling systems a sail switch ensures that air flow is adequate in a duct. Pressure switches respond to fluid pressure.

===Mercury tilt switch===
The mercury switch consists of a drop of mercury inside a glass bulb with two or more contacts. The two contacts pass through the glass, and are connected by the mercury when the bulb is tilted to make the mercury roll on to them.

This type of switch performs much better than the ball tilt switch, as the liquid metal connection is unaffected by dirt, debris and oxidation, it wets the contacts ensuring a very low resistance bounce-free connection, and movement and vibration do not produce a poor contact. These types can be used for precision works.

It can also be used where arcing is dangerous (such as in the presence of explosive vapour) as the entire unit is sealed.

===Knife switch===

Knife switches consist of a flat metal blade, hinged at one end, with an insulating handle for operation, and a fixed contact. When the switch is closed, current flows through the hinged pivot and blade and through the fixed contact. Such switches are usually not enclosed. The knife and contacts are typically formed of copper, steel, or brass, depending on the application. Fixed contacts may be backed up with a spring. Several parallel blades can be operated at the same time by one handle. The parts may be mounted on an insulating base with terminals for wiring, or may be directly bolted to an insulated switch board in a large assembly. Since the electrical contacts are exposed, the switch is used only where people cannot accidentally come in contact with the switch or where the voltage is so low as to not present a hazard.

Knife switches are made in many sizes from miniature switches to large devices used to carry thousands of amperes. In electrical transmission and distribution, gang-operated switches are used in circuits up to the highest voltages.

The disadvantages of the knife switch are the slow opening speed and the proximity of the operator to exposed live parts. Metal-enclosed safety disconnect switches are used for isolation of circuits in industrial power distribution. Sometimes spring-loaded auxiliary blades are fitted which momentarily carry the full current during opening, then quickly part to rapidly extinguish the arc.

===Reversing switch===
A DPDT switch has six connections, but since polarity reversal is a very common usage of DPDT switches, some variations of the DPDT switch are internally wired specifically for polarity reversal. These crossover switches only have four terminals rather than six. Two of the terminals are inputs and two are outputs. When connected to a battery or other DC source, the 4-way switch selects from either normal or reversed polarity. Such switches can also be used as intermediate switches in a multiway switching system for control of lamps by more than two switches. 

==Light switches==
In building wiring, light switches are installed at convenient locations to control lighting and occasionally other circuits. By use of multiple-pole switches, multiway switching control of a lamp can be obtained from two or more places, such as the ends of a corridor or stairwell. A wireless light switch allows remote control of lamps for convenience; some lamps include a touch switch which electronically controls the lamp if touched anywhere. In public buildings several types of vandal resistant switches are used to prevent unauthorized use.

==Slide switches==
Slide switches are mechanical switches using a slider that moves (slides) from the open (off) position to the closed (on) position.

==Electronic switches==

The term &quot;switch&quot; has since spread to a variety of solid state electronics that perform a switching function, but which are controlled electronically by active devices rather than purely mechanically. These are categorized in the article electronic switch. Electromechanical switches (such as the traditional relay, electromechanical crossbar, and Strowger switch) bridge the categorization.

==Other switches==
* Centrifugal switch
* Company switch
* Crossbar switch
* Dead man&#x27;s switch
* Fireman&#x27;s switch
* Hall-effect switch
* Inertial switch
* Isolator switch
* Key switch
* Kill switch
* Latching switch
* Light switch
* Load control switch
* Membrane switch
* MEMS switch
* Optical switch
* Piezo switch
* Pull switch
* Push switch
* Sense switch
* Slotted optical switch
* Stepping switch
* Strowger switch
* Thermal switch
* Time switch
* Touch switch
* Transfer switch
* Zero speed switch
==See also==

* Circuit breaker
* Commutator (electric)
* Contact resistance
* DIN rail
* Electric switchboard
* Fuse cutout
* RF switch matrix
* Switch access
* Switchgear
==Notes==
==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="3" end="25" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320" start="29" end="35" title="Switch" label="switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11653" start="42" end="62" title="electrical component" label="electrical component"/>
<link wikidata="Q132629" start="120" end="138" title="electrical circuit" label="electrical circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="157" end="173" title="electric current" label="electric current"/>
<link wikidata="Q394001" start="325" end="343" title="electrical contact" label="electrical contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q962420" start="762" end="774" title="light switch" label="light switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q167676" start="818" end="833" title="sensor" label="sensing element"/>
<link wikidata="Q187665" start="925" end="935" title="thermostat" label="thermostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320" start="979" end="992" title="toggle switch" label="toggle switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256622" start="994" end="1007" title="rotary switch" label="rotary switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761567" start="1009" end="1023" title="mercury switch" label="mercury switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q870870" start="1025" end="1036" title="push-button" label="push-button"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320" start="1045" end="1061" title="reversing switch" label="reversing switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q174053" start="1063" end="1068" title="relay" label="relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q211058" start="1074" end="1089" title="circuit breaker" label="circuit breaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q394001" start="1469" end="1488" title="electrical contacts" label="electrical contacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q962420" start="2259" end="2271" title="light switch" label="light switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q167676" start="2623" end="2629" title="sensor" label="sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q187665" start="2703" end="2713" title="thermostat" label="thermostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q174053" start="2850" end="2855" title="relay" label="relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q377672" start="3289" end="3298" title="rise time" label="rise time"/>
<link wikidata="Q321834" start="3303" end="3312" title="fall time" label="fall time"/>
<link wikidata="Q332329" start="3520" end="3538" title="contact resistance" label="contact resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="4020" end="4025" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q178150" start="4264" end="4274" title="Electrical insulation" label="insulating"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="4376" end="4399" title="electrical conductivity" label="electrical conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q332329" start="4604" end="4622" title="contact resistance" label="contact resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q196314" start="4628" end="4643" title="wetting current" label="wetting current"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503392" start="4695" end="4701" title="Electroplating" label="plated"/>
<link wikidata="Q585302" start="4707" end="4718" title="noble metal" label="noble metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q178150" start="5309" end="5327" title="Insulator (electric)" label="insulating air gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q870870" start="6387" end="6398" title="push-button" label="push-button"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="7077" end="7088" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q387400" start="7305" end="7321" title="Mains electricity" label="electrical power"/>
<link wikidata="Q165029" start="7365" end="7376" title="electrician" label="electrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="7469" end="7484" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="7489" end="7505" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q174053" start="8143" end="8148" title="relay" label="relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q267298" start="8154" end="8169" title="battery contact" label="battery contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q332329" start="8213" end="8231" title="contact resistance" label="contact resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q174925" start="8667" end="8675" title="analogue electronics" label="analogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q170451" start="8680" end="8693" title="logic circuit" label="logic circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q114817" start="8836" end="8853" title="surface roughness" label="surface roughness"/>
<link wikidata="Q917260" start="8887" end="8904" title="Passivation (chemistry)" label="passivated layers"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="8974" end="8987" title="Hammond organ" label="Hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q125576797" start="9224" end="9240" title="electronic organ" label="electronic organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q174053" start="9374" end="9397" title="Mercury-wetted relay" label="mercury-wetted contacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q918242" start="9519" end="9534" title="low-pass filter" label="low-pass filter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9825" end="9829" title="#Contact terminology" label="SPDT"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9923" end="9935" title="Multivibrator#Bistable" label="SR flip-flop"/>
<link wikidata="Q202957" start="9947" end="9962" title="Schmitt trigger" label="Schmitt trigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q190382" start="10173" end="10179" title="ionize" label="ionize"/>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="10274" end="10284" title="gas plasma" label="gas plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q207456" start="10303" end="10315" title="electric arc" label="electric arc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10643" end="10670" title="Contact protection#Contact wear" label="degradation of the contacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474513" start="10692" end="10720" title="electromagnetic interference" label="electromagnetic interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785039" start="10749" end="10764" title="arc suppression" label="arc suppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267190" start="10940" end="10957" title="breakdown voltage" label="breakdown voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q190837" start="11271" end="11294" title="Tipping point (physics)" label="tipping-point mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q160329" start="11733" end="11743" title="convection" label="convection"/>
<link wikidata="Q583582" start="12411" end="12422" title="mineral oil" label="mineral oil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12430" end="12449" title="Sulfur hexafluoride#Dielectric medium" label="sulfur hexafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365018" start="13614" end="13627" title="laser pointer" label="laser pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q235783" start="13760" end="13770" title="flashlight" label="flashlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q177897" start="13899" end="13908" title="inductance" label="inductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q72313" start="13925" end="13939" title="electric motor" label="electric motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q207456" start="14008" end="14013" title="Electric arc" label="spark"/>
<link wikidata="Q177897" start="14066" end="14075" title="inductance" label="inductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474513" start="14140" end="14168" title="electromagnetic interference" label="electromagnetic interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975192" start="14190" end="14197" title="snubber" label="snubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321" start="14211" end="14219" title="resistor" label="resistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322" start="14224" end="14233" title="capacitor" label="capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q47616" start="14311" end="14328" title="Incandescent light bulb" label="incandescent lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q358932" start="14343" end="14357" title="inrush current" label="inrush current"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="14752" end="14761" title="oxidation" label="oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="14869" end="14877" title="humidity" label="humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917288" start="14959" end="14966" title="Control engineering" label="systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q423488" start="15249" end="15257" title="actuator" label="actuator"/>
<link wikidata="Q870870" start="15592" end="15603" title="push-button" label="push-button"/>
<link wikidata="Q178032" start="16161" end="16174" title="electromagnet" label="electromagnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q37828" start="16209" end="16221" title="refrigerator" label="refrigerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273786" start="17834" end="17844" title="switchgear" label="switchgear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436167" start="17885" end="17898" title="radio control" label="radio control"/>
<link wikidata="Q40164" start="18224" end="18229" title="lever" label="lever"/>
<link wikidata="Q394001" start="18443" end="18461" title="electrical contact" label="electrical contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="18499" end="18515" title="electric current" label="electric current"/>
<link wikidata="Q387400" start="18519" end="18524" title="Mains electricity" label="mains"/>
<link wikidata="Q179310" start="19215" end="19224" title="computing" label="computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q729752" start="19460" end="19469" title="caps lock" label="caps lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q624912" start="19782" end="19794" title="float switch" label="float switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245463" start="19819" end="19829" title="key switch" label="key switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340519" start="19861" end="19873" title="limit switch" label="limit switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q688956" start="19877" end="19888" title="microswitch" label="microswitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461745" start="19928" end="19939" title="reed switch" label="reed switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340519" start="20055" end="20067" title="limit switch" label="limit switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7400154" start="20197" end="20208" title="sail switch" label="sail switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261034" start="20254" end="20269" title="Pressure switch" label="Pressure switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="20367" end="20374" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="20384" end="20389" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6557453" start="20633" end="20645" title="liquid metal" label="liquid metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="21346" end="21352" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="21354" end="21359" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q39782" start="21364" end="21369" title="brass" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860300" start="22239" end="22256" title="disconnect switch" label="disconnect switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q286083" start="23001" end="23019" title="multiway switching" label="multiway switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q286083" start="23256" end="23274" title="multiway switching" label="multiway switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026892" start="23381" end="23402" title="wireless light switch" label="wireless light switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828656" start="23472" end="23484" title="touch switch" label="touch switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q15208265" start="23582" end="23605" title="vandal resistant switch" label="vandal resistant switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q611957" start="23885" end="23908" title="solid state electronics" label="solid state electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11653" start="23987" end="24000" title="active device" label="active device"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358435" start="24072" end="24089" title="electronic switch" label="electronic switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q533188" start="24091" end="24108" title="Electromechanical" label="Electromechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q174053" start="24143" end="24148" title="relay" label="relay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24150" end="24176" title="Crossbar Switch#Electromechanical switching in telephony" label="electromechanical crossbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q354142" start="24182" end="24197" title="Strowger switch" label="Strowger switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q974039" start="24248" end="24266" title="Centrifugal switch" label="Centrifugal switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25105128" start="24269" end="24283" title="Company switch" label="Company switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929149" start="24286" end="24301" title="Crossbar switch" label="Crossbar switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153563" start="24304" end="24326" title="Dead man&amp;#x27;s switch" label="Dead man&amp;#x27;s switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451897" start="24329" end="24350" title="Fireman&amp;#x27;s switch" label="Fireman&amp;#x27;s switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431247" start="24353" end="24371" title="Hall-effect switch" label="Hall-effect switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3800565" start="24374" end="24389" title="Inertial switch" label="Inertial switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860300" start="24392" end="24407" title="Isolator switch" label="Isolator switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245463" start="24410" end="24420" title="Key switch" label="Key switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001958" start="24423" end="24434" title="Kill switch" label="Kill switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495142" start="24437" end="24452" title="Latching switch" label="Latching switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q962420" start="24455" end="24467" title="Light switch" label="Light switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255048" start="24470" end="24489" title="Load control switch" label="Load control switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815142" start="24492" end="24507" title="Membrane switch" label="Membrane switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276610" start="24510" end="24521" title="MEMS switch" label="MEMS switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105111" start="24524" end="24538" title="Optical switch" label="Optical switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193125" start="24541" end="24553" title="Piezo switch" label="Piezo switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259393" start="24556" end="24567" title="Pull switch" label="Pull switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261766" start="24570" end="24581" title="Push switch" label="Push switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451002" start="24584" end="24596" title="Sense switch" label="Sense switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541440" start="24599" end="24621" title="Slotted optical switch" label="Slotted optical switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713498" start="24624" end="24639" title="Stepping switch" label="Stepping switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q354142" start="24642" end="24657" title="Strowger switch" label="Strowger switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q259873" start="24660" end="24674" title="Thermal switch" label="Thermal switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805441" start="24677" end="24688" title="Time switch" label="Time switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828656" start="24691" end="24703" title="Touch switch" label="Touch switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936022" start="24706" end="24721" title="Transfer switch" label="Transfer switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312684" start="24724" end="24741" title="Zero speed switch" label="Zero speed switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q211058" start="24758" end="24773" title="Circuit breaker" label="Circuit breaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q840916" start="24776" end="24797" title="Commutator (electric)" label="Commutator (electric)"/>
<link wikidata="Q332329" start="24800" end="24818" title="Contact resistance" label="Contact resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q570110" start="24821" end="24829" title="DIN rail" label="DIN rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972689" start="24832" end="24852" title="Electric switchboard" label="Electric switchboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509993" start="24855" end="24866" title="Fuse cutout" label="Fuse cutout"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276621" start="24869" end="24885" title="RF switch matrix" label="RF switch matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173854" start="24888" end="24901" title="Switch access" label="Switch access"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273786" start="24904" end="24914" title="Switchgear" label="Switchgear"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28287" wikidata="Q209680" url="?curid=28287" title="Sutra">
<text>Sutra () in Indian literary traditions refers to an aphorism or a collection of aphorisms in the form of a manual or, more broadly, a condensed manual or text. Sutras are a genre of ancient and medieval Indian texts found in Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism.

In Hinduism, sutras are a distinct type of literary composition, a compilation of short aphoristic statements. Each sutra is any short rule, like a theorem distilled into few words or syllables, around which teachings of ritual, philosophy, grammar, or any field of knowledge can be woven. The oldest sutras of Hinduism are found in the Brahmana and Aranyaka layers of the Vedas. Every school of Hindu philosophy, Vedic guides for rites of passage, various fields of arts, law, and social ethics developed respective sutras, which help teach and transmit ideas from one generation to the next.

In Buddhism, sutras, also known as &quot;suttas&quot;, are canonical scriptures, many of which are regarded as records of the oral teachings of Gautama Buddha. They are not aphoristic, but are quite detailed, sometimes with repetition. This may reflect a derivation from Vedic or Sanskrit &quot;sūkta&quot; (well spoken), rather than from &quot;sūtra&quot; (thread).

In Jainism, sutras, also known as &quot;suyas&quot;, are canonical sermons of Mahavira contained in the Jain Agamas as well as some later (post-canonical) normative texts.

==Etymology==

The Sanskrit word &quot;Sūtra&quot; (Sanskrit: सूत्र, Pali: &quot;sutta&quot;, Ardha Magadhi: &quot;sūya&quot;) means &quot;string, thread&quot;. The root of the word is &quot;siv&quot;, &quot;that which sews and holds things together&quot;. The word is related to &quot;sūci&quot; (Sanskrit: सूचि) meaning &quot;needle, list&quot;, and &quot;sūnā&quot; (Sanskrit: सूना) meaning &quot;woven&quot;.

In the context of literature, &quot;sūtra&quot; means a distilled collection of syllables and words, any form or manual of &quot;aphorism, rule, direction&quot; hanging together like threads with which the teachings of ritual, philosophy, grammar, or any field of knowledge can be woven.

A &quot;sūtra&quot; is any short rule, states Moriz Winternitz, in Indian literature; it is &quot;a theorem condensed in few words&quot;. A collection of &quot;sūtras&quot; becomes a text, and this is also called &quot;sūtra&quot; (often capitalized in Western literature).

A &quot;sūtra&quot; is different from other components such as &quot;Shlokas&quot;, &quot;Anuvyakhayas&quot; and &quot;Vyakhyas&quot; found in ancient Indian literature. A &quot;sūtra&quot; is a condensed rule which succinctly states the message, while a &quot;Shloka&quot; is a verse that conveys the complete message and is structured to certain rules of musical meter, an &quot;Anuvyakhaya&quot; is an explanation of the reviewed text, while a &quot;Vyakhya&quot; is a comment by the reviewer.

==History==

Sutras first appear in the Brahmana and Aranyaka layer of Vedic literature. They grow in number in the Vedangas, such as the Shrauta Sutras and Kalpa Sutras. These were designed so that they can be easily communicated from a teacher to student, memorized by the recipient for discussion or self-study or as reference.

A sutra by itself is condensed shorthand, and the threads of syllable are difficult to decipher or understand without associated scholarly Bhasya or deciphering commentary that fills in the &quot;weft&quot;.

The oldest manuscripts that have survived into the modern era that contain extensive sutras are part of the Vedas, dated from the late 2nd millennium BCE through to the mid 1st millennium BCE. The Aitareya Aranyaka, for example, states Winternitz, is primarily a collection of &quot;sutras&quot;. Their use and ancient roots are attested by sutras being mentioned in larger genre of ancient non-Vedic Hindu literature called &quot;Gatha&quot;, &quot;Narashansi&quot;, &quot;Itihasa&quot;, and &quot;Akhyana&quot; (songs, legends, epics, and stories).

In the history of Indian literature, large compilations of sutras, in diverse fields of knowledge, have been traced to the period from 600 BCE to 200 BCE (mostly after Buddha and Mahavira), and this has been called the &quot;sutras period&quot;. This period followed the more ancient &quot;Chhandas period&quot;, &quot;Mantra period&quot; and &quot;Brahmana period&quot;.

==Hinduism==
Some of the earliest surviving specimens of &quot;sutras&quot; of Hinduism are found in the &quot;Anupada Sutras&quot; and &quot;Nidana Sutras&quot;. The former distills the epistemic debate whether Sruti or Smriti or neither must be considered the more reliable source of knowledge, while the latter distills the rules of musical meters for Samaveda chants and songs.

A larger collection of ancient sutra literature in Hinduism corresponds to the six Vedangas, or six limbs of the Vedas. These are six subjects that said in the Vedas to be necessary for complete mastery of the Vedas. The six subjects with their own &quot;sutras&quot; were &quot;pronunciation (Shiksha), meter (Chandas), grammar (Vyakarana), explanation of words (Nirukta), time keeping through astronomy (Jyotisha), and ceremonial rituals (Kalpa). The first two, states Max Muller, were considered in the Vedic era to be necessary for reading the Veda, the second two for understanding it, and the last two for deploying the Vedic knowledge at yajnas (fire rituals). The &quot;sutras&quot; corresponding to these are embedded inside the Brahmana and Aranyaka layers of the Vedas. Taittiriya Aranyaka, for example in Book 7, embeds sutras for accurate pronunciation after the terse phrases &quot;On Letters&quot;, &quot;On Accents&quot;, &quot;On Quantity&quot;, &quot;On Delivery&quot;, and &quot;On Euphonic Laws&quot;.

The fourth and often the last layer of philosophical, speculative text in the Vedas, the Upanishads, too have embedded sutras such as those found in the Taittiriya Upanishad.

The compendium of ancient Vedic sutra literature that has survived, in full or fragments, includes the Kalpa Sutras, Shulba Sutras, Srauta Sutras, Dharma Sutras, Grhya Sutras, and Smarta traditions . Other fields for which ancient sutras are known include etymology, phonetics, and grammar.

===Post-vedic sutras===

Some examples of sutra texts in various schools of Hindu philosophy include
* Brahma Sutras (or Vedanta Sutra) – a Sanskrit text, composed by Badarayana, likely sometime between 200 BCE to 200 CE. The text contains 555 &quot;sutras&quot; in four chapters that summarize the philosophical and spiritual ideas in the Upanishads. It is one of the foundational texts of the Vedānta school of Hindu philosophy.
* Yoga Sutras – contains 196 sutras on Yoga including the eight limbs and meditation. The &quot;Yoga Sutras&quot; were compiled around 400 CE by Patanjali, taking materials about yoga from older traditions. The text has been highly influential on Indian culture and spiritual traditions, and it is among the most translated ancient Indian text in the medieval era, having been translated into about forty Indian languages.
* Samkhya Sutra – is a collection of major Sanskrit texts of the Samkhya school of Hindu philosophy, including the sutras on dualism of Kapila. It consists of six books with 526 sutras.

* Vaisheshika Sutra – the foundational text of the Vaisheshika school of Hinduism, dated to between the 4th century BCE and 1st century BCE, authored by Kanada. With 370 sutras, it aphoristically teaches non-theistic naturalism, epistemology, and its metaphysics. The first two sutras of the text expand as, &quot;Now an explanation of Dharma; The means to prosperity and salvation is Dharma.&quot;
* Nyaya Sutras – an ancient text of Nyaya school of Hindu philosophy composed by Akṣapada Gautama, sometime between the 6th century BCE and 2nd century CE. It is notable for focusing on knowledge and logic, and making no mention of Vedic rituals. The text includes 528 aphoristic sutras, about rules of reason, logic, epistemology, and metaphysics. These sutras are divided into five books, with two chapters in each book. The first book is structured as a general introduction and table of contents of sixteen categories of knowledge. Book two is about &quot;pramana&quot; (epistemology), book three is about &quot;prameya&quot; or the objects of knowledge, and the text discusses the nature of knowledge in remaining books.

* Mimamsa Sutras – the foundational text of the Mimamsa school of Hinduism, authored by Jaimini. It emphasizes the early part of the Vedas, i.e., rituals and religious works, as means to salvation. The school emphasized precision in the selection of words, construction of sentences, developed rules for hermeneutics of language and any text, adopted and then refined principles of logic from the Nyaya school, and developed extensive rules for epistemology. An atheistic school that supported external Vedic sacrifices and rituals, its Mimamsa Sutra contains twelve chapters with nearly 2700 &quot;sutras&quot;.
* Dharma-sutras – of Āpastamba, Gautama, Baudhāyana, and Vāsiṣṭha
* Artha-sutras – the Niti Sutras of Chanakya and Somadeva are treatises on governance, law, economics, and politics. Versions of Chanakya Niti Sutras have been found in Sri Lanka and Myanmar. The more comprehensive work of Chanakya, the Arthashastra is itself composed in many parts, in &quot;sutra&quot; style, with the first Sutra of the ancient book acknowledging that it is a compilation of Artha-knowledge from previous scholars.
* Kama Sutra – an ancient Indian Sanskrit text on sexual and emotional fulfillment in life
* Moksha-sutras
* Shiva Sutras – fourteen verses that organize the phonemes of Sanskrit
* Narada Bhakti Sutra – a venerated Hindu sutra, reportedly spoken by the famous sage Narada
* Shandilya Bhakti Sutra – collection of one hundred bhakti sutras spoken by the Vedic sage Brahmarshi Shandilya. These sutras are also called as &quot;Shandilya Sutras&quot;.

==Buddhism==
In Buddhism, a &quot;sutta&quot; or &quot;sutra&quot; constitutes a segment of the canonical literature. These early Buddhist sutras, unlike Hindu texts, are not aphoristic; rather, they tend to be quite lengthy. The Buddhist term &quot;sutta&quot; or &quot;sutra&quot; likely derives from Sanskrit &quot;sūkta&quot; (&quot;su&quot; + &quot;ukta&quot;), meaning &quot;well spoken,&quot; reflecting the belief that &quot;all that was spoken by the Lord Buddha was well-spoken&quot;. They embody the essence of sermons conveying &quot;well-spoken&quot; wisdom, akin to the Jain sutras.

In Chinese, these are known as 經 (pinyin: &quot;jīng&quot;). These teachings are organized as part of the Tripiṭaka, specifically referred to as the &quot;Sutta Pitaka&quot;. Numerous significant or influential Mahayana texts, such as the &quot;Platform Sutra&quot; and the &quot;Lotus Sutra&quot;, are termed sutras despite being attributed to much later authors.

In Theravada Buddhism, suttas constitute the second &quot;basket&quot; (pitaka) of the Pāli Canon. Rewata Dhamma and Bhikkhu Bodhi describe the Sutta Pitaka as:
==Jainism==
In the Jain tradition, sutras are an important genre of &quot;fixed text&quot;, which used to be memorized.

The Kalpa Sūtra is, for example, a Jain text that includes monastic rules, as well as biographies of the Jain Tirthankaras. Many sutras discuss all aspects of ascetic and lay life in Jainism. Various ancient sutras particularly from the early 1st millennium CE, for example, recommend devotional bhakti as an essential Jain practice.

The surviving scriptures of Jaina tradition, such as the Acaranga Sutra (Agamas), exist in sutra format, as is the Tattvartha Sutra, a Sanskrit text accepted by all four Jainism sects as the most authoritative philosophical text that completely summarizes the foundations of Jainism.

== See also ==

* Ananda Sutram
* Chinese Buddhist canon
* List of suttas
* Shastra
* Sutra copying
* Sutram
* Tibetan Buddhist canon


==Notes and references==
==Further reading==
* Monier-Williams, Monier. (1899) &quot;A Sanskrit-English Dictionary&quot;. Delhi:Motilal Banarsidass. p. 1241

==External links==
*SuttaCentral Public domain translations in multiple languages of suttas from the Pali Tipitaka and other collections.
*Buddhist Scriptures in Multiple Languages
*More Mahayana Sutras
*The Hindu Vedas, Upanishads, Puranas, and Vedanta Sacred-texts.com
*A Modern sutra
*Digital Sanskrit Buddhist Canon
*Ida B. Wells Memorial Sutra Library (Pali Suttas)
*Chinese and English Buddhist Sutras
*Polity Sutra
*Yoga Sutra of Patanjali Translations in Multiple Languages|Yoga Sutra Chanting by Vimal Sharma</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q622237" start="12" end="18" title="Indian literature" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q165740" start="52" end="60" title="aphorism" label="aphorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="225" end="233" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="235" end="243" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="248" end="255" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q823671" start="595" end="603" title="Brahmana" label="Brahmana"/>
<link wikidata="Q265461" start="608" end="616" title="Aranyaka" label="Aranyaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="631" end="636" title="Vedas" label="Vedas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079293" start="654" end="670" title="Hindu philosophy" label="Hindu philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001051" start="912" end="932" title="Buddhist texts" label="canonical scriptures"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="997" end="1011" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Gautama Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q9422" start="1299" end="1307" title="Mahavira" label="Mahavira"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006151" start="1325" end="1336" title="Jain Agamas (Śvētāmbara)" label="Jain Agamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="1446" end="1454" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="1463" end="1467" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q35217" start="1488" end="1501" title="Ardha Magadhi" label="Ardha Magadhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754210" start="2441" end="2447" title="Shloka" label="Shloka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754210" start="2633" end="2639" title="Shloka" label="Shloka"/>
<link wikidata="Q823671" start="2910" end="2918" title="Brahmana" label="Brahmana"/>
<link wikidata="Q265461" start="2923" end="2931" title="Aranyaka" label="Aranyaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767268" start="3341" end="3347" title="Bhasya" label="Bhasya"/>
<link wikidata="Q116214300" start="3398" end="3402" title="Warp and weft" label="weft"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="3519" end="3524" title="Vedas" label="Vedas"/>
<link wikidata="Q265461" start="3608" end="3625" title="Aitareya Aranyaka" label="Aitareya Aranyaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="4523" end="4532" title="epistemology" label="epistemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47148" start="4548" end="4553" title="Sruti" label="Sruti"/>
<link wikidata="Q840548" start="4557" end="4563" title="Smriti" label="Smriti"/>
<link wikidata="Q236226" start="4691" end="4699" title="Samaveda" label="Samaveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="4832" end="4837" title="Vedas" label="Vedas"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="4879" end="4884" title="Vedas" label="Vedas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588510" start="5013" end="5020" title="Siksha" label="Shiksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q15904388" start="5030" end="5037" title="Chandas" label="Chandas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573578" start="5049" end="5058" title="Vyakarana" label="Vyakarana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047159" start="5083" end="5090" title="Nirukta" label="Nirukta"/>
<link wikidata="Q740253" start="5125" end="5133" title="Jyotisha" label="Jyotisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764567" start="5364" end="5369" title="yajna" label="yajna"/>
<link wikidata="Q823671" start="5457" end="5465" title="Brahmana" label="Brahmana"/>
<link wikidata="Q265461" start="5470" end="5478" title="Aranyaka" label="Aranyaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q772960" start="5895" end="5915" title="Taittiriya Upanishad" label="Taittiriya Upanishad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382061" start="6021" end="6033" title="Kalpa (Vedanga)" label="Kalpa Sutras"/>
<link wikidata="Q84052" start="6035" end="6048" title="Shulba Sutras" label="Shulba Sutras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382061" start="6050" end="6063" title="Srauta Sutras" label="Srauta Sutras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382061" start="6065" end="6078" title="Dharma Sutras" label="Dharma Sutras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382061" start="6080" end="6092" title="Grhya Sutras" label="Grhya Sutras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079293" start="6286" end="6302" title="Hindu philosophy" label="Hindu philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q897298" start="6313" end="6326" title="Brahma Sutras" label="Brahma Sutras"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113985" start="6550" end="6560" title="Upanishads" label="Upanishads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512051" start="6605" end="6612" title="Vedānta" label="Vedānta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068646" start="6643" end="6654" title="Yoga Sutras" label="Yoga Sutras"/>
<link wikidata="Q9350" start="6680" end="6684" title="Yoga" label="Yoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q231680" start="6786" end="6795" title="Patanjali" label="Patanjali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110088" start="7066" end="7079" title="Samkhya Sutra" label="Samkhya Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="7107" end="7115" title="Sanskrit language" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q164828" start="7129" end="7136" title="Samkhya" label="Samkhya"/>
<link wikidata="Q48732167" start="7189" end="7196" title="Dualism (Indian philosophy)" label="dualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553317" start="7253" end="7270" title="Vaisheshika Sutra" label="Vaisheshika Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q651387" start="7302" end="7313" title="Vaisheshika" label="Vaisheshika"/>
<link wikidata="Q56000" start="7468" end="7478" title="naturalism (philosophy)" label="naturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q134293" start="7587" end="7593" title="Dharma" label="Dharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363579" start="7652" end="7664" title="Nyaya Sutras" label="Nyaya Sutras"/>
<link wikidata="Q595650" start="7686" end="7691" title="Nyaya" label="Nyaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714540" start="8210" end="8217" title="pramana" label="pramana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410998" start="8379" end="8393" title="Purva Mimamsa Sutras" label="Mimamsa Sutras"/>
<link wikidata="Q847918" start="8425" end="8432" title="Mimamsa" label="Mimamsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q595650" start="8774" end="8779" title="Nyaya" label="Nyaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q323133" start="9293" end="9305" title="Arthashastra" label="Arthashastra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353429" start="9451" end="9456" title="Artha" label="Artha"/>
<link wikidata="Q47228" start="9493" end="9503" title="Kama Sutra" label="Kama Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672209" start="9600" end="9612" title="Shiva Sutras" label="Shiva Sutras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337406" start="9672" end="9691" title="Narada Bhakti Sutra" label="Narada Bhakti Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q131160870" start="9765" end="9787" title="Shandilya Bhakti Sutra" label="Shandilya Bhakti Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416367" start="9855" end="9875" title="Shandilya (Rishi)" label="Brahmarshi Shandilya"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="10572" end="10578" title="pinyin" label="pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321432" start="10644" end="10653" title="Tripiṭaka" label="Tripiṭaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q757370" start="10693" end="10705" title="Sutta Pitaka" label="Sutta Pitaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="10749" end="10757" title="Mahayana" label="Mahayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418783" start="10783" end="10797" title="Platform Sutra" label="Platform Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q861212" start="10818" end="10829" title="Lotus Sutra" label="Lotus Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="10907" end="10925" title="Theravada Buddhism" label="Theravada Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q215685" start="10991" end="11001" title="Pāli Canon" label="Pāli Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319044" start="11003" end="11016" title="Rewata Dhamma" label="Rewata Dhamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q854944" start="11021" end="11034" title="Bhikkhu Bodhi" label="Bhikkhu Bodhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q757370" start="11048" end="11060" title="Sutta Pitaka" label="Sutta Pitaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q422848" start="11190" end="11201" title="Kalpa Sūtra" label="Kalpa Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077817" start="11296" end="11308" title="Tirthankaras" label="Tirthankaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q507417" start="11482" end="11488" title="bhakti" label="bhakti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672107" start="11578" end="11592" title="Acaranga Sutra" label="Acaranga Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006151" start="11594" end="11600" title="Jain Agamas (Śvētāmbara)" label="Agamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778761" start="11636" end="11652" title="Tattvartha Sutra" label="Tattvartha Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q485786" start="11824" end="11837" title="Ananda Sutram" label="Ananda Sutram"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023673" start="11840" end="11862" title="Chinese Buddhist canon" label="Chinese Buddhist canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642004" start="11865" end="11879" title="List of suttas" label="List of suttas"/>
<link wikidata="Q510547" start="11882" end="11889" title="Shastra" label="Shastra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462275" start="11892" end="11905" title="Sutra copying" label="Sutra copying"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650114" start="11908" end="11914" title="Sutram" label="Sutram"/>
<link wikidata="Q385530" start="11917" end="11939" title="Tibetan Buddhist canon" label="Tibetan Buddhist canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="12133" end="12146" title="Public domain" label="Public domain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28288" wikidata="Q38142" url="?curid=28288" title="Samurai">
<text>or bushi (武士, [bɯ.ɕi]) were members of the warrior class in Japan. They were originally provincial warriors who served the Kuge and imperial court in the late 12th century. Samurai eventually came to play a major political role until their abolition in the late 1870s during the Meiji era.

In the Heian period, powerful regional clans were relied on to put down rebellions. After power struggles, the Taira clan defeated the Minamoto clan in 1160. After the Minamoto defeated the Taira in 1185, Minamoto no Yoritomo established the Kamakura shogunate, a parallel government that did not supplant the imperial court. The warriors who served the Shogunate were called gokenin, landholding warriors whose retainers were called samurai. Gokenin were regulated by the Samurai-dokoro.

During the Sengoku Period, the term was vague and some samurai owned land, others were retainers or mercenaries. There was a great increase in the number of men who styled themselves samurai by virtue of bearing arms, and performance mattered more than heritage. During the Edo period, 1603 to 1868, they were mainly the stewards and chamberlains of the &quot;daimyo&quot; estates, roles they had also filled in the past. During the Edo period, they came to represent a hereditary class. On the other hand, from the mid-Edo period, and farmers could be promoted to the samurai class by being adopted into families or by serving in offices, and low-ranking samurai could be transferred to lower social classes, such as &quot;chōnin&quot;, by changing jobs.
In 1853, Japan was opened to the West by U.S. Commodore Matthew C. Perry, beginning the &quot;Bakumatsu&quot; (&quot;end of the &quot;bakufu&quot;&quot;) era. Samurai from the rebellious Chōshū and Satsuma Domains played a major role in the &quot;sonnō jōi&quot; movement against the Tokugawa shogunate, and later in the Meiji Restoration and Boshin War of 1868, which restored power to the emperor. As modern militaries emerged in the late 19th century, the samurai were considered obsolete and expensive to maintain compared to the average conscript soldier. Their class was abolished in the 1870s by the policies of the new Meiji government. Most former samurai became members of the &quot;shizoku&quot; class, ranking above the commoner class and allowing them to move into professional and entrepreneurial roles; the &quot;shizoku&quot; class was later abolished in 1947.

==Terminology==
The proper term for Japanese warriors is , meaning &#x27;warrior&#x27;, but also could be interchangeable with , meaning &#x27;military family&#x27;, and later could refer to the whole class of professional warriors. Especially in the west, samurai is used synonymous with bushi, but they can have different meanings depending on context. 

According to translator William Scott Wilson: &quot;In Chinese, the character 侍 was originally a verb meaning &#x27;to wait upon&#x27;, &#x27;accompany persons&#x27; in the upper ranks of society, and this is also true of the original term in Japanese, &quot;&quot; and did not have military connotations, although bushi in the Heian period who served courtiers were called samurai. The samurai were superior to Gokenin who held land from which they took their name. According to Michael Wert, &quot;a warrior of elite stature in pre-seventeenth-century Japan would have been insulted to be called a &#x27;samurai&#x27;&quot;. In the Tokugawa period, the terms were roughly interchangeable, as the military class was legally limited to the retainers of the Shogun or Daimyo. However, strictly speaking samurai referred to higher ranking retainers, although the cut off between samurai and other military retainers varied from domain to domain. Also usage varied by class, with commoners referring to all sword carrying men as samurai, regardless of rank.

=== The changing definition of &quot;samurai&quot; ===
The definition of &quot;samurai&quot; varies from period to period. From the Heian period to the Edo period, &quot;bushi&quot; were people who fought with weapons for a living. In the Heian period, on the other hand, the definition of samurai referred to officials who served the emperor, the imperial family, and the nobles of the imperial court, the upper echelons of society. They were responsible for assisting the nobles in their daily duties, guarding the nobles, guarding the court, arresting bandits, and suppressing civil wars, much like secretaries, butlers, and police officers today.

During the Kamakura period, the definition of samurai became synonymous with , which refers to &quot;bushi&quot; who owned territory and served the shogun. However, some samurai of exceptional status, , did not serve the shogun. Subordinate &quot;bushi&quot; in the service of the samurai were called or . Some of the &quot;rōtō&quot; were given a territory and a family name, and as , they acquired a status equivalent to that of a samurai. In other words, a high-ranking person among the &quot;bushi&quot; was called a samurai.

During the Muromachi period, as in the Kamakura period, the definition of samurai referred to high-ranking &quot;bushi&quot; in the service of the shogun. &quot;Bushi&quot; serving were not considered samurai. Those who did not serve a particular lord, such as the , who were vagabonds, the , who were armed peasants, and the , who were temporarily hired foot soldiers, were not considered samurai.

During the Sengoku period, the traditional master-servant relationship in Japanese society collapsed, and the traditional definition of samurai changed dramatically. Samurai no longer referred to those serving the shogun or emperor, and anyone who distinguished themselves in war could become samurai regardless of their social status. came from the powerful , who owned farmland and held leadership positions in their villages, and became vassals of . Their status was half farmer, half &quot;bushi&quot; (samurai). On the other hand, it also referred to local &quot;bushi&quot; who did not serve the shogun or &quot;daimyo&quot;. According to Stephen Morillo, during this period the term refers to &quot;a retainer of a lord - usually ... the retainer of a &quot;daimyo&quot;&quot; and that the term &quot;samurai&quot; &quot;marks social function and not class&quot;, and &quot;all sorts of soldiers, including pikemen, bowmen, musketeers and horsemen were samurai&quot;.

During the Azuchi–Momoyama period (late Sengoku period), &quot;samurai&quot; often referred to , the lowest-ranking &quot;bushi&quot;, as exemplified by the provisions of the temporary law Separation Edict enacted by Toyotomi Hideyoshi in 1591. This law regulated the transfer of status classes:samurai (&quot;wakatō&quot;), , , and . These four classes and the &quot;ashigaru&quot; were and peasants employed by the &quot;bushi&quot; and fell under the category of . In times of war, samurai (&quot;wakatō&quot;) and &quot;ashigaru&quot; were fighters, while the rest were porters. Generally, samurai (&quot;wakatō&quot;) could take family names, while some &quot;ashigaru&quot; could, and only samurai (&quot;wakatō&quot;) were considered samurai class. &quot;Wakatō&quot;, like samurai, had different definitions in different periods, meaning a young &quot;bushi&quot; in the Muromachi period and a rank below and above &quot;ashigaru&quot; in the Edo period.

In the early Edo period, even some with territories of 10,000 &quot;koku&quot; or more called themselves samurai. At the beginning of the Tokugawa shogunate, there was no clear distinction between and &quot;gokenin&quot;, which referred to direct vassals of the shogun, but from the second half of the 17th century a distinction was made between &quot;hatamoto&quot;, direct vassals with territories of 10,000 &quot;koku&quot; or less who were entitled to an audience with the shogun, and &quot;gokenin&quot;, those without such rights. Samurai referred to &quot;hatamoto&quot; in the Tokugawa shogunate and to or higher status &quot;bushi&quot; in each . During this period, most &quot;bushi&quot; came to serve the shogun and the &quot;daimyo&quot; of each domains, and as the distinction between &quot;bushi&quot; and &quot;chōnin&quot; or peasants became stricter, the boundaries between the definitions of samurai and &quot;bushi&quot; became blurred. Since then, the term &quot;samurai&quot; has been used to refer to &quot;bushi&quot;. Officially, however, the high-ranking &quot;bushi&quot; were called samurai and the low-ranking bushi were called . Samurai and &quot;kachi&quot; were represented by the word , a status that can be translated as warrior class, &quot;bushi&quot; class, or samurai class. Samurai were entitled to an audience with their lord, were allowed to ride horses, and received rice from the land and peasants under their control, while &quot;kachi&quot; were not entitled to an audience with their lord, guarded their lord on foot, and received rice from the stores of the shogunate and each domain. &quot;Gokenin&quot;, the status of &quot;kachi&quot;, were financially impoverished and supported themselves by making bamboo handicrafts and umbrellas and selling plants. The &quot;shibun&quot; status of samurai and &quot;kachi&quot; was clearly distinguished from the status of the &quot;ashigaru&quot; and &quot;chūgen&quot; who served them, but it was more difficult to rise from &quot;kachi&quot; to samurai than from &quot;ashigaru&quot; to &quot;kachi&quot;, and the status gap between samurai, who were high-ranking &quot;bushi&quot;, and &quot;kachi&quot;, who were low-ranking &quot;bushi&quot;, was quite wide. During the Edo Period, samurai represented a hereditary social class defined by the right to bear arms and to hold public office, as well as high social status. From the mid-Edo period, &quot;chōnin&quot; and farmers could be promoted to the samurai class by being adopted into &quot;gokenin&quot; families, or by serving in offices, and &quot;kachi&quot; could be transferred to lower social classes, such as &quot;chōnin&quot;, by changing jobs.

==History==
===Asuka and Nara periods===

As part of the Taihō Code of 702, and the later Yōrō Code, the population was required to report regularly for the census, a precursor for national conscription. With an understanding of how the population was distributed, Emperor Monmu introduced a law whereby 1 in 3–4 adult males were drafted into the state military. These soldiers were required to supply their own weapons, and in return were exempted from duties and taxes.

The Taihō Code classified most Imperial bureaucrats into 12 ranks, each divided into two sub-ranks, 1st rank being the highest adviser to the emperor. Those of 6th rank and below were referred to as &quot;samurai&quot; and dealt with day-to-day affairs and were initially civilian public servants, in keeping with the original derivation of this word from , a verb meaning &#x27;to serve&#x27;.

===Heian period===

In 792, the gundan, or provincial garrisons, in most of the country were abolished. This was a part of a shift from general conscription to conscripting only the rural elite. This came after the garrisons had their numbers reduced and recruitment focused on skilled horse archers. Another principle of the Ritsuryō system had already begun to be abandoned. All the land belonged to the state, and had been distributed on a per capita basis to farmers. However, in 743, farmers were allowed to cultivate reclaimed land in perpetuity. This allowed clan leaders, especially those with lots of slaves, to acquire large amounts of land. Members of the Imperial family, the Kuge and Temples and Shrines received grants of tax-free land. In the 9th Century, the farmers began to give their land over to the nobility in order to avoid taxes. They would then administer and work the land for a payment of rice. This also reduced the wealth of the Emperor, as he had no private land and was dependent on tax income.
Warriors in the provinces formed networks for mutual protection at the same time court officials and monataries also established private military entourages. These networks allowed the formation of large private armies as warrior leaders with hundreds of followers could combine forces. These networks were organized vertically, with a prominent figure (such as Taira no Masakado) partnering with lowing ranking warriors. Gradually, the Court began to rely more and more on these private warrior bands instead of the militia. New military and police posts were created to legitmatize the warrior leaders who were then given military responibilites. These leaders often delegated tasks to their followers. 

The Heian period saw the appearance of distinctive Japanese armor and weapons. Typical examples are the (long sword) and (halberd) used in close combat, and the and styles of armor. High-ranking samurai equipped with (bows) who fought on horseback wore , while lower-ranking samurai equipped with who fought on foot wore .

=== Kamakura shogunate ===

Two leading Samurai houses, the Minamoto and the Taira had both gained court positions and became rivals. During the Heiji Incident the Taira gained the upper hand and killed or exiled many members of the Minamoto family. After that Taira Kiyomori, practically controlled the court. This lasted till an imperial succession dispute resulted in a rebellion by Prince Mochihito. The exiled Minamoto Yoritomo joined the rebellion, and promised to guarantee lands and administrative rights to warriors who sworn allegiance to him. This usurped the role of the Court, and also effectively created an independent state in eastern Japan. However, Yoritomo did not fight for independence of his state, but negotiated for court recognition of many of the legal powers that he had usurped. At the end of the Gempei War, this resulted in the foundation of the Kamakura regime.

In 1185, Yoritomo obtained the right to appoint &quot;shugo&quot; and &quot;jitō&quot;, and was allowed to organize soldiers and police, and to collect a certain amount of tax. Initially, their responsibility was restricted to arresting rebels and collecting needed army provisions and they were forbidden from interfering with &quot;kokushi&quot; officials, but their responsibility gradually expanded. Thus, the warrior class began to gradually gain political power.

In 1190 he visited Kyoto and in 1192 became &quot;Sei&#x27;i Taishōgun&quot;, establishing the Kamakura shogunate, or &quot;Kamakura bakufu&quot;. Instead of ruling from Kyoto, he set up the shogunate in Kamakura, near his base of power. &quot;Bakufu&quot; means &quot;tent government&quot;, taken from the encampments the soldiers lived in, in accordance with the Bakufu&#x27;s status as a military government.

The Kamakura period (1185–1333) is seen by some as the rise of the samurai as they were &quot;entrusted with the security of the estates&quot; and were symbols of the ideal warrior and citizen. The Shogunate had its powerbase in the east, but also had authority over its warrior vassals all over the country. This allowed a subset of warriors to collaborate instead of just competing against each other. This began a gradual process that weakened the central authority to the advantage of the samurai.

In the late Kamakura period, even the most senior samurai began to wear , as the heavy and elegant were no longer respected. Until then, the body was the only part of the that was protected, but for higher-ranking samurai, the also came with a (helmet) and shoulder guards. For lower-ranked samurai, the was introduced, the simplest style of armor that protected only the front of the torso and the sides of the abdomen. In the late Kamakura period, a new type of armor called appeared, in which the two ends of the were extended to the back to provide greater protection.

=== Mongol invasions ===
Various samurai clans struggled for power during the Kamakura shogunate. Zen Buddhism spread among the samurai in the 13th century and helped shape their standards of conduct, particularly in overcoming the fear of death and killing. Among the general populace Pure Land Buddhism was favored however.

In 1274, the Mongol-founded Yuan dynasty in China sent a force of some 40,000 men and 900 ships to invade Japan in northern Kyūshū. Japan mustered a mere 10,000 samurai to meet this threat. The invading army was harassed by major thunderstorms throughout the invasion, which aided the defenders by inflicting heavy casualties. The Yuan army was eventually recalled, and the invasion was called off. The Mongol invaders used small bombs, which was likely the first appearance of bombs and gunpowder in Japan.
The Japanese defenders recognized the possibility of a renewed invasion and began construction of a great stone barrier around Hakata Bay in 1276. Completed in 1277, this wall stretched for 20 kilometers around the bay. It later served as a strong defensive point against the Mongols. The Mongols attempted to settle matters in a diplomatic way from 1275 to 1279, but every envoy sent to Japan was executed.

Leading up to the second Mongolian invasion, Kublai Khan continued to send emissaries to Japan, with five diplomats sent in September 1275 to Kyūshū. Hōjō Tokimune, the shikken of the Kamakura shogun, responded by having the Mongolian diplomats brought to Kamakura and then beheading them. The graves of the five executed Mongol emissaries exist to this day in Kamakura at Tatsunokuchi. On 29 July 1279, five more emissaries were sent by the Mongol empire, and again beheaded, this time in Hakata. This continued defiance of the Mongol emperor set the stage for one of the most famous engagements in Japanese history.

In 1281, a Yuan army of 140,000 men with 5,000 ships was mustered for another invasion of Japan. Northern Kyūshū was defended by a Japanese army of 40,000 men. The Mongol army was still on its ships preparing for the landing operation when a typhoon hit north Kyūshū island. The casualties and damage inflicted by the typhoon, followed by the Japanese defense of the Hakata Bay barrier, resulted in the Mongols again being defeated.

The thunderstorms of 1274 and the typhoon of 1281 helped the samurai defenders of Japan repel the Mongol invaders despite being vastly outnumbered. These winds became known as &quot;kami-no-Kaze&quot;, which literally translates as &quot;wind of the gods&quot;. This is often given a simplified translation as &quot;divine wind&quot;. The &quot;kami-no-Kaze&quot; lent credence to the Japanese belief that their lands were indeed divine and under supernatural protection.

===Nanboku-chō and Muromachi period===
In 1336, Ashikaga Takauji, who opposed Emperor Godaigo, established the Ashikaga Shogunate with Emperor Kōgon. As a result, the southern court, descended from Emperor Godaigo, and the northern court, descended from Emperor Kogon, were established side by side. This period of coexistence of the two dynasties is called the Nanboku-chō period, which corresponds to the beginning of the Muromachi period. The Northern Court, supported by the Ashikaga Shogunate, had six emperors, and in 1392 the Imperial Court was reunited by absorbing the Southern Court, although the modern Imperial Household Agency considers the Southern Court to be the legitimate emperor. The rule of Japan by the Ashikaga Shogunate lasted until the Onin War, which broke out in 1467.

From 1346 to 1358 during the Nanboku-cho period, the Ashikaga shogunate gradually expanded the authority of the , the local military and police officials established by the Kamakura shogunate, giving the &quot;Shugo&quot; jurisdiction over land disputes between and allowing the &quot;Shugo&quot; to receive half of all taxes from the areas they controlled. The &quot;Shugo&quot; shared their newfound wealth with the local samurai, creating a hierarchical relationship between the &quot;Shugo&quot; and the samurai, and the first early , called , appeared.

During the Nanboku-chō period, many lower-class foot soldiers called began to participate in battles, and the popularity of increased. During the Nanboku-chō and Muromachi periods, and became the norm, and senior samurai also began to wear by adding (helmet), (face armor), and gauntlet.

Issues of inheritance caused family strife as primogeniture became common, in contrast to the division of succession designated by law before the 14th century. Invasions of neighboring samurai territories became common to avoid infighting, and bickering among samurai was a constant problem for the Kamakura and Ashikaga shogunates.

===Sengoku period===
The outbreak of the Onin War, which began in 1467 and lasted about 10 years, devastated Kyoto and brought down the power of the Ashikaga Shogunate. This plunged the country into the warring states period, in which &quot;daimyo&quot; (feudal lords) from different regions fought each other. This period corresponds to the late Muromachi period. There are about nine theories about the end of the Sengoku Period, the earliest being the year 1568, when Oda Nobunaga marched on Kyoto, and the latest being the suppression of the Shimabara Rebellion in 1638. Thus, the Sengoku Period overlaps with the Muromachi, Azuchi–Momoyama, and Edo periods, depending on the theory. In any case, the Sengoku period was a time of large-scale civil wars throughout Japan.
 
&quot;Daimyo&quot; who became more powerful as the shogunate&#x27;s control weakened were called , and they often came from &quot;shugo daimyo&quot;, , and . In other words, &quot;sengoku daimyo&quot; differed from &quot;shugo daimyo&quot; in that a &quot;sengoku daimyo&quot; was able to rule the region on his own, without being appointed by the shogun.

During this period, the traditional master-servant relationship between the lord and his vassals broke down, with the vassals eliminating the lord, internal clan and vassal conflicts over leadership of the lord&#x27;s family, and frequent rebellion and puppetry by branch families against the lord&#x27;s family. These events sometimes led to the rise of samurai to the rank of &quot;sengoku daimyo&quot;. For example, Hōjō Sōun was the first samurai to rise to the rank of &quot;sengoku daimyo&quot; during this period. Uesugi Kenshin was an example of a &quot;Shugodai&quot; who became &quot;sengoku daimyo&quot; by weakening and eliminating the power of the lord.

This period was marked by the loosening of samurai culture, with people born into other social strata sometimes making a name for themselves as warriors and thus becoming &quot;de facto&quot; samurai. One such example is Toyotomi Hideyoshi, a well-known figure who rose from a peasant background to become a samurai, &quot;sengoku daimyo&quot;, and &quot;kampaku&quot; (Imperial Regent).

From this time on, infantrymen called , who were mobilized from the peasantry, were mobilized in even greater numbers than before, and the importance of the infantry, which had begun in the Nanboku-chō period, increased even more. When matchlocks were introduced from Portugal in 1543, Japanese swordsmiths immediately began to improve and mass-produce them. The Japanese matchlock was named after the Tanegashima island, which is believed to be the place where it was first introduced to Japan. By the end of the Sengoku Period, there were hundreds of thousands of arquebuses in Japan and a large army of nearly 100,000 men clashing with each other.

On the battlefield, began to fight in close formation, using (spear) and . As a result, , (bow), and became the primary weapons on the battlefield. The , which was difficult to maneuver in close formation, and the long, heavy fell into disuse and were replaced by the , which could be held short, and the short, light , which appeared in the Nanboku-cho period and gradually became more common. The was often cut off from the hilt and shortened to make a . The , which had become inconvenient for use on the battlefield, was transformed into a symbol of authority carried by high-ranking samurai. Although the had become even more obsolete, some &quot;sengoku daimyo&quot; dared to organize assault and kinsmen units composed entirely of large men equipped with to demonstrate the bravery of their armies.

These changes in the aspect of the battlefield during the Sengoku period led to the emergence of the style of armor, which improved the productivity and durability of armor. In the history of Japanese armor, this was the most significant change since the introduction of the and in the Heian period. In this style, the number of parts was reduced, and instead armor with eccentric designs became popular.

By the end of the Sengoku period, allegiances between warrior vassals, also known as military retainers, and lords were solidified. Vassals would serve lords in exchange for material and intangible advantages, in keeping with Confucian ideas imported from China between the seventh and ninth centuries.
These independent vassals who held land were subordinate to their superiors, who may be local lords or, in the Edo period, the shogun.
A vassal or samurai could expect monetary benefits, including land or money, from lords in exchange for their military services.

===Azuchi–Momoyama period===
The Azuchi-Momoyama period refers to the period when Oda Nobunaga and Toyotomi Hideyoshi were in power. The name &quot;Azuchi-Momoyama&quot; comes from the fact that Nobunaga&#x27;s castle, Azuchi Castle, was located in Azuchi, Shiga, and Fushimi Castle, where Hideyoshi lived after his retirement, was located in Momoyama. There are several theories as to when the Azuchi–Momoyama period began: 1568, when Oda Nobunaga entered Kyoto in support of Ashikaga Yoshiaki; 1573, when Oda Nobunaga expelled Ashikaga Yoshiaki from Kyoto; and 1576, when the construction of Azuchi Castle began. In any case, the beginning of the Azuchii–Momoyama period marked the complete end of the rule of the Ashikaga shogunate, which had been disrupted by the Onin War; in other words, it marked the end of the Muromachi period.

====Oda, Toyotomi, and Tokugawa====
Oda Nobunaga was the well-known lord of the Nagoya area (once called Owari Province) and an exceptional example of a samurai of the Sengoku period. He came within a few years of, and laid down the path for his successors to follow, the reunification of Japan under a new &quot;bakufu&quot; (shogunate).

Oda Nobunaga made innovations in the fields of organization and war tactics, made heavy use of arquebuses, developed commerce and industry, and treasured innovation. Consecutive victories enabled him to end the Ashikaga Bakufu and disarm of the military powers of the Buddhist monks, which had inflamed futile struggles among the populace for centuries. Attacking from the &quot;sanctuary&quot; of Buddhist temples, they were constant headaches to any warlord and even the emperor, who tried to control their actions. He died in 1582 when one of his generals, Akechi Mitsuhide, turned upon him with his army.

Toyotomi Hideyoshi and Tokugawa Ieyasu, who founded the Tokugawa shogunate, were loyal followers of Nobunaga. Hideyoshi began as a peasant and became one of Nobunaga&#x27;s top generals, and Ieyasu had shared his childhood with Nobunaga. Hideyoshi defeated Mitsuhide within a month and was regarded as the rightful successor of Nobunaga by avenging the treachery of Mitsuhide. These two were able to use Nobunaga&#x27;s previous achievements on which build a unified Japan and there was a saying: &quot;The reunification is a rice cake; Oda made it. Hashiba shaped it. In the end, only Ieyasu tastes it.&quot; (Hashiba is the family name that Toyotomi Hideyoshi used while he was a follower of Nobunaga.)

Toyotomi Hideyoshi, who became a grand minister in 1586, created a law that non-samurai were not allowed to carry weapons, which the samurai caste codified as permanent and hereditary, thereby ending the social mobility of Japan, which lasted until the dissolution of the Edo shogunate by the Meiji revolutionaries.

The distinction between samurai and non-samurai was so obscure that during the 16th century, most male adults in any social class (even small farmers) belonged to at least one military organization of their own and served in wars before and during Hideyoshi&#x27;s rule. It can be said that an &quot;all against all&quot; situation continued for a century. The authorized samurai families after the 17th century were those that chose to follow Nobunaga, Hideyoshi and Ieyasu. Large battles occurred during the change between regimes, and a number of defeated samurai were destroyed, went &quot;rōnin&quot; or were absorbed into the general populace.

====Invasions of Korea====

In 1592 and again in 1597, Toyotomi Hideyoshi, aiming to invade China through Korea, mobilized an army of 160,000 peasants and samurai and deployed them to Korea in one of the largest military endeavors in Eastern Asia until the late 19th century. Taking advantage of arquebus mastery and extensive wartime experience from the Sengoku period, Japanese samurai armies made major gains in most of Korea. A few of the famous samurai generals of this war were Katō Kiyomasa, Konishi Yukinaga, and Shimazu Yoshihiro. Katō Kiyomasa advanced to Orangkai territory (present-day Manchuria) bordering Korea to the northeast and crossed the border into northern China.

Kiyomasa withdrew back to Korea after retaliatory counterattacks from the Jurchens in the area, whose castles his forces had raided. Shimazu Yoshihiro led some 7,000 samurai into battle, and despite being heavily outnumbered, defeated a host of allied Ming and Korean forces at the Battle of Sacheon in 1598. Yoshihiro was feared as &quot;Oni-Shimazu&quot; (&quot;Shimazu ogre&quot;) and his nickname spread across Korea and into China.

In spite of the superiority of Japanese land forces, the two expeditions ultimately failed after Hideyoshi&#x27;s death, though the invasions did devastate the Korean peninsula. The causes of the failure included Korean naval superiority (which, led by Admiral Yi Sun-sin, harassed Japanese supply lines continuously throughout the wars, resulting in supply shortages on land), the commitment of sizable Ming forces to Korea, Korean guerrilla actions, wavering Japanese commitment to the campaigns as the wars dragged on, and the underestimation of resistance by Japanese commanders.

In the first campaign of 1592, Korean defenses on land were caught unprepared, under-trained, and under-armed. They were rapidly overrun, with only a limited number of successfully resistant engagements against the more experienced and battle-hardened Japanese forces. During the second campaign in 1597, Korean and Ming forces proved far more resilient and with the support of continued Korean naval superiority, managed to limit Japanese gains to parts of southeastern Korea. The final death blow to the Japanese campaigns in Korea came with Hideyoshi&#x27;s death in late 1598 and the recall of all Japanese forces in Korea by the Council of Five Elders, established by Hideyoshi to oversee the transition from his regency to that of his son Hideyori.

==== Battle of Sekigahara ====

Before his death, Hideyoshi ordered that Japan be ruled by a council of the five most powerful &quot;sengoku daimyo&quot;, , and Hideyoshi&#x27;s five retainers, , until his only heir, the five-year-old Toyotomi Hideyori, reached the age of 16. However, having only the young Hideyori as Hideyoshi&#x27;s successor weakened the Toyotomi regime. Today, the loss of all of Hideyoshi&#x27;s adult heirs is considered the main reason for the downfall of the Toyotomi clan. Hideyoshi&#x27;s younger brother, Toyotomi Hidenaga, who had supported Hideyoshi&#x27;s rise to power as a leader and strategist, had already died of illness in 1591, and his nephew, Toyotomi Hidetsugu, who was Hideyoshi&#x27;s only adult successor, was forced to commit seppuku in 1595 along with many other vassals on Hideyoshi&#x27;s orders for suspected rebellion.

In this politically unstable situation, Maeda Toshiie, one of the &quot;Gotairō&quot;, died of illness, and Tokugawa Ieyasu, one of the &quot;Gotairō&quot;&#x27; who had been second in power to Hideyoshi but had not participated in the war, rose to power, and Ieyasu came into conflict with Ishida Mitsunari, one of the &quot;Go-Bukyō&quot; and others. This conflict eventually led to the Battle of Sekigahara, in which the led by Ieyasu defeated the led by Mitsunari, and Ieyasu nearly gained control of Japan.

Social mobility was high, as the ancient regime collapsed and emerging samurai needed to maintain a large military and administrative organizations in their areas of influence. Most of the samurai families that survived to the 19th century originated in this era, declaring themselves to be the blood of one of the four ancient noble clans: Minamoto, Taira, Fujiwara, and Tachibana. In most cases, however, it is difficult to prove these claims.

===Tokugawa shogunate===

After the Battle of Sekigahara, when the Tokugawa shogunate defeated the Toyotomi clan in the summer campaign of the siege of Osaka in 1615, the long war ended. During the Tokugawa shogunate, samurai increasingly became courtiers, bureaucrats, and administrators rather than warriors. With no warfare since the early 17th century, samurai gradually lost their military function during the Tokugawa era (also called the Edo period).

Following the passing of a law in 1629, samurai on official duty were required to wear two swords. However, by the end of the Tokugawa era, samurai were aristocratic bureaucrats for their &quot;daishō&quot;, becoming more of a symbolic emblem of power than a weapon used in daily life. They still had the legal right to cut down any commoner who did not show proper respect , but to what extent this right was used is unknown. When the central government forced &quot;daimyōs&quot; to cut the size of their armies, unemployed rōnin became a social problem.

Theoretical obligations between a samurai and his lord (usually a &quot;daimyō&quot;) increased from the Genpei era to the Edo era, strongly emphasized by the teachings of Confucius and Mencius, required reading for the educated samurai class. The leading figures who introduced Confucianism in Japan in the early Tokugawa period were Fujiwara Seika (1561–1619), Hayashi Razan (1583–1657), and Matsunaga Sekigo (1592–1657).

Pederasty permeated the culture of samurai in the early seventeenth century. The relentless condemnation of pederasty by Jesuit missionaries also hindered attempts to convert Japan&#x27;s governing elite to Christianity. Pederasty had become deeply institutionalized among the daimyo and samurai, prompting comparisons to ancient Athens and Sparta. The Jesuits&#x27; strong condemnation of the practice alienated many of Japan&#x27;s ruling class, creating further barriers to their acceptance of Christianity. Tokugawa Iemitsu, the third shogun, was known for his interest in pederasty.

The samurai served as role modeld for the other social classes. From the mid-Edo period, wealthy and farmers could join the samurai class by giving a large sum of money to an impoverished to be adopted into a samurai family and inherit the samurai&#x27;s position and stipend. The amount of money given to a &quot;gokenin&quot; varied according to his position: 1,000 &quot;ryo&quot; for a and 500 &quot;ryo&quot; for an Some of their descendants were promoted to and held important positions in the shogunate. Some of the peasants&#x27; children were promoted to the samurai class by serving in the office. &quot;Kachi&quot; could change jobs and move into the lower classes, such as &quot;chōnin&quot;. For example, Takizawa Bakin became a &quot;chōnin&quot; by working for Tsutaya Jūzaburō.

====Samurai in Southeast Asia====
In the late 1500s, trade between Japan and Southeast Asia accelerated and increased exponentially when the Tokugawa shogunate was established in the early 1600s. The destinations of the trading ships, the red seal ships, were Thailand, the Philippines, Vietnam, Cambodia, etc. Many Japanese moved to Southeast Asia and established Japanese towns there. Many samurai, or rōnin, who had lost their masters after the Battle of Sekigahara, lived in the Japanese towns. The Spaniards in the Philippines, the Dutch of the Dutch East India Company, and the Thais of the Ayutthaya Kingdom saw the value of these samurai as mercenaries and recruited them. The most famous of these mercenaries was Yamada Nagamasa. He was originally a palanquin bearer who belonged to the lowest end of the samurai class, but he rose to prominence in the Ayutthaya Kingdom, now in southern Thailand, and became governor of the Nakhon Si Thammarat Kingdom. When the policy of national isolation (&quot;sakoku&quot;) was established in 1639, trade between Japan and Southeast Asia ceased, and records of Japanese activities in Southeast Asia were lost for many years after 1688.

====Samurai as diplomatic ambassadors====
In 1582, three &quot;Kirishitan&quot; &quot;daimyō&quot;, Ōtomo Sōrin, Ōmura Sumitada, and Arima Harunobu, sent a group of boys, their own blood relatives and retainers, to Europe as Japan&#x27;s first diplomatic mission to Europe. They had audiences with King Philip II of Spain, Pope Gregory XIII, and Pope Sixtus V. The mission returned to Japan in 1590, but its members were forced to renounce, be exiled, or be executed, due to the Tokugawa shogunate&#x27;s suppression of Christianity.

In 1612, Hasekura Tsunenaga, a vassal of the &quot;daimyo&quot; Date Masamune, led a diplomatic mission and had an audience with King Philip III of Spain, presenting him with a letter requesting trade, and he also had an audience with Pope Paul V in Rome. He returned to Japan in 1620, but news of the Tokugawa shogunate&#x27;s suppression of Christianity had already reached Europe, and trade did not take place due to the Tokugawa shogunate&#x27;s policy of &quot;sakoku&quot;. In the town of Coria del Rio in Spain, where the diplomatic mission stopped, there were 600 people with the surnames Japon or Xapon as of 2021, and they have passed on the folk tale that they are the descendants of the samurai who remained in the town.

At the end of the Edo period (Bakumatsu era), when Matthew C. Perry came to Japan in 1853 and the &quot;sakoku&quot; policy was abolished, six diplomatic missions were sent to the United States and European countries for diplomatic negotiations. The most famous were the US mission in 1860 and the European missions in 1862 and 1864. Fukuzawa Yukichi, who participated in these missions, is most famous as a leading figure in the modernization of Japan, and his portrait was selected for the 10,000 yen note.

===Modernization===

The relative peace of the Tokugawa era was shattered with the arrival of Commodore Matthew Perry&#x27;s massive U.S. Navy steamships in 1853. Perry used his superior firepower to force Japan to open its borders to trade. Prior to that only a few harbor towns, under strict control from the shogunate, were allowed to participate in Western trade, and even then, it was based largely on the idea of playing the Franciscans and Dominicans against one another (in exchange for the crucial arquebus technology, which in turn was a major contributor to the downfall of the classical samurai).

From 1854, the samurai army and the navy were modernized. A naval training school was established in Nagasaki in 1855. Naval students were sent to study in Western naval schools for several years, starting a tradition of foreign-educated future leaders, such as Admiral Enomoto. French naval engineers were hired to build naval arsenals, such as Yokosuka and Nagasaki. By the end of the Tokugawa shogunate in 1867, the Japanese navy of the &quot;shōgun&quot; already possessed eight western-style steam warships around the flagship &quot;Kaiyō Maru&quot;, which were used against pro-imperial forces during the Boshin War, under the command of Admiral Enomoto Takeaki. A French Military Mission to Japan (1867) was established to help modernize the armies of the Bakufu.

The last showing of the original samurai was in 1867 when samurai from Chōshū and Satsuma provinces defeated the shogunate forces in favor of the rule of the emperor in the Boshin War. The two provinces were the lands of the &quot;daimyōs&quot; that submitted to Ieyasu after the Battle of Sekigahara in 1600.

===Dissolution===

In the 1870s, samurai comprised five percent of the population, or 400,000 families with about 1.9 million members. They came under direct national jurisdiction in 1869, and of all the classes during the Meiji revolution they were the most affected.
Although many lesser samurai had been active in the Meiji restoration, the older ones represented an obsolete feudal institution that had a practical monopoly of military force, and to a large extent of education as well. A priority of the Meiji government was to gradually abolish the entire class of samurai and integrate them into the Japanese professional, military and business classes.

Their traditional guaranteed salaries were very expensive, and in 1873 the government started taxing the stipends and began to transform them into interest-bearing government bonds; the process was completed in 1879. The main goal was to provide enough financial liquidity to enable former samurai to invest in land and industry. A military force capable of contesting not just China but the imperial powers required a large conscript army that closely followed Western standards. The notion of very strict obedience to chain of command was incompatible with the individual authority of the samurai. Samurai now became &quot;Shizoku&quot; (; this status was abolished in 1947). The right to wear a katana in public was abolished, along with the right to execute commoners who paid them disrespect. In 1877, there was a localized samurai rebellion that was quickly crushed.

Younger samurai often became exchange students because they were ambitious, literate and well-educated. On return, some started private schools for higher education, while many samurai became reporters and writers and set up newspaper companies. Others entered governmental service. In the 1880s, 23 percent of prominent Japanese businessmen were from the samurai class; by the 1920s the number had grown to 35 percent.

==Philosophy==
===Honor===
In a 16th-century account of Japan sent to Father Ignatius Loyola at Rome, drawn from the statements of Anger (Han-Siro&#x27;s western name), Xavier describes the importance of honor to the Japanese (Letter preserved at College of Coimbra):

In the first place, the nation with which we have had to do here surpasses in goodness any of the nations lately discovered. I really think that among barbarous nations there can be none that has more natural goodness than the Japanese. They are of a kindly disposition, not at all given to cheating, wonderfully desirous of honour and rank. Honour with them is placed above everything else. There are a great many poor among them, but poverty is not a disgrace to any one. There is one thing among them of which I hardly know whether it is practised anywhere among Christians. The nobles, however poor they may be, receive the same honour from the rest as if they were rich.

Historian H. Paul Varley notes the description of Japan given by Jesuit leader St. Francis Xavier: &quot;There is no nation in the world which fears death less.&quot; Xavier further describes the honour and manners of the people: &quot;I fancy that there are no people in the world more punctilious about their honour than the Japanese, for they will not put up with a single insult or even a word spoken in anger.&quot; Xavier spent 1549 to 1551 converting Japanese to Christianity. He also observed: &quot;The Japanese are much braver and more warlike than the people of China, Korea, Ternate and all of the other nations around the Philippines.&quot;

However, insubordination or gekokujo, a term used in the fifteenth century during widespread rebellion, involved provincial lords defying the shogun, who in turn disregarded the emperor&#x27;s commands.

===Doctrine===

In the 13th century, Hōjō Shigetoki wrote: &quot;When one is serving officially or in the master&#x27;s court, he should not think of a hundred or a thousand people, but should consider only the importance of the master.&quot; Carl Steenstrup notes that 13th- and 14th-century warrior writings (&quot;gunki&quot;) &quot;portrayed the &quot;bushi&quot; in their natural element, war, eulogizing such virtues as reckless bravery, fierce family pride, and selfless, at times senseless devotion of master and man&quot;.

Feudal lords such as Shiba Yoshimasa (1350–1410) stated that a warrior looked forward to a glorious death in the service of a military leader or the emperor: 

In 1412, Imagawa Sadayo wrote a letter of admonishment to his brother stressing the importance of duty to one&#x27;s master. Imagawa was admired for his balance of military and administrative skills during his lifetime, and his writings became widespread. The letters became central to Tokugawa-era laws and became required study material for traditional Japanese until World War II:

Similarly, the feudal lord Takeda Nobushige (1525–1561) stated:

Nobushige&#x27;s brother Takeda Shingen (1521–1573) also made similar observations: 

The feudal lord Asakura Yoshikage (1428–1481) wrote: &quot;In the fief of the Asakura, one should not determine hereditary chief retainers. A man should be assigned according to his ability and loyalty.&quot; Asakura also observed that the successes of his father were obtained by the kind treatment of the warriors and common people living in domain. By his civility, &quot;all were willing to sacrifice their lives for him and become his allies&quot;.

Katō Kiyomasa was one of the most powerful and well-known lords of the Sengoku period. He commanded most of Japan&#x27;s major clans during the invasion of Korea. In a handbook he addressed to &quot;all samurai, regardless of rank&quot;, he told his followers that a warrior&#x27;s only duty in life was to &quot;grasp the long and the short swords and to die&quot;. He also ordered his followers to put forth great effort in studying the military classics, especially those related to loyalty and filial piety. He is best known for his quote: &quot;If a man does not investigate into the matter of Bushido daily, it will be difficult for him to die a brave and manly death. Thus it is essential to engrave this business of the warrior into one&#x27;s mind well.&quot;

Nabeshima Naoshige (1538–1618 AD) was another Sengoku &quot;daimyō&quot; who fought alongside Kato Kiyomasa in Korea. He stated that it was shameful for any man to have not risked his life at least once in the line of duty, regardless of his rank. Nabeshima&#x27;s sayings were passed down to his son and grandson and became the basis for Tsunetomo Yamamoto&#x27;s &quot;Hagakure&quot;. He is best known for his saying, &quot;The way of the samurai is in desperateness. Ten men or more cannot kill such a man.&quot;
Torii Mototada (1539–1600) was a feudal lord in the service of Tokugawa Ieyasu. On the eve of the battle of Sekigahara, he volunteered to remain behind in the doomed Fushimi Castle while his lord advanced to the east. Torii and Tokugawa both agreed that the castle was indefensible. In an act of loyalty to his lord, Torii chose to remain behind, pledging that he and his men would fight to the finish. As was custom, Torii vowed that he would not be taken alive. In a dramatic last stand, the garrison of 2,000 men held out against overwhelming odds for ten days against the massive army of Ishida Mitsunari&#x27;s 40,000 warriors. In a moving last statement to his son Tadamasa, he wrote:

It is said that both men cried when they parted ways, because they knew they would never see each other again. Torii&#x27;s father and grandfather had served the Tokugawa before him, and his own brother had already been killed in battle. Torii&#x27;s actions changed the course of Japanese history. Ieyasu Tokugawa successfully raised an army and won at Sekigahara.

The translator of &quot;Hagakure&quot;, William Scott Wilson, observed examples of warrior emphasis on death in clans other than Yamamoto&#x27;s: &quot;he (Takeda Shingen) was a strict disciplinarian as a warrior, and there is an exemplary story in the &quot;Hagakure&quot; relating his execution of two brawlers, not because they had fought, but because they had not fought to the death&quot;.

The rival of Takeda Shingen (1521–1573) was Uesugi Kenshin (1530–1578), a legendary Sengoku warlord well versed in the Chinese military classics and who advocated the &quot;way of the warrior as death&quot;. Japanese historian Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki describes Uesugi&#x27;s beliefs as: 

Families such as the Imagawa were influential in the development of warrior ethics and were widely quoted by other lords during their lifetime. The writings of Imagawa Sadayo were highly respected and sought out by Tokugawa Ieyasu as the source of Japanese feudal law.

===Religious influences===
The philosophies of Confucianism, Buddhism and Zen, and to a lesser extent Shinto, influenced the samurai culture. Zen meditation became an important teaching because it offered a process to calm one&#x27;s mind. The Buddhist concept of reincarnation and rebirth led samurai to abandon torture and needless killing, while some samurai even gave up violence altogether and became Buddhist monks after coming to believe that their killings were fruitless. Some were killed as they came to terms with these conclusions in the battlefield. The most defining role that Confucianism played in samurai philosophy was to stress the importance of the lord-retainer relationship—the loyalty that a samurai was required to show his lord.

Literature on the subject of &quot;bushido&quot; such as &quot;Hagakure&quot; (&quot;Hidden in Leaves&quot;) by Yamamoto Tsunetomo and &quot;Gorin no Sho&quot; (&quot;Book of the Five Rings&quot;) by Miyamoto Musashi, both written in the Edo period, contributed to the development of &quot;bushidō&quot; and Zen philosophy.

According to Robert Sharf, &quot;The notion that Zen is somehow related to Japanese culture in general, and bushidō in particular, is familiar to Western students of Zen through the writings of D. T. Suzuki, no doubt the single most important figure in the spread of Zen in the West.&quot;

==Culture==

As aristocrats for centuries, samurai developed their own cultures that influenced Japanese culture as a whole. , , , tea ceremony, and were some of the cultural pursuits enjoyed by the samurai.
&quot;Waka&quot; poems were also used as . Hosokawa Gracia, Asano Naganori, and Takasugi Shinsaku are famous for their &quot;jisei no ku&quot;.

&quot;Noh&quot; and &quot;kemari&quot; were promoted by the Ashikaga shogunate and became popular among and samurai. During the Sengoku period, the appreciation of &quot;noh&quot; and the practice of tea ceremonies were valued for socializing and exchanging information, and were essential cultural pursuits for &quot;daimyo&quot; and samurai. The view of life and death expressed in &quot;noh&quot; plays was something the samurai of the time could relate to. Owning tea utensils used in the tea ceremony was a matter of prestige for &quot;daimyo&quot; and samurai, and in some cases tea utensils were given in exchange for land as a reward for military service. The was also used as a place for political meetings, as it was suitable for secret talks, and the tea ceremony sometimes brought together samurai and townspeople who did not normally interact.

===Education===
In general, samurai, aristocrats, and priests had a very high literacy rate in kanji. Recent studies have shown that literacy in kanji among other groups in society was somewhat higher than previously understood. For example, court documents, birth and death records and marriage records from the Kamakura period, submitted by farmers, were prepared in Kanji. Both the kanji literacy rate and skills in math improved toward the end of Kamakura period.

Some samurai had &quot;buke bunko&quot;, or &quot;warrior library&quot;, a personal library that held texts on strategy, the science of warfare, and other documents that would have proved useful during the warring era of feudal Japan. One such library held 20,000 volumes. The upper class had &quot;Kuge bunko&quot;, or &quot;family libraries&quot;, that held classics, Buddhist sacred texts, and family histories, as well as genealogical records.

There were to Lord Eirin&#x27;s character many high points difficult to measure, but according to the elders the foremost of these was the way he governed the province by his civility. It goes without saying that he acted this way toward those in the samurai class, but he was also polite in writing letters to the farmers and townspeople, and even in addressing these letters he was gracious beyond normal practice. In this way, all were willing to sacrifice their lives for him and become his allies.

In a letter dated 29 January 1552, St Francis Xavier observed the ease of which the Japanese understood prayers due to the high level of literacy in Japan at that time:

In a letter to Father Ignatius Loyola at Rome, Xavier further noted the education of the upper classes:

The Nobles send their sons to monasteries to be educated as soon as they are 8 years old, and they remain there until they are 19 or 20, learning reading, writing and religion; as soon as they come out, they marry and apply themselves to politics.

===Names===
A samurai was usually named by combining one kanji from his father or grandfather and one new kanji. Samurai normally used only a small part of their total name.

For example, the full name of Oda Nobunaga was &quot;Oda Kazusanosuke Saburo Nobunaga&quot; (), in which &quot;Oda&quot; is a clan or family name, &quot;Kazusanosuke&quot; is a title of vice-governor of Kazusa province, &quot;Saburo&quot; is a formal nickname (&quot;yobina&quot;), and &quot;Nobunaga&quot; is an adult name (&quot;nanori&quot;) given at genpuku, the coming of age ceremony. A man was addressed by his family name and his title, or by his &quot;yobina&quot; if he did not have a title. However, the &quot;nanori&quot; was a private name that could be used by only a very few, including the emperor. Samurai could choose their own &quot;nanori&quot; and frequently changed their names to reflect their allegiances.

Samurai were given the privilege of carrying two swords and using &#x27;samurai surnames&#x27; to identify themselves from the common people.

===Marriage===
Samurai had arranged marriages, which were arranged by a go-between of the same or higher rank. While for those samurai in the upper ranks this was a necessity (as most had few opportunities to meet women), this was a formality for lower-ranked samurai. Most samurai married women from a samurai family, but for lower-ranked samurai, marriages with commoners were permitted. In these marriages a dowry was brought by the woman and was used to set up the couple&#x27;s new household.

A samurai could take concubines, but their backgrounds were checked by higher-ranked samurai. In many cases, taking a concubine was akin to a marriage. Kidnapping a concubine, although common in fiction, would have been shameful, if not criminal. If the concubine was a commoner, a messenger was sent with betrothal money or a note for exemption of tax to ask for her parents&#x27; acceptance. Even though the woman would not be a legal wife, a situation normally considered a demotion, many wealthy merchants believed that being the concubine of a samurai was superior to being the legal wife of a commoner. When a merchant&#x27;s daughter married a samurai, her family&#x27;s money erased the samurai&#x27;s debts, and the samurai&#x27;s social status improved the standing of the merchant family. If a samurai&#x27;s commoner concubine gave birth to a son, the son could inherit his father&#x27;s social status.

A samurai could divorce his wife for a variety of reasons with approval from a superior, but divorce was, while not entirely nonexistent, a rare event. A wife&#x27;s failure to produce a son was cause for divorce, but adoption of a male heir was considered an acceptable alternative to divorce. A samurai could divorce for personal reasons, even if he simply did not like his wife, but this was generally avoided as it would embarrass the person who had arranged the marriage. A woman could also arrange a divorce, although it would generally take the form of the samurai divorcing her. After a divorce, samurai had to return the betrothal money, which often prevented divorces.

==Women==


Maintaining the household was the main duty of women of the samurai class. This was especially crucial during early feudal Japan, when warrior husbands were often traveling abroad or engaged in clan battles. The wife, or &quot;okugatasama&quot; (meaning: one who remains in the home), was left to manage all household affairs, care for the children, and perhaps even defend the home forcibly. For this reason, many women of the samurai class were trained in wielding a polearm called a &quot;naginata&quot; or a special knife called the &quot;kaiken&quot; in an art called &quot;tantojutsu&quot; (lit. the skill of the knife), which they could use to protect their household, family, and honor if the need arose. There were women who actively engaged in battles alongside male samurai in Japan, although most of these female warriors were not formal samurai.

A samurai&#x27;s daughter&#x27;s greatest duty was political marriage. These women married members of enemy clans of their families to form a diplomatic relationship. These alliances were stages for many intrigues, wars and tragedies throughout Japanese history. A woman could divorce her husband if he did not treat her well and also if he was a traitor to his wife&#x27;s family. A famous case was that of Oda Tokuhime (daughter of Oda Nobunaga); irritated by the antics of her mother-in-law, Lady Tsukiyama (the wife of Tokugawa Ieyasu), she was able to get Lady Tsukiyama arrested on suspicion of communicating with the Takeda clan (then a great enemy of Nobunaga and the Oda clan). Ieyasu also arrested his own son, Matsudaira Nobuyasu, who was Tokuhime&#x27;s husband, because Nobuyasu was close to his mother Lady Tsukiyama. To assuage his ally Nobunaga, Ieyasu had Lady Tsukiyama executed in 1579 and that same year ordered his son to commit seppuku to prevent him from seeking revenge for the death of his mother.

Though women of wealthier samurai families enjoyed perks of their elevated position in society, such as avoiding the physical labor that those of lower classes often engaged in, they were still viewed as far beneath men. Women were prohibited from engaging in any political affairs and were usually not the heads of their household. This does not mean that women in the samurai class were always powerless. Samurai women wielded power at various occasions. Throughout history, several women of the samurai class have acquired political power and influence, even though they have not received these privileges &quot;de jure&quot;.

After Ashikaga Yoshimasa, 8th &quot;shōgun&quot; of the Muromachi shogunate, lost interest in politics, his wife Hino Tomiko largely ruled in his place. Nene, wife of Toyotomi Hideyoshi, was known to overrule her husband&#x27;s decisions at times, and Yodo-dono, his concubine, became the &quot;de facto&quot; master of Osaka castle and the Toyotomi clan after Hideyoshi&#x27;s death. Tachibana Ginchiyo was chosen to lead the Tachibana clan after her father&#x27;s death. Yamauchi Chiyo, wife of Yamauchi Kazutoyo, has long been considered the ideal samurai wife. According to legend, she made her kimono out of a quilted patchwork of bits of old cloth and saved pennies to buy her husband a magnificent horse, on which he rode to many victories. The fact that Chiyo (though she is better known as &quot;Wife of Yamauchi Kazutoyo&quot;) is held in such high esteem for her economic sense is illuminating in the light of the fact that she never produced an heir and the Yamauchi clan was succeeded by Kazutoyo&#x27;s younger brother. The source of power for women may have been that samurai left their finances to their wives. Several women ascended the Chrysanthemum Throne as a female imperial ruler (女性天皇, josei tennō)

As the Tokugawa period progressed more value became placed on education, and the education of females beginning at a young age became important to families and society as a whole. Marriage criteria began to weigh intelligence and education as desirable attributes in a wife, right along with physical attractiveness. Though many of the texts written for women during the Tokugawa period only pertained to how a woman could become a successful wife and household manager, there were those that undertook the challenge of learning to read, and also tackled philosophical and literary classics. Nearly all women of the samurai class were literate by the end of the Tokugawa period.

==Combat techniques==
During the existence of the samurai, two opposite types of organization reigned. The first type were recruits-based armies: at the beginning, during the Nara period, samurai armies relied on armies of Chinese-type recruits and towards the end in infantry units composed of &quot;ashigaru&quot;. The second type of organization was that of a samurai on horseback who fought individually or in small groups.

At the beginning of the contest, a series of bulbous-headed arrows were shot, which buzzed in the air. The purpose of these shots was to call the &quot;kami&quot; to witness the displays of courage that were about to unfold. After a brief exchange of arrows between the two sides, a contest called &quot;ikkiuchi&quot; (一 騎 討 ち) was developed, where great rivals on both sides faced each other. After these individual combats, the major combats were given way, usually sending infantry troops led by samurai on horseback. At the beginning of the samurai battles, it was an honor to be the first to enter battle. This changed in the Sengoku period with the introduction of the arquebus.

At the beginning of the use of firearms, the combat methodology was as follows: at the beginning an exchange of arquebus shots was made at a distance of approximately 100 meters; when the time was right, the &quot;ashigaru&quot; spearmen were ordered to advance and finally the samurai would attack, either on foot or on horseback. The army chief would sit in a scissor chair inside a semi-open tent called &quot;maku&quot;, which exhibited its respective &quot;mon&quot; and represented the &quot;bakufu&quot;, &quot;government from the &quot;maku&quot;.&quot;

In the middle of the contest, some samurai decided to get off the horse and seek to cut off the head of a worthy rival. This act was considered an honor. Through it they gained respect among the military class. After the battle, the high-ranking samurai normally celebrated with a tea ceremony, and the victorious general reviewed the heads of the most important members of the enemy which had been cut.

Most of the battles were not resolved in the ideal manner mentioned above. Most wars were won through surprise attacks, such as night raids, fires, etc. The renowned samurai Minamoto no Tametomo said:

===Head collection===
Cutting off the head of a worthy rival on the battlefield was a source of great pride and recognition. There was a detailed ritual to beautify the severed heads: first they were washed and combed, and once this was done, the teeth were blackened by applying a dye called &quot;ohaguro&quot;. The reason for blackening the teeth was that white teeth was a sign of distinction, so applying a dye to darken them was a desecration. The heads were carefully arranged on a table for exposure.

In 1600, Kani Saizō participated in the Battle of Sekigahara as the forerunner of Fukushima Masanori&#x27;s army. In the outpost battle of Gifu Castle, he took the heads of 17 enemy soldiers, and was greatly praised by Tokugawa Ieyasu. He fought with a bamboo stalk on his back and would mark the heads of his defeated enemies by putting bamboo leaves in their cut necks or mouths, since he could not carry every head. Thus he gained the nickname &quot;Bamboo Saizo.&quot;

During Toyotomi Hideyoshi&#x27;s invasions of Korea, the number of severed heads of the enemies to be sent to Japan was such that for logistical reasons only the noses were sent. These were covered with salt and shipped in wooden barrels. These barrels were buried in a burial mound near the &quot;Great Buddha&quot; of Hideyoshi, where they remain today under the wrong name of &quot;mimizuka&quot; or &quot;ear mound&quot;.

===Military formations===
During the Azuchi-Momoyama period and thanks to the introduction of firearms, combat tactics changed dramatically. The military formations adopted had poetic names, among which are:

Many of these formations were created by Zhuge Liang, Sun Tzu, and others in China, and were introduced to Japan where they were used. In reality, based on these, each force developed its own formations depending on its organization and tactics.

==In popular culture==
Samurai figures have been the subject for legends, folk tales, dramatic stories (i.e. &quot;gunki monogatari&quot;), theatre productions in kabuki and noh, in literature, movies, animated and anime films, television shows, manga, video games, and in various musical pieces in genre that range from &quot;enka&quot; to J-Pop songs.

&quot;Jidaigeki&quot; (literally historical drama) has always been a staple program on Japanese movies and television. The programs typically feature a samurai. Samurai films and westerns share a number of similarities, and the two have influenced each other over the years. One of Japan&#x27;s most renowned directors, Akira Kurosawa, greatly influenced western film-making. George Lucas&#x27; &quot;Star Wars&quot; series incorporated many stylistic traits pioneered by Kurosawa, and &quot;Star Wars: A New Hope&quot; takes the core story of a rescued princess being transported to a secret base from Kurosawa&#x27;s &quot;The Hidden Fortress&quot;. Kurosawa was inspired by the works of director John Ford, and in turn Kurosawa&#x27;s works have been remade into westerns such as &quot;Seven Samurai&quot; into &quot;The Magnificent Seven&quot; and &quot;Yojimbo&quot; into &quot;A Fistful of Dollars&quot;. There is also a 26-episode anime adaptation (&quot;Samurai 7&quot;) of &quot;Seven Samurai&quot;. Along with film, literature containing samurai influences are seen as well. As well as influence from American Westerns, Kurosawa also adapted two of Shakespeare&#x27;s plays as sources for samurai movies: &quot;Throne of Blood&quot; was based on &quot;Macbeth,&quot; and &quot;Ran&quot; was based on &quot;King Lear&quot;.

Most common are historical works where the protagonist is either a samurai or former samurai (or another rank or position) who possesses considerable martial skill. Eiji Yoshikawa is one of the most famous Japanese historical novelists. His retellings of popular works, including Taiko, Musashi and &quot;The Tale of the Heike&quot;, are popular among readers for their epic narratives and rich realism in depicting samurai and warrior culture. The samurai have also appeared frequently in Japanese comics (manga) and animation (anime). Examples are &quot;Samurai Champloo&quot;, &quot;Shigurui&quot;, &quot;Requiem from the Darkness&quot;, &quot;&quot;, and &quot;Afro Samurai&quot;. Samurai-like characters are not just restricted to historical settings, and a number of works set in the modern age, and even the future, include characters who live, train and fight like samurai. Some of these works have made their way to the west, where it has been increasing in popularity with America.

In the 21st century, samurai have become more popular in America. Through various media, producers and writers have been capitalizing on the notion that Americans admire the samurai lifestyle. The animated series, &quot;Afro Samurai&quot;, became well-liked in American popular culture because of its blend of hack-and-slash animation and gritty urban music. Created by Takashi Okazaki, &quot;Afro Samurai&quot; was initially a &quot;dōjinshi&quot;, or manga series, which was then made into an animated series by Studio Gonzo. In 2007, the animated series debuted on American cable television on the Spike TV channel. The series was produced for American viewers which &quot;embodies the trend... comparing hip-hop artists to samurai warriors, an image some rappers claim for themselves&quot;. The story line keeps in tone with the perception of a samurai finding vengeance against someone who has wronged him. Because of its popularity, &quot;Afro Samurai&quot; was adopted into a full feature animated film and also became titles on gaming consoles such as the PlayStation 3 and Xbox. Not only has the samurai culture been adopted into animation and video games, it can also be seen in comic books.

The television series &quot;Power Rangers Samurai&quot; (adapted from &quot;Samurai Sentai Shinkenger&quot;) is inspired by the way of the samurai.

==Samurai museums==
* Japanese Sword Museum – dedicated to the art of Japanese swordmaking.
* Matsumoto Castle – the second floor features a collection of feudal guns, armor, and other weapons.
* Ōyamazumi Shrine in Ōmishima Island – large collection of ancient samurai weaponry, armor and shrine statuary.
* Samurai Museum Berlin
* Samurai Museum in Shinjuku, Tokyo – about the history of the samurai with armor, weapons etc.

==See also==

* List of Japanese battles
* List of samurai
* Musha shugyō
* Ninja
* Pechin
* Kabukimono
* Seiwa Genji
* Shudō
* Shi
* Hwarang
* Kheshig
==References==
==Bibliography==

* Absolon, Trevor. &quot;Samurai Armour: Volume I: The Japanese Cuirass&quot; (Bloomsbury Publishing, 2017).
* Anderson, Patricia E. &quot;Roles of Samurai Women: Social Norms and Inner Conflicts During Japan&#x27;s Tokugawa Period, 1603–1868&quot;. &quot;New Views on Gender&quot; 15 (2015): 30–37. online
* Ansart, Olivier. &quot;Lust, Commerce and Corruption: An Account of What I Have Seen and Heard by an Edo Samurai&quot;. &quot;Asian Studies Review&quot; 39.3 (2015): 529–530.
* Benesch, Oleg. &quot;Inventing the Way of the Samurai: Nationalism, Internationalism, and Bushido in Modern Japan&quot; (Oxford UP, 2014). 
* Benesch, Oleg. &quot;Comparing Warrior Traditions: How the Janissaries and Samurai Maintained Their Status and Privileges During Centuries of Peace.&quot; &quot;Comparative Civilizations Review&quot; 55.55 (2006): 6:37–55 Online.
* Clements, Jonathan. &quot;A Brief History of the Samurai&quot; (Running Press, 2010) 
* Cummins, Antony, and Mieko Koizumi. &quot;The Lost Samurai School&quot; (North Atlantic Books, 2016) 17th century Samurai textbook on combat; heavily illustrated.
* Hubbard, Ben. &quot;The Samurai Warrior: The Golden Age of Japan&#x27;s Elite Warriors 1560–1615&quot; (Amber Books, 2015).
* Jaundrill, D. Colin. &quot;Samurai to Soldier: Remaking Military Service in Nineteenth-Century Japan&quot; (Cornell UP, 2016).
* Kinmonth, Earl H. &quot;Self-Made Man in Meiji Japanese Thought: From Samurai to Salary Man&quot; (1981) 385pp.
* Ogata, Ken. &quot;End of the Samurai: A Study of Deinstitutionalization Processes&quot;. &quot;Academy of Management Proceedings&quot; Vol. 2015. No. 1.
* Thorne, Roland. &quot;Samurai films&quot; (Oldcastle Books, 2010).
* Turnbull, Stephen. &quot;The Samurai: A Military History&quot; (1996).
* Kure, Mitsuo. &quot;Samurai: an illustrated history&quot; (2014).

===Historiography===
* Howland, Douglas R. &quot;Samurai status, class, and bureaucracy: A historiographical essay&quot;. &quot;The Journal of Asian Studies&quot;. 60.2 (2001): 353–380. online.
==External links==
* 
* The Samurai Archives Japanese History page
* Samurai Swords and Samurai Culture 
* History of the Samurai
* The Way of the Samurai – Japan: Memoirs of a Secret Empire
* Comprehensive Database of Archaeological Site Reports in Japan, Nara National Research Institute for Cultural Properties</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="3" end="8" title="Samurai" label="bushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="60" end="65" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196276" start="123" end="127" title="Kuge" label="Kuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="279" end="288" title="Meiji era" label="Meiji era"/>
<link wikidata="Q193292" start="298" end="310" title="Heian period" label="Heian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079102" start="402" end="412" title="Taira clan" label="Taira clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q599881" start="426" end="439" title="Minamoto clan" label="Minamoto clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q944859" start="443" end="447" title="Heiji rebellion" label="1160"/>
<link wikidata="Q968676" start="490" end="494" title="Battle of Dan-no-ura" label="1185"/>
<link wikidata="Q242800" start="496" end="516" title="Minamoto no Yoritomo" label="Minamoto no Yoritomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q736839" start="533" end="551" title="Kamakura shogunate" label="Kamakura shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143696" start="764" end="778" title="Samurai-dokoro" label="Samurai-dokoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q204023" start="792" end="806" title="Sengoku period" label="Sengoku Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="1055" end="1065" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q61855" start="1593" end="1609" title="Matthew C. Perry" label="Matthew C. Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q804558" start="1631" end="1640" title="Bakumatsu" label="Bakumatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="1671" end="1677" title="bakufu" label="bakufu"/>
<link wikidata="Q876267" start="1724" end="1730" title="Chōshū Domain" label="Chōshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q676187" start="1735" end="1750" title="Satsuma Domain" label="Satsuma Domains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065356" start="1784" end="1793" title="sonnō jōi" label="sonnō jōi"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="1821" end="1839" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="1858" end="1875" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q309184" start="1880" end="1890" title="Boshin War" label="Boshin War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322181" start="2164" end="2180" title="Meiji government" label="Meiji government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482406" start="2230" end="2237" title="shizoku" label="shizoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018220" start="2796" end="2816" title="William Scott Wilson" label="William Scott Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q193292" start="3960" end="3972" title="Heian period" label="Heian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="3980" end="3990" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q236205" start="4491" end="4506" title="Kamakura period" label="Kamakura period"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="4628" end="4634" title="shogun" label="shogun"/>
<link wikidata="Q334845" start="5022" end="5038" title="Muromachi period" label="Muromachi period"/>
<link wikidata="Q204023" start="5422" end="5436" title="Sengoku period" label="Sengoku period"/>
<link wikidata="Q319531" start="6398" end="6420" title="Azuchi–Momoyama period" label="Azuchi–Momoyama period"/>
<link wikidata="Q982467" start="6576" end="6592" title="Separation Edict" label="Separation Edict"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="7364" end="7374" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q855048" start="7419" end="7423" title="koku" label="koku"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="7489" end="7507" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059892" start="10111" end="10121" title="Taihō Code" label="Taihō Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575743" start="10144" end="10153" title="Yōrō Code" label="Yōrō Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q357246" start="10319" end="10332" title="Emperor Monmu" label="Emperor Monmu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207652" start="12311" end="12328" title="Taira no Masakado" label="Taira no Masakado"/>
<link wikidata="Q3671179" start="12707" end="12721" title="Japanese armor" label="Japanese armor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13125" end="13139" title="Heiji Incident" label="Heiji Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141023" start="13928" end="13933" title="shugo" label="shugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329805" start="13950" end="13954" title="jitō" label="jitō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351234" start="14208" end="14215" title="Kokushi (official)" label="kokushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="14394" end="14414" title="Shōgun" label="Sei&amp;#x27;i Taishōgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q200267" start="14548" end="14556" title="Kamakura, Kanagawa" label="Kamakura"/>
<link wikidata="Q236205" start="14761" end="14776" title="Kamakura period" label="Kamakura period"/>
<link wikidata="Q736839" start="15912" end="15930" title="Kamakura shogunate" label="Kamakura shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="15932" end="15944" title="Zen Buddhism" label="Zen Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q262244" start="16120" end="16138" title="Pure Land Buddhism" label="Pure Land Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="16189" end="16201" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q13987" start="16285" end="16291" title="Kyūshū" label="Kyūshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154769" start="16769" end="16788" title="Genko Borui" label="great stone barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344806" start="16796" end="16806" title="Hakata Bay" label="Hakata Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523" start="17123" end="17134" title="Kublai Khan" label="Kublai Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q430964" start="17228" end="17241" title="Hōjō Tokimune" label="Hōjō Tokimune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045904" start="17247" end="17254" title="shikken" label="shikken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330839" start="17568" end="17574" title="Hakata-ku, Fukuoka" label="Hakata"/>
<link wikidata="Q297107" start="18652" end="18668" title="Ashikaga Takauji" label="Ashikaga Takauji"/>
<link wikidata="Q313942" start="18682" end="18697" title="Emperor Godaigo" label="Emperor Godaigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154406" start="18715" end="18733" title="Ashikaga Shogunate" label="Ashikaga Shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q471885" start="18739" end="18752" title="Emperor Kōgon" label="Emperor Kōgon"/>
<link wikidata="Q264012" start="18966" end="18984" title="Nanboku-chō period" label="Nanboku-chō period"/>
<link wikidata="Q334845" start="19028" end="19044" title="Muromachi period" label="Muromachi period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143602" start="19218" end="19243" title="Imperial Household Agency" label="Imperial Household Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q385676" start="19364" end="19372" title="Onin War" label="Onin War"/>
<link wikidata="Q250843" start="20294" end="20307" title="primogeniture" label="primogeniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q385676" start="20623" end="20631" title="Onin War" label="Onin War"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="20691" end="20696" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q204023" start="20785" end="20806" title="Sengoku Period" label="warring states period"/>
<link wikidata="Q61982" start="20823" end="20829" title="daimyo" label="daimyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q171411" start="21053" end="21065" title="Oda Nobunaga" label="Oda Nobunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q696217" start="21128" end="21147" title="Shimabara Rebellion" label="Shimabara Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q319531" start="21211" end="21226" title="Azuchi–Momoyama period" label="Azuchi–Momoyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="21232" end="21242" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q924929" start="22135" end="22144" title="Hōjō Sōun" label="Hōjō Sōun"/>
<link wikidata="Q311080" start="22237" end="22251" title="Uesugi Kenshin" label="Uesugi Kenshin"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="22561" end="22569" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q187550" start="22605" end="22623" title="Toyotomi Hideyoshi" label="Toyotomi Hideyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346974" start="22739" end="22746" title="Sessho and Kampaku" label="kampaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243678" start="23009" end="23018" title="matchlock" label="matchlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q696228" start="23175" end="23193" title="Tanegashima" label="Tanegashima island"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="24864" end="24873" title="Confucian" label="Confucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q171411" start="25288" end="25300" title="Oda Nobunaga" label="Oda Nobunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q187550" start="25305" end="25323" title="Toyotomi Hideyoshi" label="Toyotomi Hideyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q786888" start="25425" end="25438" title="Azuchi Castle" label="Azuchi Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q165676" start="25455" end="25468" title="Azuchi, Shiga" label="Azuchi, Shiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196273" start="25474" end="25488" title="Fushimi Castle" label="Fushimi Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q171411" start="26080" end="26092" title="Oda Nobunaga" label="Oda Nobunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q11751" start="26124" end="26130" title="Nagoya" label="Nagoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q514506" start="26149" end="26163" title="Owari Province" label="Owari Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q313320" start="26944" end="26960" title="Akechi Mitsuhide" label="Akechi Mitsuhide"/>
<link wikidata="Q187550" start="26994" end="27012" title="Toyotomi Hideyoshi" label="Toyotomi Hideyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171977" start="27017" end="27032" title="Tokugawa Ieyasu" label="Tokugawa Ieyasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q212418" start="28611" end="28616" title="rōnin" label="rōnin"/>
<link wikidata="Q576338" start="28835" end="28857" title="Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–1598)" label="deployed them to Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q168289" start="28964" end="28972" title="arquebus" label="arquebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q204023" start="29023" end="29037" title="Sengoku period" label="Sengoku period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069843" start="29152" end="29165" title="Katō Kiyomasa" label="Katō Kiyomasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q942553" start="29167" end="29183" title="Konishi Yukinaga" label="Konishi Yukinaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156288" start="29189" end="29206" title="Shimazu Yoshihiro" label="Shimazu Yoshihiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="29266" end="29275" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q753880" start="29429" end="29437" title="Jurchen people" label="Jurchens"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="29607" end="29611" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q484475" start="29637" end="29654" title="Battle of Sacheon (1598)" label="Battle of Sacheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q50184" start="30054" end="30064" title="Yi Sun-sin" label="Yi Sun-sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154511" start="31012" end="31034" title="Council of Five Elders" label="Council of Five Elders"/>
<link wikidata="Q313641" start="31369" end="31386" title="Toyotomi Hideyori" label="Toyotomi Hideyori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191183" start="31669" end="31686" title="Toyotomi Hidenaga" label="Toyotomi Hidenaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q967501" start="31818" end="31836" title="Toyotomi Hidetsugu" label="Toyotomi Hidetsugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196817" start="32045" end="32058" title="Maeda Toshiie" label="Maeda Toshiie"/>
<link wikidata="Q171977" start="32113" end="32128" title="Tokugawa Ieyasu" label="Tokugawa Ieyasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q334107" start="32296" end="32312" title="Ishida Mitsunari" label="Ishida Mitsunari"/>
<link wikidata="Q234188" start="32394" end="32414" title="Battle of Sekigahara" label="Battle of Sekigahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q599881" start="32859" end="32867" title="Minamoto" label="Minamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079102" start="32869" end="32874" title="Taira" label="Taira"/>
<link wikidata="Q641628" start="32876" end="32884" title="Fujiwara clan" label="Fujiwara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975377" start="32890" end="32899" title="Tachibana clan (samurai)" label="Tachibana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521658" start="33064" end="33077" title="Toyotomi clan" label="Toyotomi clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q475780" start="33108" end="33122" title="siege of Osaka" label="siege of Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="33410" end="33420" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q944685" start="33511" end="33521" title="Daishō" label="two swords"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604" start="34154" end="34163" title="Confucius" label="Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q188903" start="34168" end="34175" title="Mencius" label="Mencius"/>
<link wikidata="Q211354" start="34407" end="34416" title="Pederasty" label="Pederasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="34528" end="34534" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294184" start="34737" end="34754" title="Pederasty in ancient Greece" label="Athens and Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q314481" start="34918" end="34934" title="Tokugawa Iemitsu" label="Tokugawa Iemitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q463142" start="35714" end="35728" title="Takizawa Bakin" label="Takizawa Bakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541685" start="35772" end="35788" title="Tsutaya Jūzaburō" label="Tsutaya Jūzaburō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429347" start="36030" end="36044" title="red seal ships" label="red seal ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q212418" start="36195" end="36200" title="rōnin" label="rōnin"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="36341" end="36365" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="36388" end="36405" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188845" start="36513" end="36528" title="Yamada Nagamasa" label="Yamada Nagamasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483643" start="36725" end="36752" title="Nakhon Si Thammarat Kingdom" label="Nakhon Si Thammarat Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q332075" start="36799" end="36805" title="sakoku" label="sakoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q718714" start="37039" end="37049" title="Kirishitan" label="Kirishitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185032" start="37076" end="37087" title="Ōtomo Sōrin" label="Ōtomo Sōrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728800" start="37089" end="37103" title="Ōmura Sumitada" label="Ōmura Sumitada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197394" start="37109" end="37123" title="Arima Harunobu" label="Arima Harunobu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16663030" start="37201" end="37248" title="Tenshō embassy" label="Japan&amp;#x27;s first diplomatic mission to Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="37279" end="37297" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q83029" start="37299" end="37316" title="Pope Gregory XIII" label="Pope Gregory XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q133350" start="37322" end="37335" title="Pope Sixtus V" label="Pope Sixtus V"/>
<link wikidata="Q244764" start="37520" end="37538" title="Hasekura Tsunenaga" label="Hasekura Tsunenaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q311183" start="37575" end="37588" title="Date Masamune" label="Date Masamune"/>
<link wikidata="Q34464" start="37645" end="37664" title="Philip III of Spain" label="Philip III of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q132711" start="37746" end="37757" title="Pope Paul V" label="Pope Paul V"/>
<link wikidata="Q804558" start="38275" end="38288" title="Bakumatsu era" label="Bakumatsu era"/>
<link wikidata="Q61855" start="38296" end="38312" title="Matthew C. Perry" label="Matthew C. Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158166" start="38516" end="38534" title="Japanese Embassy to the United States" label="US mission in 1860"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079787" start="38543" end="38568" title="First Japanese Embassy to Europe (1862)" label="European missions in 1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025044" start="38573" end="38577" title="Second Japanese Embassy to Europe (1864)" label="1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q355447" start="38579" end="38595" title="Fukuzawa Yukichi" label="Fukuzawa Yukichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545898" start="38737" end="38752" title="10,000 yen note" label="10,000 yen note"/>
<link wikidata="Q61855" start="38859" end="38872" title="Matthew Perry (naval officer)" label="Matthew Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="39186" end="39196" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="39202" end="39212" title="Dominican order" label="Dominicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456184" start="39425" end="39446" title="Nagasaki Naval Training Center" label="naval training school"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="39466" end="39474" title="Nagasaki, Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q532959" start="39635" end="39642" title="Enomoto Takeaki" label="Enomoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q200578" start="39711" end="39719" title="Yokosuka" label="Yokosuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3005167" start="39897" end="39919" title="Japanese battleship Kaiyo Maru" label="&amp;quot;Kaiyō Maru&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q309184" start="39976" end="39986" title="Boshin War" label="Boshin War"/>
<link wikidata="Q532959" start="40017" end="40032" title="Enomoto Takeaki" label="Enomoto Takeaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316839" start="40036" end="40075" title="French Military Mission to Japan (1867)" label="French Military Mission to Japan (1867)"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="40128" end="40134" title="Bakufu" label="Bakufu"/>
<link wikidata="Q907382" start="40208" end="40214" title="Nagato Province" label="Chōshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q667475" start="40219" end="40226" title="Satsuma Province" label="Satsuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="40769" end="40786" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482406" start="41735" end="41742" title="Shizoku" label="Shizoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q714820" start="41929" end="41981" title="Satsuma Rebellion" label="localized samurai rebellion that was quickly crushed"/>
<link wikidata="Q44281" start="42482" end="42497" title="Ignatius Loyola" label="Ignatius Loyola"/>
<link wikidata="Q163900" start="43430" end="43448" title="St. Francis Xavier" label="St. Francis Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q19151" start="43938" end="43945" title="Ternate" label="Ternate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416571" start="44034" end="44042" title="gekokujo" label="gekokujo"/>
<link wikidata="Q373083" start="44247" end="44261" title="Hōjō Shigetoki (born 1198)" label="Hōjō Shigetoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q860484" start="44453" end="44468" title="Carl Steenstrup" label="Carl Steenstrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q281350" start="44912" end="44926" title="Imagawa Sadayo" label="Imagawa Sadayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350640" start="45315" end="45331" title="Takeda Nobushige" label="Takeda Nobushige"/>
<link wikidata="Q276404" start="45378" end="45392" title="Takeda Shingen" label="Takeda Shingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322768" start="45455" end="45472" title="Asakura Yoshikage" label="Asakura Yoshikage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069843" start="45894" end="45907" title="Katō Kiyomasa" label="Katō Kiyomasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503193" start="46002" end="46026" title="Japanese clans" label="Japan&amp;#x27;s major clans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039095" start="46664" end="46682" title="Nabeshima Naoshige" label="Nabeshima Naoshige"/>
<link wikidata="Q548162" start="47003" end="47021" title="Tsunetomo Yamamoto" label="Tsunetomo Yamamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q387227" start="47035" end="47043" title="Hagakure" label="Hagakure"/>
<link wikidata="Q665518" start="47180" end="47194" title="Torii Mototada" label="Torii Mototada"/>
<link wikidata="Q234188" start="47288" end="47298" title="Sekigahara" label="Sekigahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196273" start="47346" end="47360" title="Fushimi Castle" label="Fushimi Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q234188" start="48226" end="48236" title="Sekigahara" label="Sekigahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018220" start="48279" end="48299" title="William Scott Wilson" label="William Scott Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q276404" start="48648" end="48662" title="Takeda Shingen" label="Takeda Shingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q311080" start="48679" end="48693" title="Uesugi Kenshin" label="Uesugi Kenshin"/>
<link wikidata="Q281350" start="49083" end="49097" title="Imagawa Sadayo" label="Imagawa Sadayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="49254" end="49262" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="49267" end="49270" title="Zen" label="Zen"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="49295" end="49301" title="Shinto" label="Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q128593" start="49457" end="49470" title="reincarnation" label="reincarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q387227" start="50011" end="50019" title="Hagakure" label="Hagakure"/>
<link wikidata="Q548162" start="50060" end="50078" title="Yamamoto Tsunetomo" label="Yamamoto Tsunetomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q193344" start="50148" end="50164" title="Miyamoto Musashi" label="Miyamoto Musashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q202298" start="50695" end="50707" title="Japanese tea ceremony" label="tea ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q256864" start="50815" end="50830" title="Hosokawa Gracia" label="Hosokawa Gracia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866316" start="50832" end="50846" title="Asano Naganori" label="Asano Naganori"/>
<link wikidata="Q700310" start="50852" end="50869" title="Takasugi Shinsaku" label="Takasugi Shinsaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154406" start="50977" end="50995" title="Ashikaga shogunate" label="Ashikaga shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q204023" start="51045" end="51059" title="Sengoku period" label="Sengoku period"/>
<link wikidata="Q82772" start="51870" end="51875" title="kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q163900" start="53232" end="53249" title="St Francis Xavier" label="St Francis Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q44281" start="53382" end="53404" title="Ignatius of Loyola" label="Father Ignatius Loyola"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="53408" end="53412" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q82772" start="53778" end="53783" title="kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q171411" start="53926" end="53938" title="Oda Nobunaga" label="Oda Nobunaga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54163" end="54169" title="yobina" label="yobina"/>
<link wikidata="Q734625" start="54227" end="54233" title="nanori" label="nanori"/>
<link wikidata="Q483226" start="54250" end="54257" title="genpuku" label="genpuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="55181" end="55186" title="dowry" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q188790" start="55290" end="55299" title="concubine" label="concubine"/>
<link wikidata="Q546116" start="57369" end="57377" title="naginata" label="naginata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497844" start="57420" end="57426" title="Kaiken (dagger)" label="kaiken"/>
<link wikidata="Q3980935" start="57456" end="57466" title="tantojutsu" label="tantojutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772890" start="57788" end="57806" title="political marriage" label="political marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040026" start="58145" end="58157" title="Tokuhime (Oda)" label="Oda Tokuhime"/>
<link wikidata="Q171411" start="58171" end="58183" title="Oda Nobunaga" label="Oda Nobunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4415657" start="58232" end="58246" title="Lady Tsukiyama" label="Lady Tsukiyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q171977" start="58260" end="58275" title="Tokugawa Ieyasu" label="Tokugawa Ieyasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188704" start="58458" end="58477" title="Matsudaira Nobuyasu" label="Matsudaira Nobuyasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="59376" end="59383" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q447034" start="59398" end="59416" title="Ashikaga Yoshimasa" label="Ashikaga Yoshimasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306708" start="59505" end="59516" title="Hino Tomiko" label="Hino Tomiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146603" start="59545" end="59549" title="Nene (aristocrat)" label="Nene"/>
<link wikidata="Q247408" start="59644" end="59653" title="Yodo-dono" label="Yodo-dono"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273091" start="59777" end="59795" title="Tachibana Ginchiyo" label="Tachibana Ginchiyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11630191" start="59865" end="59879" title="Yamauchi Chiyo" label="Yamauchi Chiyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981690" start="60546" end="60566" title="Chrysanthemum Throne" label="Chrysanthemum Throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q595038" start="60572" end="60593" title="Empress of Japan" label="female imperial ruler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374675" start="60601" end="60612" title="Josei Tennō" label="josei tennō"/>
<link wikidata="Q189178" start="61470" end="61481" title="Nara period" label="Nara period"/>
<link wikidata="Q524158" start="61876" end="61880" title="kami" label="kami"/>
<link wikidata="Q600964" start="62867" end="62882" title="Mon (emblem)" label="&amp;quot;mon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="62909" end="62915" title="bakufu" label="bakufu"/>
<link wikidata="Q202298" start="63255" end="63267" title="Japanese tea ceremony" label="tea ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339356" start="63553" end="63573" title="Minamoto no Tametomo" label="Minamoto no Tametomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345851" start="63750" end="63763" title="Headhunting" label="severed heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016382" start="63880" end="63887" title="ohaguro" label="ohaguro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8190371" start="64100" end="64110" title="Kani Saizō" label="Kani Saizō"/>
<link wikidata="Q234188" start="64131" end="64151" title="Battle of Sekigahara" label="Battle of Sekigahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194995" start="64173" end="64191" title="Fukushima Masanori" label="Fukushima Masanori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367052" start="64230" end="64241" title="Gifu Castle" label="Gifu Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q171977" start="64310" end="64325" title="Tokugawa Ieyasu" label="Tokugawa Ieyasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="64344" end="64350" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q707668" start="64950" end="64958" title="mimizuka" label="mimizuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q198211" start="65242" end="65253" title="Zhuge Liang" label="Zhuge Liang"/>
<link wikidata="Q37151" start="65255" end="65262" title="Sun Tzu" label="Sun Tzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q587327" start="65563" end="65579" title="gunki monogatari" label="gunki monogatari"/>
<link wikidata="Q199701" start="65611" end="65617" title="kabuki" label="kabuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q226887" start="65622" end="65625" title="noh" label="noh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="65663" end="65668" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="65694" end="65699" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q873478" start="65775" end="65779" title="enka" label="enka"/>
<link wikidata="Q131578" start="65789" end="65794" title="J-Pop" label="J-Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q629917" start="65809" end="65818" title="Jidaigeki" label="Jidaigeki"/>
<link wikidata="Q25372" start="65847" end="65852" title="drama" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q172980" start="65982" end="65990" title="Western movie" label="westerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006" start="66123" end="66137" title="Akira Kurosawa" label="Akira Kurosawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="66179" end="66191" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="66204" end="66213" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="66295" end="66316" title="Star Wars (film)" label="Star Wars: A New Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q39946" start="66428" end="66447" title="The Hidden Fortress" label="The Hidden Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q51114" start="66502" end="66511" title="John Ford" label="John Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q189540" start="66592" end="66605" title="Seven Samurai" label="Seven Samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q19069" start="66623" end="66644" title="The Magnificent Seven" label="The Magnificent Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q20475" start="66661" end="66668" title="Yojimbo (film)" label="Yojimbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q76479" start="66686" end="66706" title="A Fistful of Dollars" label="A Fistful of Dollars"/>
<link wikidata="Q696224" start="66765" end="66774" title="Samurai 7" label="Samurai 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="66962" end="66980" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q257818" start="67024" end="67039" title="Throne of Blood" label="Throne of Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q130283" start="67065" end="67072" title="Macbeth" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q565231" start="67090" end="67093" title="Ran (film)" label="Ran"/>
<link wikidata="Q181598" start="67119" end="67128" title="King Lear" label="King Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q221957" start="67302" end="67316" title="Eiji Yoshikawa" label="Eiji Yoshikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q221769" start="67417" end="67422" title="Taiko" label="Taiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q193344" start="67424" end="67431" title="Miyamoto Musashi" label="Musashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q830740" start="67442" end="67463" title="The Tale of the Heike" label="The Tale of the Heike"/>
<link wikidata="Q143276" start="67693" end="67709" title="Samurai Champloo" label="Samurai Champloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535807" start="67723" end="67731" title="Shigurui" label="Shigurui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045857" start="67745" end="67770" title="Requiem from the Darkness" label="Requiem from the Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q388128" start="67802" end="67814" title="Afro Samurai" label="Afro Samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6125527" start="68500" end="68515" title="Takashi Okazaki" label="Takashi Okazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q668711" start="68564" end="68572" title="dōjinshi" label="dōjinshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137522" start="68644" end="68656" title="Studio Gonzo" label="Studio Gonzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q47460738" start="68731" end="68739" title="Spike TV" label="Spike TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q10683" start="69194" end="69207" title="PlayStation 3" label="PlayStation 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q15281614" start="69212" end="69216" title="Xbox" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q848992" start="69361" end="69382" title="Power Rangers Samurai" label="Power Rangers Samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329874" start="69504" end="69525" title="Japanese Sword Museum" label="Japanese Sword Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q739612" start="69576" end="69592" title="Matsumoto Castle" label="Matsumoto Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q703904" start="69678" end="69694" title="Ōyamazumi Shrine" label="Ōyamazumi Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9009869" start="69698" end="69713" title="Ōmishima Island, Ehime" label="Ōmishima Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q68106357" start="69791" end="69812" title="Samurai Museum Berlin" label="Samurai Museum Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q839176" start="69926" end="69950" title="List of Japanese battles" label="List of Japanese battles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6637227" start="69953" end="69968" title="List of samurai" label="List of samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q826523" start="69971" end="69983" title="Musha shugyō" label="Musha shugyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q9402" start="69986" end="69991" title="Ninja" label="Ninja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317686" start="69994" end="70000" title="Pechin" label="Pechin"/>
<link wikidata="Q592897" start="70003" end="70013" title="Kabukimono" label="Kabukimono"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164991" start="70016" end="70027" title="Seiwa Genji" label="Seiwa Genji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626313" start="70030" end="70035" title="Shudō" label="Shudō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328489" start="70038" end="70041" title="Shi (class)" label="Shi"/>
<link wikidata="Q696511" start="70044" end="70051" title="Hwarang" label="Hwarang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059082" start="70054" end="70061" title="Kheshig" label="Kheshig"/>
<link wikidata="Q15707255" start="72069" end="72097" title="The Journal of Asian Studies" label="The Journal of Asian Studies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28290" wikidata="Q58436" url="?curid=28290" title="Slackware">
<text>Slackware is a Linux distribution created by Patrick Volkerding in 1993. Originally based on Softlanding Linux System (SLS), Slackware has been the basis for many other Linux distributions, most notably the first versions of SUSE Linux distributions, and is the oldest distribution that is still maintained.

Slackware aims for design stability and simplicity and to be the most &quot;Unix-like&quot; Linux distribution. It makes as few modifications as possible to software packages from upstream and tries not to anticipate use cases or preclude user decisions. In contrast to most modern Linux distributions, Slackware provides no graphical installation procedure and no automatic dependency resolution of software packages. It uses plain text files and only a small set of shell scripts for configuration and administration. Without further modification it boots into a command-line interface environment. Because of its many conservative and simplistic features, Slackware is often considered to be most suitable for advanced and technically inclined Linux users.

Slackware is available for the IA-32 and x86_64 architectures, with a port to the ARM architecture. While Slackware is mostly free and open-source software, it does not have a formal bug tracking facility or public code repository, with releases periodically announced by Volkerding. There is no formal membership procedure for developers and Volkerding is the primary contributor to releases.

==Name==
The name &quot;Slackware&quot; stems from the fact that the distribution started as a private side project with no intended commitment. To prevent it from being taken too seriously at first, Volkerding gave it a humorous name, which stuck even after Slackware became a serious project.

Slackware refers to the &quot;pursuit of Slack&quot;, a tenet of the Church of the SubGenius, a parody religion. Certain aspects of Slackware graphics reflect this—the pipe that Tux is smoking, as influenced by the image of J. R. &quot;Bob&quot; Dobbs&#x27; head.

A humorous reference to the Church of the SubGenius can be found in many versions of the &quot;install.end&quot; text files, which indicate the end of a software series to the setup program. In recent versions, including Slackware release 14.1, the text is ROT13 obfuscated.

==History==
===Birth===

Slackware was originally derived from the Softlanding Linux System (SLS), the most popular of the original Linux distributions and the first to offer a comprehensive software collection that comprised more than just the kernel and basic utilities, including an X11 graphical interface, TCP/IP, UUCP networking, and GNU Emacs.

Patrick Volkerding started with SLS after needing a LISP interpreter for a school project at the then named Moorhead State University (MSU). He found CLISP was available for Linux and downloaded SLS to run it. A few weeks later, Volkerding was asked by his artificial intelligence professor at MSU to show him how to install Linux at home and on some of the computers at school. Volkerding had made notes describing fixes to issues he found after installing SLS and he and his professor went through and applied those changes to a new installation. However, this took almost as long as it took to just install SLS, so the professor asked if the install disks could be adjusted so the fixes could be applied during installation. This was the start of Slackware. Volkerding continued making improvements to SLS: fixing bugs, upgrading software, automatic installation of shared libraries and the kernel image, fixing file permissions, and more. In a short time, Volkerding had upgraded around half the packages beyond what SLS had available.

Volkerding had no intentions to provide his modified SLS version for the public. His friends at MSU urged him to put his SLS modifications onto an FTP server, but Volkerding assumed that &quot;SLS would be putting out a new version that included these things soon enough&quot;, so he held off for a few weeks. During that time, many SLS users on the internet were asking SLS for a new release, so eventually Volkerding made a post titled &quot;Anyone want an SLS-like 0.99pl11A system?&quot;, to which he received many positive responses. After a discussion with the local sysadmin at MSU, Volkerding obtained permission to upload Slackware to the university&#x27;s FTP server. This first Slackware release, version 1.00, was distributed on July 17, 1993, at 00:16:36 (UTC), and was supplied as twenty-four 3½&quot; floppy disk images. After the announcement was made, Volkerding watched as the flood of FTP connections continually crashed the server. Soon afterwards, Walnut Creek CDROM offered additional archive space on their FTP servers.

===Development===
The size of Slackware quickly increased with the addition of included software, and by version 2.1, released October 1994, it had more than tripled to comprise seventy-three 1.44M floppy disk images.

In 1999, Slackware saw its version jump from 4 to 7. Slackware version numbers were lagging behind other distributions, and this led many users to believe it was out of date even though the bundled software versions were similar. Volkerding made the decision to bump the version as a marketing effort to show that Slackware was as up-to-date as other Linux distributions, many of which had release numbers of 6 at the time. He chose 7, estimating that most other distributions would soon be at this release number.

In April 2004, Patrick Volkerding added X.Org Server packages into the testing/ directory of -current as a replacement for the XFree86 packages currently being used, with a request for comments on what the future of the X Window System in Slackware should be. A month later, he switched from XFree86 to X.Org Server after stating that the opinions were more than 4 to 1 in favor of using the X.org release as the default version of X. He stated the decision was primarily a technical one, as XFree86 was proving to cause compatibility problems. Slackware 10.0 was the first release with X.Org Server.

In March 2005, Patrick Volkerding announced the removal of the GNOME desktop environment in the development ChangeLog. He stated this had been under consideration for more than four years and that there were already projects that provided a more complete version of GNOME for Slackware than what Slackware itself provided. Volkerding stated future GNOME support would rely on the community. The community responded and as of October 2016, there are several active GNOME projects for Slackware. These include Cinnamon, Dlackware, Dropline GNOME, MATE, and SlackMATE. The removal was deemed significant by some in the Linux community due to the prevalence of GNOME in many distributions.

In May 2009, Patrick Volkerding announced the public (development) release of an official x86_64 variant, called Slackware64, maintained in parallel with the IA-32 distribution. Slackware64 is a pure 64-bit distribution in that it does not support running or compiling 32-bit programs, however, it was designed as &quot;multilib-ready&quot;. Eric Hameleers, one of the core Slackware team members, maintains a multilib repository that contains the necessary packages to convert Slackware64 to multilib to enable running of 32-bit software. Hameleers started the 64-bit port as a diversion from the pain of recovering from surgery in September 2008. Volkerding tested the port in December 2008, and was impressed when he saw speed increases between 20 and 40 percent for some benchmarks compared to the 32-bit version. To minimize the extra effort of maintaining both versions in parallel, Slackware&#x27;s build scripts, called SlackBuilds, were slowly transitioned to supporting either architecture, allowing for one set of sources for both versions. Slackware64 saw its first stable release with version 13.0.

Between the November 2013 release of 14.1 and June 2016, Slackware saw a 31-month gap between releases, marking the longest span in release history. During this time the development branch went without updates for 47 days. However, on April 21, 2015, Patrick Volkerding apologized on the ChangeLog for the absence of updates and stated that the development team used the time to get &quot;some good work done.&quot; There were over 700 program changes listed on that ChangeLog entry, including many major library upgrades. In January 2016, Volkerding announced the reluctant addition of PulseAudio, primarily due to BlueZ dropping direct ALSA support in v5.x. while various other projects were in turn dropping support for BlueZ v4.x. Knowing some users would not be happy with the change, he stated that &quot;Bug reports, complaints, and threats can go to me.&quot; These changes culminated in the release of Slackware 14.2 in June 2016.

===Historical documentation===

David Cantrell worked as a core member of the Slackware team between 1999-2001, and described that period on the Slackware ARM Vlog.
Patrick Volkerding provided further information about the time period in two interviews.

==Design philosophy==
The design philosophy of Slackware is oriented toward simplicity, software purity, and a core design that emphasizes lack of change to upstream sources. Many design choices in Slackware can be seen as a heritage of the simplicity of traditional Unix systems and as examples of the KISS principle. In this context, &quot;simple&quot; refers to the simplicity in system design, rather than system usage. Thus, ease of use may vary between users: those lacking knowledge of command line interfaces and classic Unix tools may experience a steep learning curve using Slackware, whereas users with a Unix background may benefit from a less abstract system environment. In keeping with Slackware&#x27;s design philosophy, and its spirit of purity, most software in Slackware uses the original configuration mechanisms supplied by the software&#x27;s authors; however, for some administrative tasks, distribution-specific configuration tools are delivered.

==Development model==
There is no formal issue tracking system and no official procedure to become a code contributor or developer. The project does not maintain a public code repository. Bug reports and contributions, while being essential to the project, are managed in an informal way. All the final decisions about what is going to be included in a Slackware release strictly remain with Slackware&#x27;s benevolent dictator for life, Patrick Volkerding.

The first versions of Slackware were developed by Patrick Volkerding alone. Beginning with version 4.0, the official Slackware announce files list David Cantrell and Logan Johnson as part of the &quot;Slackware team&quot;. Later announce statements, up to release version 8.1, include Chris Lumens. Lumens, Johnson and Cantrell are also the authors of the first edition of &quot;Slackware Linux Essentials&quot;, the official guide to Slackware Linux. The Slackware website mentions Chris Lumens and David Cantrell as being &quot;Slackware Alumni&quot;, who &quot;worked full-time on the Slackware project for several years.&quot; In his release notes for Slackware 10.0 and 10.1 Volkerding thanks Eric Hameleers for &quot;his work on supporting USB, PCI, and Cardbus wireless cards&quot;. Starting with version 12.0 there is, for a second time, a team building around Volkerding. According to the release notes of 12.2, the development team consists of seven people. Future versions added people. Since version 13.0, the Slackware team seems to have core members. Eric Hameleers gives an insight into the core team with his essay on the &quot;History of Slackware Development&quot;, written on October 3–4, 2009 (shortly after the release of version 13.0).

==Packages==
===Management===

Slackware&#x27;s package management system, collectively known as pkgtools, can administer (), install (), upgrade (), and remove () packages from local sources. It can also uncompress () and create () packages. The official tool to update Slackware over a network or the internet is . It was originally developed by Piter Punk as an unofficial way to keep Slackware up-to-date. It was officially included in the main tree in Slackware 12.2, having been included in since Slackware 9.1. When a package is upgraded, it will install the new package over the old one and then remove any files that no longer exist in the new package. Once a package has been installed with it can be managed with or other package management commands. When running , it only confirms that the version numbers are &quot;different&quot;, thus allowing downgrading the package if desired.

Slackware packages are tarballs compressed using various methods. Starting with 13.0, most packages are compressed using xz (based on the LZMA compression algorithm), utilizing the filename extension. Prior to 13.0, packages were compressed using gzip (based on the DEFLATE compression algorithm), using the extension. Support for bzip2 and lzip compression was also added, using the filename extensions and respectively, although these are not commonly used.

Packages contain all the files for that program, as well as additional metadata files used by the package manager. The package tarball contains the full directory structure of the files and is meant to be extracted in the system&#x27;s root directory during installation. The additional metadata files, located under the special directory within the tarball, usually include a file, which is a specifically formatted text file that is read by the package manager to provide users with a description of the packaged software, as well as a file, which is a post-unpacking shell script allowing creation of symbolic links, preserving permissions on startup files, proper handling of new configuration files, and any other aspects of installation that can not be implemented via the package&#x27;s directory structure. During the development of 15.0, Volkerding introduced support for a uninstall script that can be launched when removing or upgrading a package. This allows package maintainers to run commands when a package is uninstalled.

The package manager maintains a local database on the computer, stored in multiple folders. On 14.2 and older systems, the main database of installed packages was maintained in , however, during the development of 15.0, Volkerding moved two of the directories to a dedicated location under to prevent accidental deletion when clearing system logs. Each Slackware installation will contain a and directory in the main database location. The former is where each package installed will have a corresponding install log file (based on the package name, version, arch, and build) that contains the package size, both compressed and uncompressed, the software description, and the full path of all files that were installed. If the package contained an optional post-installation script, the contents of that script will be added to a file in the directory matching the filename of the corresponding package in the directory, allowing the administrator to view the post-installation script at a future point. When a package is removed or upgraded, the old install logs and scripts found under and are moved to and , making it possible to review any previous packages and see when they were removed. These directories can be found in on 14.2 and earlier, but were moved to during the development of 15.0. On systems supporting the uninstall script, those scripts will be stored in the directory while the package is installed. Once removed, the script will be moved to .

=== Dependency resolution ===
The package management system does not track or manage &quot;dependencies&quot;; however, when performing the recommended full install, all dependencies of the stock packages are met. For custom installations or 3rd-party packages, Slackware relies on the user to ensure that the system has all the supporting system libraries and programs required by the program. Since no official lists of dependencies for stock packages are provided, if users decide to install a custom installation or install 3rd-party software, they will need to work through any possible missing dependencies themselves. Since the package manager doesn&#x27;t manage dependencies, it will install any and all packages, whether or not dependencies are met. A user may find out that dependencies are missing only when attempting to use the software.

While Slackware itself does not incorporate official tools to resolve dependencies, some unofficial, community-supported software tools do provide this function, similar to the way APT does for Debian-based distributions and yum does for Red Hat-based distributions. They include
* slapt-get is a command line utility that functions in a similar way to APT. While slapt-get does provide a framework for dependency resolution, it does not provide dependency resolution for packages included within the Slackware distribution. However, several community package sources and Slackware based distributions take advantage of this functionality. Gslapt is a graphical interface to slapt-get.
* Swaret is a package management tool featuring dependency resolution. It was originally included in Slackware version 9.1 as an optional package, but did not contain dependency resolution at that time. It was removed from the distribution with Slackware 10.0 and turned over to the community. It eventually added dependency resolution and roll-back functionality; however, as of May 2014, there are no active developers.
* NetBSD&#x27;s pkgsrc provides support for Slackware, among other Unix-like operating systems. pkgsrc provides dependency resolution for both binary and source packages.

===Repositories===
There are no official repositories for Slackware. The only official packages Slackware provides are available on the installation media. However, there are many third-party repositories for Slackware; some are standalone repositories and others are for distributions that are Slackware-based but retain package compatibility with Slackware. Many of these can be searched at once using pkgs.org, which is a Linux package search engine. However, mixing and matching dependencies from multiple repositories can lead to two or more packages that require different versions of the same dependency, which is a form of dependency hell. Slackware itself won&#x27;t provide any dependency resolution for these packages, however some projects will provide a list of dependencies that are not included with Slackware with the files for the package, commonly with a extension.

Due to the possibility of dependency issues, many users choose to compile their own programs using community-provided SlackBuilds. SlackBuilds are shell scripts that will create an installable Slackware package from a provided software tarball. Since SlackBuilds are scripts, they aren&#x27;t limited to just compiling a program&#x27;s source; they can also be used to repackage pre-compiled binaries provided by projects or other distributions&#x27; repositories into proper Slackware packages. SlackBuilds that compile sources have several advantages over pre-built packages: since they build from the original author&#x27;s source code, the user does not have to trust a third-party packager; furthermore the local compilation process allows for machine-specific optimization. In comparison to manual compilation and installation of software, SlackBuilds provide cleaner integration to the system by utilizing Slackware&#x27;s package manager. Some SlackBuilds will come with an additional file with metadata that allows automated tools to download the source, verify the source is not corrupt, and calculate additional dependencies that are not part of Slackware. Some repositories will include both SlackBuilds and the resulting Slackware packages, allowing users to either build their own or install a pre-built package.

The only officially endorsed SlackBuilds repository is SlackBuilds.org, commonly referred to as SBo. This is a community-supported project offering SlackBuilds for building software not included with Slackware. Users are able to submit new SlackBuilds for software to the site and, once approved, they become the &quot;package maintainer&quot;. They are then responsible for providing updates to the SlackBuild, either to fix issues or to build newer versions provided by upstream. To ensure all programs can be compiled and used, any required dependencies of the software not included with Slackware are required to be documented and be available on the site. All submissions are tested by the site&#x27;s administrators before being added to the repository. The administrators intend for the build process to be nearly identical to the way Slackware&#x27;s official packages are built, mainly to ensure Volkerding was &quot;sympathetic of our cause&quot;. This allows SlackBuilds that Volkerding deems worthy to be pulled into regular Slackware with minimal changes to the script. It also prevent users from suggesting Volkerding to change his scripts to match SBo&#x27;s. SBo provides templates for SlackBuilds and the additional metadata files and they encourage package maintainers to not deviate unless necessary.

Two Slackware team members, Eric Hameleers and Robby Workman each have their own repository of pre-compiled packages along with the SlackBuilds and source files used to create the packages. While most packages are just additional software not included in Slackware that they felt was worth their time to maintain, some packages are used as a testbed for future upgrades to Slackware, most notably, Hameleers provides &quot;Ktown&quot; packages for newer versions of KDE. He also maintains Slackware&#x27;s &quot;multilib&quot; repository, enabling Slackware64 to run and compile 32-bit packages.

== Releases ==

Slackware&#x27;s release policy follows a feature and stability based release cycle, in contrast to the time-bound (&quot;e.g.&quot;, Ubuntu) or rolling release (&quot;e.g.&quot;, Gentoo Linux) schemes of other Linux distributions. This means there is no set time on when to expect a release. Volkerding will release the next version after he feels a suitable number of changes from the previous version have been made and those changes lead to a stable environment. As stated by Patrick Volkerding, &quot;It&#x27;s usually our policy not to speculate on release dates, since that&#x27;s what it is — pure speculation. It&#x27;s not always possible to know how long it will take to make the upgrades needed and tie up all the related loose ends. As things are built for the upcoming release, they&#x27;ll be uploaded into the -current tree.&quot;

Throughout Slackware&#x27;s history, they generally tried to deliver up-to-date software on at least an annual basis. From its inception until 2014, Slackware had at least one release per year. Release activity peaked in 1994, 1995, 1997 and 1999, with three releases each year. Starting with version 7.1 (June 22, 2000) the release progression became more stable and typically occurred once per year. After that point, the only years with two releases were 2003, 2005 and 2008. However, since the release of Slackware 14.1 in 2013, new releases have slowed down drastically. There was a more than 2-year gap between 14.1 and 14.2 and over a 5 year gap to 15.0. Upon the release of 15.0, Volkerding stated that Slackware 15.1 will hopefully have a far shorter development cycle since the &quot;tricky parts&quot; were resolved during the development of 15.0.

Slackware&#x27;s latest 32-bit x86 and 64-bit x86_64 stable releases are at version 15.0 (released on February 2, 2022), which include support for Linux 5.15.19.

Volkerding also maintains a testing/developmental version of Slackware called &quot;-current&quot; that can be used for a more bleeding edge configuration. This version will eventually become the next stable release, at which point Volkerding will start a new -current to start developing for the next release of Slackware. While this version is generally known to be stable, it is possible for things to break, so -current tends to not be recommended for production systems.


==Support==
Currently, Slackware has no officially stated support term policy. However, on June 14, 2012, notices appeared in the changelogs for versions 8.1, 9.0, 9.1, 10.0, 10.1, 10.2, 11.0, and 12.0 stating that, effective August 1, 2012, security patches would no longer be provided for these versions. The oldest release, version 8.1, was released on June 18, 2002 and had over 10 years of support before reaching EOL. Later, on August 30, 2013, announcements were made on the changelogs of 12.1 and 12.2 stating their EOL on December 9, 2013. It was stated in the changelog entries that they had at least 5 years of support. On April 6, 2018, versions of 13.0, 13.1 and 13.37 were declared reaching their EOL on July 5, 2018. It was stated in the changelog entries that they had at least 7 years of support (13.0 had been supported almost 9 years). On October 9, 2023 the changelog for 14.2 stated that 14.0, 14.1 and 14.2 will be EOL effective January 1, 2024.

While there have been no official announcements for versions prior to 8.1, they are no longer maintained and are effectively EOL.

==Hardware architectures==
Historically, Slackware concentrated solely on the IA-32 architecture and releases were available as 32-bit only. However, starting with Slackware 13.0, a 64-bit x86_64 variant is available and officially supported in symmetrical development with the 32-bit platform. Prior to the release of Slackware64 users wanting 64-bit were required to use unofficial ports such as slamd64.

Slackware is also available for the IBM S/390 architecture in the form of Slack/390 and for the ARM architecture under Slackware ARM (originally known as &#x27;ARMedslack&#x27;). Both ports have been declared &quot;official&quot; by Patrick Volkerding. However, the S/390 port is still at version 10.0 for the stable version and 11.0 for the testing/developmental version, and has had no updates since 2009. Also, on May 7, 2016, the developer of Slackware ARM announced 14.1 will be EOL on September 1, 2016 and development of -current will cease with the release of 14.2, however support for 14.2 will be maintained for the foreseeable future. The EOL announcement for 14.1 was added to the changelog on June 25, 2016, and the EOL announcement for 14.2 was added to the changelog on December 21, 2022.

In July 2016, the developer of Slackware ARM announced that the development and build tools had been enhanced to reduce the manual effort involved in maintaining the ARM port, and proceeded to announce that a 32-bit hardware floating port was in development. The port was released in August 2016 in &quot;current&quot; form.

On 28th December 2020 work began on porting Slackware to the 64-bit ARM architecture (known as &#x27;AArch64&#x27;), with the initial Hardware Model targets being the PINE64&#x27;s RockPro64 and Pinebook Pro. It was functionally complete by May 2021, and has many improvements over the original design and implementation of the ARM port - particularly in regards to the management and enablement of new Hardware Models by the Slackware ARM community. Additionally, the boot and installation processes were improved significantly - making the installation process far easier and more streamlined. 

On Mar 29th 2022 Slackware AArch64 was publicly released in -current (development) form with support for the RockPro64, Pinebook Pro and Raspberry Pi 3 &amp; 4, with online installation documentation and video installation guides. Also the unofficial &quot;slarm64&quot; project has a port for AArch64, and an additional port for riscv64 architecture.

In March 2022 official development of the ARM 32-bit port of Slackware ceased, with future development concentrated solely on the AArch64/ARM64 port. This was because the 32-bit hardware was unable to keep pace with the development of Slackware and was inhibiting development, and the limitations of the hardware became a blocker to the adoption of the latest technologies. Additionally since most of the other mainstream distributions ceased support for 32-bit ARM, some of the applications failed to build and were no longer supportable. There is however the unofficial Slackware port &quot;BonSlack&quot; that provide both soft (ARMv5) and hard float (ARMv7) ports for 32-bit ARM, with development and updates (from 14.2) aligned with official Slackware. This project also provides ports for Aarch64 (ARM64), Alpha, HPPA (PA-RISC 1.1), LoongArch (64 bit), MIPS (32/64-bit), OpenRISC, PowerPC (32/64-bit), RISC-V (64-bit), S/390x, SH-4, SPARC (32/64-bit), and x86 (32-bit with 64-bit ) architectures.

On Dec 21 2022, Slackware ARM 14.2 had its EOL (End of Life) declared as 1st March 2023.

Slackintosh is a port of Slackware Linux for the Macintosh New World ROM PowerPC architecture, used by Apple&#x27;s Power Macintosh, PowerBook, iMac, iBook, and Xserve lines from 1994 until 2006. The last version of Slackintosh was 12.1, released on Jun 7, 2008. Slackintosh&#x27;s website is still active and version 12.1 is available for download for those who have older PowerPC Macintosh computers. The project developers announced in February 2012 that development was frozen and 12.1 would be able to receive security patches for one month.
The next month, it was announced that the stable release is frozen and won&#x27;t receive any further updates unless someone else decides to take over.
This never happened and Volkerding officially declared the project dead in July 2021.

==Distribution==
Slackware 14.2 CD sets, single DVDs, and merchandise were available from the third-party-controlled Slackware store, but due to underpayment, Patrick Volkerding, &quot;told them to take it down or I&#x27;d suspend the DNS for the store&quot;.

Slackware ISO images (2.6 GB) for installation can be downloaded for free at the Slackware website via BitTorrent, FTP mirrors, and HTTP mirrors.

Slackware port for IBM S/390 (EOL: 2009)) can be downloaded, and installs from a DOS Partition or from floppy disk.

Slackware port for ARM
architecture can be downloaded, and installed via a network, using Das U-Boot and a TFTP boot server or from a mini-root filesystem. 

Slackware ARM can also be installed on a PC running QEMU
using the same technique.

Slackware AArch64 (ARM64) is installed directly from SD card images in a similar fashion to installing Slackware x86 off a DVD.

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q58436" start="0" end="9" title="Slackware" label="Slackware"/>
<link wikidata="Q131669" start="15" end="33" title="Linux distribution" label="Linux distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q44808" start="45" end="63" title="Patrick Volkerding" label="Patrick Volkerding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757001" start="93" end="117" title="Softlanding Linux System" label="Softlanding Linux System"/>
<link wikidata="Q16691" start="225" end="235" title="SUSE Linux" label="SUSE Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="385" end="394" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q131669" start="401" end="419" title="Linux distribution" label="Linux distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q352213" start="489" end="497" title="upstream (software development)" label="upstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q959549" start="777" end="789" title="shell script" label="shell script"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="874" end="896" title="command-line interface" label="command-line interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q262238" start="1101" end="1106" title="IA-32" label="IA-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q272629" start="1111" end="1117" title="x86-64" label="x86_64"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="1152" end="1168" title="ARM architecture" label="ARM architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="1196" end="1225" title="free and open-source software" label="free and open-source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q956086" start="1253" end="1265" title="bug tracking system" label="bug tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q211257" start="1830" end="1853" title="Church of the SubGenius" label="Church of the SubGenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106806" start="1985" end="2012" title="J. R. &amp;quot;Bob&amp;quot; Dobbs" label="J. R. &amp;quot;Bob&amp;quot; Dobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q666455" start="2283" end="2288" title="ROT13" label="ROT13"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757001" start="2369" end="2393" title="Softlanding Linux System" label="Softlanding Linux System"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="2588" end="2591" title="X11" label="X11"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="2613" end="2619" title="TCP/IP" label="TCP/IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047966" start="2621" end="2625" title="UUCP" label="UUCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252773" start="2642" end="2651" title="GNU Emacs" label="GNU Emacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="2706" end="2710" title="Lisp (programming language)" label="LISP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868559" start="2762" end="2787" title="Minnesota State University Moorhead" label="Moorhead State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q581256" start="2804" end="2809" title="CLISP" label="CLISP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="2911" end="2934" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q42283" start="4361" end="4364" title="File Transfer Protocol" label="FTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="4511" end="4522" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643747" start="4664" end="4682" title="Walnut Creek CDROM" label="Walnut Creek CDROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q39809" start="5242" end="5251" title="marketing" label="marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q518900" start="5514" end="5526" title="X.Org Server" label="X.Org Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q742255" start="5601" end="5608" title="XFree86" label="XFree86"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="5694" end="5709" title="X Window System" label="X Window System"/>
<link wikidata="Q44316" start="6139" end="6144" title="GNOME" label="GNOME"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092551" start="6584" end="6592" title="Cinnamon (desktop environment)" label="Cinnamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040014" start="6605" end="6619" title="Dropline GNOME" label="Dropline GNOME"/>
<link wikidata="Q194090" start="6621" end="6625" title="MATE (software)" label="MATE"/>
<link wikidata="Q262238" start="6921" end="6926" title="IA-32" label="IA-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466320" start="8463" end="8473" title="PulseAudio" label="PulseAudio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561066" start="8492" end="8497" title="BlueZ" label="BlueZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q379635" start="8514" end="8518" title="Advanced Linux Sound Architecture" label="ALSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q14652" start="9148" end="9158" title="unix philosophy" label="simplicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q131560" start="9375" end="9389" title="KISS principle" label="KISS principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480561" start="10085" end="10106" title="issue tracking system" label="issue tracking system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11271" start="10453" end="10481" title="benevolent dictator for life" label="benevolent dictator for life"/>
<link wikidata="Q283579" start="12683" end="12691" title="tar (computing)" label="tarballs"/>
<link wikidata="Q539460" start="12781" end="12783" title="XZ Utils" label="xz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733" start="12798" end="12802" title="LZMA" label="LZMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q186157" start="12841" end="12859" title="filename extension" label="filename extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q283647" start="12907" end="12911" title="gzip" label="gzip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712" start="12926" end="12933" title="DEFLATE" label="DEFLATE"/>
<link wikidata="Q283563" start="12991" end="12996" title="bzip2" label="bzip2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143890" start="13001" end="13005" title="lzip" label="lzip"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="13192" end="13200" title="metadata" label="metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q972090" start="13357" end="13371" title="root directory" label="root directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q959549" start="13691" end="13703" title="shell script" label="shell script"/>
<link wikidata="Q230724" start="16660" end="16663" title="Advanced Packaging Tool" label="APT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715973" start="16673" end="16679" title="Debian" label="Debian"/>
<link wikidata="Q625662" start="16704" end="16707" title="Yellowdog Updater, Modified" label="yum"/>
<link wikidata="Q215273" start="16717" end="16724" title="Red Hat Enterprise Linux" label="Red Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050511" start="16761" end="16770" title="slapt-get" label="slapt-get"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050511" start="17119" end="17125" title="Gslapt" label="Gslapt"/>
<link wikidata="Q34225" start="17589" end="17595" title="NetBSD" label="NetBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q310603" start="17603" end="17609" title="pkgsrc" label="pkgsrc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234113" start="18390" end="18405" title="dependency hell" label="dependency hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q352213" start="20444" end="20452" title="Upstream (software development)" label="upstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431" start="21759" end="21762" title="KDE" label="KDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q381" start="22040" end="22046" title="Ubuntu (operating system)" label="Ubuntu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491125" start="22051" end="22066" title="rolling release" label="rolling release"/>
<link wikidata="Q170378" start="22086" end="22098" title="Gentoo Linux" label="Gentoo Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q14579" start="23761" end="23766" title="Linux (kernel)" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q120208" start="23904" end="23917" title="bleeding edge" label="bleeding edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q224887" start="24674" end="24677" title="End-of-life (product)" label="EOL"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25753" end="25760" title="slamd64" label="slamd64"/>
<link wikidata="Q118906379" start="25799" end="25808" title="IBM ESA/390" label="IBM S/390"/>
<link wikidata="Q17637401" start="27822" end="27829" title="RISC-V" label="riscv64"/>
<link wikidata="Q18384745" start="28640" end="28647" title="Aarch64" label="Aarch64"/>
<link wikidata="Q858065" start="28657" end="28662" title="DEC Alpha" label="Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q113585" start="28664" end="28668" title="PA-RISC" label="HPPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q615955" start="28684" end="28693" title="LoongArch" label="LoongArch"/>
<link wikidata="Q527464" start="28704" end="28708" title="MIPS_architecture" label="MIPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092481" start="28722" end="28730" title="OpenRISC" label="OpenRISC"/>
<link wikidata="Q209860" start="28732" end="28739" title="PowerPC" label="PowerPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17637401" start="28753" end="28759" title="RISC-V" label="RISC-V"/>
<link wikidata="Q8062893" start="28770" end="28776" title="Z/Architecture" label="S/390x"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205020" start="28778" end="28782" title="SuperH" label="SH-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q273190" start="28784" end="28789" title="SPARC" label="SPARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="28807" end="28810" title="x86" label="x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="28988" end="28997" title="Macintosh" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q645383" start="28998" end="29011" title="New World ROM" label="New World ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q209860" start="29012" end="29019" title="PowerPC" label="PowerPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q621322" start="29055" end="29070" title="Power Macintosh" label="Power Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q621317" start="29072" end="29081" title="PowerBook" label="PowerBook"/>
<link wikidata="Q14091" start="29083" end="29087" title="iMac" label="iMac"/>
<link wikidata="Q305889" start="29089" end="29094" title="iBook" label="iBook"/>
<link wikidata="Q621384" start="29100" end="29106" title="Xserve" label="Xserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q44808" start="29884" end="29902" title="Patrick Volkerding" label="Patrick Volkerding"/>
<link wikidata="Q877050" start="29996" end="30005" title="ISO image" label="ISO image"/>
<link wikidata="Q133862" start="30089" end="30099" title="BitTorrent" label="BitTorrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q224887" start="30163" end="30166" title="End-of-life (product)" label="EOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170607" start="30340" end="30350" title="Das U-Boot" label="Das U-Boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q612640" start="30357" end="30361" title="TFTP" label="TFTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q624699" start="30460" end="30464" title="QEMU" label="QEMU"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28291" wikidata="Q446430" url="?curid=28291" title="Sequencer">
<text>Sequencer may refer to:

==Technology==
* Drum sequencer (controller), an electromechanical system for controlling a sequence of events automatically
* DNA sequencer, a machine used to automatically produce a sequence readout from a biological DNA sample
* Microsequencer, part of the control unit of a CPU
* Music sequencer, software or hardware device for recording, playing, and editing digital music data
* Protein sequencer, a machine used to automatically produce a sequence readout from a biological protein sample

==Arts and entertainment==
* &quot;Sequencer&quot; (Larry Fast album), 1976
* &quot;Sequencer&quot; (Covenant album), 1996
* &quot;Sequencer&quot;, a song by Al Di Meola from his album &quot;Scenario&quot;

==See also==
* Sequence (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q446430" start="0" end="9" title="Sequencer" label="Sequencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q690218" start="42" end="69" title="Drum sequencer (controller)" label="Drum sequencer (controller)"/>
<link wikidata="Q908889" start="152" end="165" title="DNA sequencer" label="DNA sequencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q175848" start="257" end="271" title="Microsequencer" label="Microsequencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q646683" start="309" end="324" title="Music sequencer" label="Music sequencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142557" start="411" end="428" title="Protein sequencer" label="Protein sequencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q343221" start="552" end="592" title="Sequencer (Larry Fast album)" label="&amp;quot;Sequencer&amp;quot; (Larry Fast album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13583027" start="601" end="639" title="Sequencer (Covenant album)" label="&amp;quot;Sequencer&amp;quot; (Covenant album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430717" start="714" end="722" title="Scenario (album)" label="Scenario"/>
<link wikidata="Q355974" start="745" end="770" title="Sequence (disambiguation)" label="Sequence (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28292" wikidata="Q228631" url="?curid=28292" title="Stalingrad (disambiguation)">
<text>Stalingrad is a former name of Volgograd, a city in Russia.

Stalingrad may also refer to:
==Related to the city==
* Battle of Stalingrad, a battle in 1942–1943 widely considered the turning point in the European theatre of World War II
* Stalingrad Oblast, former name of Volgograd Oblast, an administrative division of Russia

==Arts and entertainment==

===Films===
:&quot;(All set in the Battle of Stalingrad)&quot;
* &quot;Stalingrad&quot; (1943 film), a Soviet propaganda film
* &quot;&quot;, film made in West Germany and released in 1959
* &quot;Stalingrad&quot; (1990 film), a Soviet war film
* &quot;Stalingrad&quot; (1993 film), a German anti-war film following the fate of German soldiers
* &quot;Stalingrad&quot; (2013 film), a Russian film, part love story

=== Music ===
* &quot;Stalingrad&quot; (Eternal Flame album) (1988)
* &quot;Stalingrad&quot; (Accept album) (2012)
*&quot;Stalingrad&quot;, a song by Swedish metal band Sabaton from the album &quot;Primo Victoria&quot;
*&quot;Stalingrad&quot;, a song by Russian-sung Finnish metal band KYPCK from the album &quot;Cherno&quot;

=== Other ===
* &quot;Stalingrad&quot; (painting), an oil painting by Danish artist Asger Jorn
* &quot;Stalingrad&quot; (1948 novel), by Theodor Plievier, and the two television adaptations of it
* &quot;Stalingrad&quot; (Grossman novel), a 1952 novel by Vasily Grossman
* &quot;Stalingrad&quot; (Beevor book), a non-fiction book by Antony Beevor published in 1998
* &quot;Stalingrad&quot; (wargame), a table top wargame, published by Avalon Hill in 1963
* &quot;Stalingrad&quot; (2005 video game), a real-time strategy computer game

==Other uses==
* Stalingrad legal defense, a strategy used by a defendant to wear down the plaintiff or legal proceedings.
* &quot;Stalingrad&quot;-class battlecruiser, a cancelled Soviet dreadnought warship
* , a Soviet steamship active in the World War II Arctic convoys, and sunk in 1942
* Stalingrad (Paris Métro), a metro station in Paris, France
* Place de la Bataille-de-Stalingrad, a square in Paris named after the battle
* 2250 Stalingrad, an asteroid discovered in 1972 by Tamara Smirnova

== See also ==
* Starigrad (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q228631" start="0" end="10" title="Stalingrad (disambiguation)" label="Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q914" start="31" end="40" title="Volgograd" label="Volgograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q228631" start="61" end="71" title="Stalingrad (disambiguation)" label="Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="117" end="137" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Battle of Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819" start="273" end="289" title="Volgograd Oblast" label="Volgograd Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439202" start="422" end="456" title="Stalingrad (1943 film)" label="&amp;quot;Stalingrad&amp;quot; (1943 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439205" start="548" end="582" title="Stalingrad (1990 film)" label="&amp;quot;Stalingrad&amp;quot; (1990 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q316225" start="604" end="638" title="Stalingrad (1993 film)" label="&amp;quot;Stalingrad&amp;quot; (1993 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q552725" start="703" end="737" title="Stalingrad (2013 film)" label="&amp;quot;Stalingrad&amp;quot; (2013 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5402644" start="788" end="832" title="Stalingrad (Eternal Flame album)" label="&amp;quot;Stalingrad&amp;quot; (Eternal Flame album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q128839" start="842" end="879" title="Stalingrad (Accept album)" label="&amp;quot;Stalingrad&amp;quot; (Accept album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q780874" start="970" end="984" title="Primo Victoria" label="Primo Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571933" start="1085" end="1091" title="Cherno (album)" label="Cherno"/>
<link wikidata="Q4456917" start="1115" end="1148" title="Stalingrad (painting)" label="&amp;quot;Stalingrad&amp;quot; (painting)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1196" end="1231" title="Stalingrad (1948 novel)" label="&amp;quot;Stalingrad&amp;quot; (1948 novel)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1236" end="1252" title="Theodor Plievier#The novel Stalingrad" label="Theodor Plievier"/>
<link wikidata="Q85803121" start="1297" end="1336" title="Stalingrad (Grossman novel)" label="&amp;quot;Stalingrad&amp;quot; (Grossman novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597259" start="1372" end="1408" title="Stalingrad (Beevor book)" label="&amp;quot;Stalingrad&amp;quot; (Beevor book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597260" start="1466" end="1498" title="Stalingrad (wargame)" label="&amp;quot;Stalingrad&amp;quot; (wargame)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439201" start="1556" end="1596" title="Stalingrad (2005 video game)" label="&amp;quot;Stalingrad&amp;quot; (2005 video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104875968" start="1651" end="1675" title="Stalingrad legal defense" label="Stalingrad legal defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536253" start="1759" end="1801" title="Stalingrad-class battlecruiser" label="&amp;quot;Stalingrad&amp;quot;-class battlecruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418821" start="1927" end="1951" title="Stalingrad (Paris Métro)" label="Stalingrad (Paris Métro)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577891" start="1988" end="2022" title="Place de la Bataille-de-Stalingrad" label="Place de la Bataille-de-Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110360" start="2067" end="2082" title="2250 Stalingrad" label="2250 Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497169" start="2152" end="2178" title="Starigrad (disambiguation)" label="Starigrad (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28296" wikidata="Q49084" url="?curid=28296" title="Short story">
<text>A short story is a piece of prose fiction. It can typically be read in a single sitting and focuses on a self-contained incident or series of linked incidents, with the intent of evoking a single effect or mood. The short story is one of the oldest types of literature and has existed in the form of legends, mythic tales, folk tales, fairy tales, tall tales, fables, and anecdotes in various ancient communities around the world. The modern short story developed in the early 19th century.

==Definition==
The short story is a crafted form in its own right. Short stories make use of plot, resonance and other dynamic components as in a novel, but typically to a lesser degree. While the short story is largely distinct from the novel or novella/short novel, authors generally draw from a common pool of literary techniques. The short story is sometimes referred to as a genre.

Determining what exactly defines a short story remains problematic. A classic definition of a short story is that one should be able to read it in one sitting, a point most notably made in Edgar Allan Poe&#x27;s essay &quot;The Philosophy of Composition&quot; (1846). H. G. Wells described the purpose of the short story as &quot;The jolly art, of making something very bright and moving; it may be horrible or pathetic or funny or profoundly illuminating, having only this essential, that it should take from fifteen to fifty minutes to read aloud.&quot; According to William Faulkner, a short story is character-driven and a writer&#x27;s job is to &quot;...trot along behind him with a paper and pencil trying to keep up long enough to put down what he says and does.&quot;

Some authors have argued that a short story must have a strict form. Somerset Maugham thought that the short story &quot;must have a definite design, which includes a point of departure, a climax and a point of test; in other words, it must have a plot&quot;. Hugh Walpole had a similar view: &quot;A story should be a story; a record of things happening full of incidents, swift movements, unexpected development, leading through suspense to a climax and a satisfying denouement.&quot;

This view of the short story as a finished product of art is however opposed by Anton Chekhov, who thought that a story should have neither a beginning nor an end. It should just be a &quot;slice of life&quot;, presented suggestively. In his stories, Chekhov does not round off the end but leaves it to the readers to draw their own conclusions.

Sukumar Azhikode defined a short story as &quot;a brief prose narrative with an intense episodic or anecdotal effect&quot;. Flannery O&#x27;Connor emphasized the need to consider what is exactly meant by the descriptor short. Short story writers may define their works as part of the artistic and personal expression of the form. They may also attempt to resist categorization by genre and fixed formation.

William Boyd, a British author and short story writer, has said:
[a short story] seem[s] to answer something very deep in our nature as if, for the duration of its telling, something special has been created, some essence of our experience extrapolated, some temporary sense has been made of our common, turbulent journey towards the grave and oblivion.

In the 1880s, the term &quot;short story&quot; acquired its modern meaning – having initially referred to children&#x27;s tales. During the early to mid-20th century, the short story underwent expansive experimentation which further hindered attempts to comprehensively provide a definition. Longer stories that cannot be called novels are sometimes considered &quot;novellas&quot; or novelettes and, like short stories, may be collected into the more marketable form of &quot;collections&quot;. Around the world, the modern short story is comparable to lyrics, dramas, novels and essays – although examination of it as a major literary form remains diminished.

== Length ==
In terms of length, word count is typically anywhere from 1,000 to 4,000 for short stories; however, some works classified as short stories have up to 15,000 words. Stories of fewer than 1,000 words are sometimes referred to as &quot;short short stories&quot;, or &quot;flash fiction&quot;.

Short stories have no set length. What constitutes a short story may differ between genres, countries, eras, and commentators. Like the novel, the short story&#x27;s predominant shape reflects the demands of the available markets for publication, and the evolution of the form seems closely tied to the evolution of the publishing industry and the submission guidelines of its constituent houses.

As a point of reference for the genre writer, the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America define short story length in the Nebula Awards for science fiction submission guidelines as having fewer than 7,500 words.

==History==
=== Prehistory - 1790 CE ===
Short stories date back to oral storytelling traditions which originally produced epics such as the Ramayana, the Mahabharata, and Homer&#x27;s &quot;Iliad&quot; and &quot;Odyssey&quot;. Oral narratives were often told in the form of rhyming or rhythmic verse, often including recurring sections or, in the case of Homer, &quot;Homeric epithets&quot;. Such stylistic devices often acted as mnemonics for easier recall, rendition, and adaptation of the story. While the overall arc of the tale was told over the course of several performances, short sections of verse could focus on individual narratives that were the duration of a single telling. It may be helpful to classify such sections as oral short stories.

Another ancient form of short story popular during the Roman Empire was the anecdote, a brief realistic narrative that embodies a point. Many surviving Roman anecdotes were collected in the 13th or 14th century as the &quot;Gesta Romanorum&quot;. Anecdotes remained popular throughout Europe well into the 18th century with the publication of the fictional anecdotal letters of Sir Roger de Coverley.
In Europe, the oral story-telling tradition began to develop into written form in the early 14th century, most notably with Giovanni Boccaccio&#x27;s &quot;Decameron&quot; and Geoffrey Chaucer&#x27;s &quot;Canterbury Tales&quot;. Both of these books are composed of individual short stories, which range from farce or humorous anecdotes to well-crafted literary fiction, set within a larger narrative story (a frame story), although the frame-tale device was not adopted by all writers. At the end of the 16th century, some of the most popular short stories in Europe were the darkly tragic &quot;novella&quot; of Italian author Matteo Bandello, especially in their French translation.

The mid 17th century in France saw the development of a refined short novel, the &quot;nouvelle&quot;, by such authors as Madame de Lafayette. Traditional fairy tales began to be published in the late 17th century; one of the most famous collections was by Charles Perrault. The appearance of Antoine Galland&#x27;s first modern translation of the 1001 Arabian Nights, a storehouse of Middle Eastern folk and fairy tales, is the &quot;Thousand and One Nights&quot; (or &quot;Arabian Nights&quot;) (from 1704; another translation appeared in 1710–12). His translation would have an enormous influence on the 18th-century European short stories of Voltaire, Diderot and others.

In India, there is a rich heritage of ancient folktales as well as a compiled body of short fiction which shaped the sensibility of modern Indian short story. Some of the famous Sanskrit collections of legends, folktales, fairy tales, and fables are Panchatantra, Hitopadesha and Kathasaritsagara. Jataka tales, originally written in Pali, is a compilation of tales concerning the previous births of Lord Gautama Buddha. The Frame story, also known as the frame narrative or story within a story, is a narrative technique that probably originated in ancient Indian works such as Panchatantra.

The evolution of printing technologies and periodical editions were among the factors contributing to the increasing importance of short story publications. Pioneering the rules of the genre in the Western canon were, among others, Rudyard Kipling (United Kingdom), Anton Chekhov (Russia), Guy de Maupassant (France), Rabindranath Tagore (India and Bangladesh), Manuel Gutiérrez Nájera (Mexico) and Rubén Darío (Nicaragua).

=== 1790–1850 ===
Early examples of short stories were published separately between 1790 and 1810, but the first true collections of short stories appeared between 1810 and 1830 in several countries.

The first short stories in the United Kingdom were gothic tales like Richard Cumberland&#x27;s &quot;remarkable narrative&quot;, &quot;The Poisoner of Montremos&quot; (1791). Novelists such as Sir Walter Scott and Charles Dickens also wrote influential short stories during this time. Germany soon followed the United Kingdom&#x27;s example by producing short stories; the first collection of short stories was by Heinrich von Kleist in 1810 and 1811. In the United States, Washington Irving was responsible for creating some of the first short stories of American origin, &quot;The Legend of Sleepy Hollow&quot; and &quot;Rip Van Winkle&quot;.

Edgar Allan Poe became another early American short story writer. His concise technique, deemed the &quot;single effect&quot;, has had tremendous influence on the formation of the modern short story.

Examples include:

* France
** Prosper Mérimée
*** Mateo Falcone (1829)
* Germany
** E. T. A. Hoffmann
*** &quot;The Nutcracker and the Mouse King&quot; (1816),
*** &quot;The Sandman&quot;,
** Brothers Grimm
*** first volume of collected fairy tales (1812)
* United States
** Edgar Allan Poe
*** &quot;The Fall of the House of Usher&quot;,
*** &quot;The Tell-Tale Heart&quot;,
*** &quot;The Cask of Amontillado&quot;,
*** &quot;The Pit and the Pendulum&quot;,
*** &quot;The Gold Bug&quot;,
*** &quot;The Murders in the Rue Morgue&quot; – one of the first detective stories
*** &quot;The Purloined Letter&quot; – one of the first detective stories
** Nathaniel Hawthorne
*** &quot;Twice-Told Tales&quot; (1837)
**John Neal
***&quot;Otter-Bag, the Oneida Chief&quot; (1829)
***&quot;David Whicher&quot; (1832)

=== 1850–1900 ===
In the latter half of the 19th century, the growth of print magazines and journals created a strong demand for short fiction of between 3,000 and 15,000 words. In 1890s Britain, literary periodicals such as &quot;The Yellow Book&quot;, &quot;Black &amp; White,&quot; and &quot;The Strand Magazine&quot; popularized the short story. Britain was not alone in the endeavor to strengthen the short story movement. French author Guy de Maupassant composed the short stories &quot;Boule de Suif&quot; (&quot;Ball of Fat&quot;, 1880) and &quot;L&#x27;Inutile Beauté&quot; (&quot;The Useless Beauty&quot;, 1890), which are important examples of French realism. Russian author Anton Chekhov was also influential in the movement.

In the late nineteenth and early twentieth century in India, many writers created short stories centered on daily life and the social scene of the different socioeconomic groups. Rabindranath Tagore published more than 150 short stories on the lives of the poor and oppressed such as peasants, women, and villagers under colonial misrule and exploitation. Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay, Tagore&#x27;s contemporary, was another pioneer in Bengali short stories. Chattopadhyay&#x27;s stories focused on the social scenario of rural Bengal and the lives of common people, especially the oppressed classes. The prolific Indian author of short stories Munshi Premchand, pioneered the genre in the Hindustani language, writing over 200 short stories and many novels in a style characterized by realism and an unsentimental and authentic introspection into the complexities of Indian society.

In 1884, Brander Matthews, the first American professor of dramatic literature, published &quot;The Philosophy of the Short-Story&quot;. During that same year, Matthews was the first one to name the emerging genre &quot;short story&quot;. Another theorist of narrative fiction was Henry James, who produced some of the most influential short narratives of the time.

The spread of the short story movement continued into South America, specifically Brazil. The novelist Machado de Assis was an important short story writer from Brazil at the time, under the influences of Xavier de Maistre, Laurence Sterne, Guy de Maupassant, among others. At the end of the 19th century, the writer João do Rio became popular by short stories about the bohemianism. Lima Barreto wrote about the former slaves and nationalism in Brazil, with his most recognized work being &quot;Triste Fim de Policarpo Quaresma&quot;.

Examples include:

* India
**Rabindranath Tagore
***&quot;The Kabuliwala&quot;
***&quot;The Hungry Stone&quot;
***&quot;The Wife&#x27;s Letter&quot;
***&quot;The Parrot&#x27;s Training&quot;
***&quot;Punishment&quot;
**Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay
***&quot;Bindu&#x27;s Son&quot;
***&quot;Abhagi&#x27;s Heaven&quot;
***&quot;Mahesh&quot;
***&quot;Ram&#x27;s Good Lesson&quot;
***&quot;Lalu&quot; (3 parts)
***&quot;The Husband&quot;
**Premchand
***&quot;The Shroud&quot;
***&quot;The Cost of Milk&quot;
***&quot;Lottery&quot;
*Poland
** Bolesław Prus
*** &quot;A Legend of Old Egypt&quot; (1888)
** Eliza Orzeszkowa
***&quot;Panna Antonina&quot; (1888)
***&quot;W zimowy wieczór&quot; (1888) 
** Henryk Sienkiewicz
***&quot;The Lighthouse keeper&quot; (1881)
***&quot;Charcoal Sketches&quot; (1877)
*Portugal
**Almeida Garrett
**Alexandre Herculano
**Eça de Queiroz
*Russia
** Ivan Turgenev
*** &quot;A Sportsman&#x27;s Sketches&quot;
** Fyodor Dostoyevski
*** &quot;The Meek One&quot; (1876)
*** &quot;The Dream of a Ridiculous Man&quot; (1877)
** Leo Tolstoy
*** &quot;Ivan the Fool&quot; (1885)
*** &quot;How Much Land Does a Man Need?&quot; (1886)
*** &quot;Alyosha the Pot&quot; (1905)
** Anton Chekhov
*** &quot;The Bet&quot; (1889)
*** &quot;Ward No. 6&quot; (1892)
*** &quot;The Lady with the Dog&quot; (1899)
** Maxim Gorky
*** &quot;Twenty-six Men and a Girl&quot; (1899)
* United Kingdom
** Thomas Hardy
*** &quot;The Three Strangers&quot; (1883),
*** &quot;A Mere Interlude&quot; (1885),
*** &quot;Barbara of the House of Grebe&quot; (1890)
** Rudyard Kipling
*** &quot;Plain Tales from the Hills&quot; (1888)
*** &quot;The Jungle Book&quot; (1894)
** Arthur Conan Doyle
*** &quot;The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes (1892)-&quot; detective story
** H.G. Wells- Science fiction
*** &quot;The Country of the Blind&quot; (1904)
* United States
** Herman Melville
*** &quot;The Piazza Tales&quot; (1856)
** Mark Twain
*** &quot;The Celebrated Jumping Frog of Calaveras County&quot;
** Henry James
*** &quot;The Real Thing&quot; (1892)
*** &quot;Maud-Evelyn&quot;
*** &quot;The Beast in the Jungle&quot; (1903)
**Kate Chopin
**Stephen Crane

=== 1900–1945 ===
In the United Kingdom, periodicals like &quot;The Strand Magazine&quot; and &quot;Story-Teller&quot; contributed to the popularity of the short story. Several authors during this time wrote short stories centered on the devices of satire and humor. One such author, Hector Hugh Munro (1870–1916), also known by his pen name of Saki, wrote satirical short stories about Edwardian England. P.G. Wodehouse published his first collection of comical stories about the valet, Jeeves, in 1917. Other common genres of short stories during the early to mid 1900s in England were detective stories and thrillers. Many of these detective stories were written by authors such as G.K. Chesterton, Agatha Christie, and Dorothy L. Sayers. Graham Greene wrote his collection of short stories, Twenty-One Stories, between 1929 and 1954. Many of these short stories are classified in the genres of thriller, suspense, or even horror. The European short story movement during this time was not unique to England. In Ireland, James Joyce published his short story collection &quot;Dubliners&quot; in 1914. These stories, written in a more accessible style than his later novels, are based on careful observation of the inhabitants of his birth city.

In the first half of the 20th century, a number of high-profile American magazines such as &quot;The Atlantic Monthly&quot;, &quot;Harper&#x27;s Magazine&quot;, &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, &quot;Scribner&#x27;s&quot;, &quot;The Saturday Evening Post&quot;, &quot;Esquire&quot;, and &quot;The Bookman&quot; published short stories in each issue. The demand for quality short stories was so great and the money paid so well that F. Scott Fitzgerald repeatedly turned to short-story writing to pay his numerous debts. His first collection, &quot;Flappers and Philosophers,&quot; appeared in book form in 1920. Ernest Hemingway&#x27;s concise writing style was perfectly suited for shorter fiction. Influenced by the short stories of Stephen Crane and Jack London, Hemingway&#x27;s work &quot;marks a new phase in the history of the short story&quot;. The creation and study of the short story as a medium began to emerge as an academic discipline due to Blanche Colton Williams&#x27; &quot;groundbreaking work on structure and analysis of the short story&quot; and her publication of &quot;A Handbook on Short Story Writing&quot; (1917), described as &quot;the first practical aid to growing young writers that was put on the market in this country.&quot;   

In Uruguay, Horacio Quiroga became one of the most influential short story writers in the Spanish language. With a clear influence from Edgar Allan Poe, he had a great skill in using the supernatural and the bizarre to show the struggle of man and animal to survive. He also excelled in portraying mental illness and hallucinatory states.

In India, Saadat Hasan Manto, the master of the short story in the Urdu language, is revered for his exceptional depth, irony, and sardonic humor. The author of some 250 short stories, radio plays, essays, reminiscences, and a novel, Manto is widely admired for his analyses of violence, bigotry, prejudice, and the relationships between reason and unreason. Combining realism with surrealism and irony, Manto&#x27;s works, such as the celebrated short story Toba Tek Singh, are aesthetic masterpieces that continue to give profound insight into the nature of human loss, violence, and devastation. Another famous Urdu writer is Ismat Chughtai, whose short story, &quot;Lihaaf&quot; (The Quilt), on a lesbian relationship between an upper-class Muslim woman and her maidservant created great controversy following its publication in 1942.

Notable examples in the period up to World War II include:

* Bohemia
** Franz Kafka
*** &quot;A Hunger Artist&quot; (1922)
*Brazil
**Mário de Andrade
**António de Alcantâra Machado
***&quot;Brás, Bexiga e Barra Funda&quot; (1928)
**Graciliano Ramos
**Carlos Drummond de Andrade
* England
**Virginia Woolf
***&quot;Kew Gardens&quot; (1919)
***&quot;Solid Objects&quot;
**W. Somerset Maugham
**V.S. Pritchett
**Evelyn Waugh
**Muriel Spark
**L.P. Hartley
**Arthur C. Clarke
***&quot;Travel by Wire!&quot; (1937)
*Germany
**Thomas Mann 
*Hindi
**Jaishankar Prasad
*Japan
**Ryūnosuke Akutagawa
*New Zealand
**Katherine Mansfield
***&quot;The Doll&#x27;s House&quot; (1922)
*Portugal
**Mário de Sá-Carneiro
**Florbela Espanca
**Fernando Pessoa
* United States
** O. Henry
*** &quot;The Ransom of Red Chief&quot;,
*** &quot;The Cop and the Anthem&quot;,
*** &quot;The Skylight Room&quot;,
*** &quot;After Twenty Years&quot;,
*** &quot;The Last Leaf&quot;,
*** &quot;A Retrieved Reformation&quot;
**F. Scott Fitzgerald
***&quot;The Ice Palace&quot;
***&quot;The Curious Case of Benjamin Button&quot;
***&quot;Absolution&quot;
***&quot;The Rich Boy&quot;
** Ernest Hemingway
*** &quot;A Clean, Well-Lighted Place&quot; (1926)
*** &quot;Hills Like White Elephants&quot; (1927)
*** &quot;The Snows of Kilimanjaro&quot; (1936)
**William Faulkner
***&quot;Go Down, Moses&quot;
**Dorothy Parker
***&quot;Big Blonde&quot; (1929)
**Isaac Asimov
***&quot;Nightfall&quot;

=== Since 1945 ===
Following World War II, the artistic range and numbers of writers of short stories grew significantly. Due in part to frequent contributions from John O&#x27;Hara, &quot;The New Yorker&quot; would come to exercise substantial influence as a weekly short story publication for more than half a century. Shirley Jackson&#x27;s story, &quot;The Lottery&quot; (1948), elicited the strongest response in the magazine&#x27;s history to that time. Other frequent contributors during the 1940s included John Steinbeck, Jean Stafford, Eudora Welty, and John Cheever, who is best known for &quot;The Swimmer&quot; (1964), beautifully blending realism and surrealism.

Many other American short story writers greatly influenced the evolving form of the short story. For example, J. D. Salinger&#x27;s &quot;Nine Stories&quot; (1953) experimented with point of view and voice, while Flannery O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s well-known story, &quot;A Good Man is Hard to Find&quot; (1955), reinvigorated the Southern Gothic style. Cultural and social identity played a considerable role in much of the short fiction of the 1960s. Philip Roth and Grace Paley cultivated distinctive Jewish-American voices. Tillie Olsen&#x27;s &quot;I Stand Here Ironing&quot; (1961) adopted a consciously feminist perspective. James Baldwin&#x27;s collection, &quot;Going to Meet the Man&quot; (1965), told stories of African-American life. Science fiction stories with a special poetic touch was a genre developed with great popular success by Ray Bradbury. Stephen King published many science fiction short stories in men&#x27;s magazines in the 1960s and after. King&#x27;s interest is in the supernatural and macabre. Donald Barthelme and John Barth produced works in the 1970s that demonstrate the rise of the postmodern short story. While traditionalism maintained a significant influence on the form of the short story, minimalism gained widespread influence in the 1980s, most notably in the work of Raymond Carver and Ann Beattie. Carver helped usher in an &quot;extreme minimalist aesthetic&quot; and expand the scope of the short story, as did Lydia Davis, through her idiosyncratic and laconic style.

The Argentine writer Jorge Luis Borges is one of the best-known writers of short stories in the Spanish language. &quot;The Library of Babel&quot; (1941) and &quot;The Aleph&quot; (1945) handle difficult subjects like infinity. Borges won American fame with &quot;The Garden of Forking Paths&quot;, published in the August 1948 issue of &quot;Ellery Queen&#x27;s Mystery Magazine&quot;. Two of the most representative writers of the Magical realism genre are also widely known Argentine short story writers, Adolfo Bioy Casares and Julio Cortázar. The Nobel laureate author Gabriel García Márquez and the Uruguayan writer Juan Carlos Onetti are further significant magical realist short story writers from the Hispanic world. In Brazil, João Antonio made a name for himself by writing about poverty and the favelas. Detective literature there was led by Rubem Fonseca. João Guimarães Rosa wrote short stories in the book &quot;Sagarana,&quot; using a complex, experimental language based on tales of oral tradition.

The role of the bi-monthly magazine Desh (first published in 1933) was key in development of the Bengali short story. Two of the most popular detective story writers of Bengali literature are Sharadindu Bandyopadhyay (the creator of Byomkesh Bakshi) and Satyajit Ray (the creator of Feluda).

Notable examples in the post-World War II period include:

* Angola
** José Luandino Vieira
** José Eduardo Agualusa
* Bengali
** Tarasankar Bandyopadhyay
** Manik Bandyopadhyay
** Mahasweta Devi
** Shirshendu Mukhopadhyay
** Suchitra Bhattacharya
** Ramapada Chowdhury
** Humayun Ahmed
* Brazil
** Clarice Lispector
** Lygia Fagundes Telles
** Adélia Prado
** Dalton Trevisan
** Autran Dourado
** Moacyr Scliar
** Carlos Heitor Cony
** Hilda Hilst
** Caio Fernando Abreu
* Chile
** José Donoso
** Augusto d&#x27;Halmar
** Manuel Rojas
** Diamela Eltit
** Alberto Fuguet
** José Baroja
** Alejandro Zambra
* Egypt
** Naguib Mahfouz - Nobel Prize Laureate (1988)
* Hindi
** Amrita Pritam
** Dharamvir Bharati
** Bhisham Sahni
** Krishna Sobti
** Nirmal Verma
** Kamleshwar (writer)
** Mannu Bhandari
** Harishankar Parsai
*Italy
**Italo Calvino
*** &quot;Marcovaldo (1963)&quot;
*Japan
** Kenzaburō Ōe (Nobel prize winner of 1994)
** Yukio Mishima
** Haruki Murakami
*Mozambique
** Suleiman Cassamo
** Paulina Chiziane
** Eduardo White
** Mia Couto
*Peru
**Mario Vargas Llosa - Nobel Prize Laureate (2010)
*Philippines
**Peter Solis Nery
***&quot;Lirio&quot; (1998)
***&quot;Candido&quot; (2007)
***&quot;Donato Bugtot&quot; (2011)
***&quot;Si Padre Olan kag ang Dios&quot; (2013)
*Poland
**Kornel Filipowicz
**Katarzyna Grochola
**Paweł Huelle
**Sławomir Mrożek
**Magdalena Tulli
*Portugal
** Vergílio Ferreira
** Fernando Goncalves Namora
** Sophia de Mello Breyner Andresen
** José Saramago
*United Kingdom
**Roald Dahl
**Helen Simpson
**Daphne du Maurier
***&quot;The Birds&quot; (1952)
***&quot;Don&#x27;t Look Now&quot; (1971)
*United States
**Frank O&#x27;Connor
***&quot;The Lonely Voice&quot;
**Wallace Stegner
**John Updike
**Joyce Carol Oates
**Denis Johnson
***Jesus&#x27; Son

== Sales and profits ==
The numbers of 21st-century short story writers run into the thousands. Female short story writers have gained increased critical attention, with British authors, in particular, exploring modern feminist politics in their writings.

Sales of short-story fiction are strong. In the UK, sales jumped 45% in 2017, driven by collections from international names such as Alice Munro, a high number of new writers to the genre, including famous names like actor Tom Hanks (plus those who publish their work using readily accessible, digital tools), and the revival of short story salons such as those held by the short fiction company Pin Drop Studio.

More than 690,000 short stories and anthologies were sold in the UK in 2017, generating £5.88 million, the genre&#x27;s highest sales since 2010. Throughout the 2010s, there was frequent speculation about a potential &quot;renaissance&quot;; Sam Baker called it a &quot;perfect literary form for the 21st century&quot;.

Canadian short story writers include Alice Munro, Mavis Gallant and Lynn Coady. In 2013, Alice Munro became the first writer of nothing but short stories to be awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature. Her award-winning short story collections include &quot;Dance of the Happy Shades, Lives of Girls and Women, Who Do You Think You Are?, The Progress of Love, The Love of a Good Woman&quot; and &quot;Runaway&quot;.

== Awards ==
Prominent short story awards such as The Sunday Times Short Story Award, the BBC National Short Story Award, the Royal Society of Literature&#x27;s V.S. Pritchett Short Story Prize, The London Magazine Short Story Prize, the Pin Drop Studio Short Story Award and many others attract hundreds of entries each year. Published and non-published writers take part, sending in their stories from around the world.

In 2013, Alice Munro was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature—her citation read &quot;master of the contemporary short story.&quot; She said she hopes the award will bring readership for the short story, as well as recognising the short story for its own merit, rather than &quot;something that people do before they write their first novel.&quot; Short stories were cited in the choice of other laureates as well: Paul Heyse in 1910 and Gabriel García Márquez in 1982.

==Adaptations==
Short stories are sometimes adapted for radio, TV or film:
* Radio dramas, as on &quot;NBC Presents: Short Story&quot; (1951–52). A popular example of this is &quot;The Hitch-Hiker&quot;, read by Orson Welles.
* Short films, often rewritten by other writers, and even as feature films; such is the case of &quot;Children of the Corn&quot;, &quot;The Shawshank Redemption&quot;, &quot;The Birds&quot;, &quot;Brokeback Mountain&quot;, &quot;Who Goes There?&quot;, &quot;Duel&quot;, &quot;A Sound of Thunder&quot;, &quot;The Body&quot;, &quot;Total Recall&quot;, &quot;The Lawnmower Man&quot;, &quot;Hearts in Atlantis&quot;, and &quot;The Secret Life of Walter Mitty&quot;.
* Television specials, such as &quot;12:01 PM&quot; (a 1993 television movie), &quot;Nightmare at 20,000 Feet&quot; (an October 11, 1963, episode of &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;), &quot;The Lottery&quot;, and &quot;Button, Button&quot; (on &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;).

==Characteristics==
As a concentrated, concise form of narrative and descriptive prose fiction, the short story has been theorised about through the traditional elements of dramatic structure: exposition (the introduction of setting, situation, and main characters), complication (the event that introduces the conflict), rising action, crisis (the decisive moment for the protagonist and his commitment to a course of action), climax (the point of highest interest in terms of the conflict and the point with the most action) and resolution (the point when the conflict is resolved). Because of their length, short stories may or may not often follow this pattern. For example, modern short stories only occasionally have an exposition, more typically beginning in the middle of the action (&quot;in medias res&quot;). As with longer stories, plots of short stories also have a climax, crisis or turning point. In general, short stories feature endings which might be either conclusive or open-ended. Ambiguity is a recurrent trope in short stories; whether in their ending, characterisation or length. As with any art form, the exact characteristics of a short story will vary depending on who is its creator.

Characteristic of short story authors, according to professor of English, Clare Hanson, is that they are &quot;losers and loners, exiles, women, blacks – writers who for one reason or another have not been part of the ruling &quot;narrative&quot; or epistemological/experiential framework of their society.&quot;

==See also==

* Anthology
* Conte
* Conte cruel
* Drabble
* Flash fiction (also called microfiction)
* Literary journal
* Minisaga
* Sketch story
* Tall tale
* Vignette

==References==
==Bibliography==
*Dillard, Annie. (1990). &quot;The Writing Life.&quot; Harper Perennial. ISBN 0-06-016156-6
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*Storr, Will (2020). &quot;The Science of Storytelling&quot; William Collins Publications ISBN 978-0-00-827697-3
*&quot;The Persephone Book of Short Stories&quot; (2012) Persephone Books Ltd. ISBN 978-1903-155-905
* 

Still often cited
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="2" end="13" title="Short story" label="short story"/>
<link wikidata="Q676" start="28" end="33" title="prose" label="prose"/>
<link wikidata="Q8253" start="34" end="41" title="fiction" label="fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q44342" start="300" end="306" title="legend" label="legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="309" end="321" title="Myth" label="mythic tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="323" end="333" title="Folklore genre" label="folk tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q699" start="335" end="345" title="fairy tale" label="fairy tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951220" start="348" end="357" title="tall tale" label="tall tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q693" start="360" end="365" title="fable" label="fable"/>
<link wikidata="Q193206" start="372" end="380" title="anecdote" label="anecdote"/>
<link wikidata="Q8261" start="638" end="643" title="novel" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8261" start="730" end="735" title="novel" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="739" end="758" title="novella" label="novella/short novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q10428845" start="805" end="823" title="literary technique" label="literary technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="1069" end="1084" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35760" start="1092" end="1097" title="essay" label="essay"/>
<link wikidata="Q942049" start="1104" end="1133" title="The Philosophy of Composition" label="The Philosophy of Composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="1148" end="1159" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q38392" start="1449" end="1465" title="William Faulkner" label="William Faulkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q134942" start="1727" end="1743" title="Somerset Maugham" label="Somerset Maugham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758354" start="1906" end="1910" title="Plot (narrative)" label="plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q548004" start="1918" end="1930" title="Hugh Walpole" label="Hugh Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685" start="2226" end="2239" title="Anton Chekhov" label="Anton Chekhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842791" start="2493" end="2509" title="Sukumar Azhikode" label="Sukumar Azhikode"/>
<link wikidata="Q193206" start="2593" end="2602" title="Anecdote" label="anecdotal"/>
<link wikidata="Q234579" start="2617" end="2639" title="Flannery O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Flannery O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q722103" start="2901" end="2913" title="William Boyd (writer)" label="William Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="3623" end="3631" title="novellas" label="novellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q602446" start="3810" end="3816" title="lyrics" label="lyrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034324" start="3952" end="3962" title="word count" label="word count"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457615" start="4202" end="4215" title="flash fiction" label="flash fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364364" start="4672" end="4718" title="Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America" label="Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q194285" start="4752" end="4764" title="Nebula Award" label="Nebula Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="4770" end="4785" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q37293" start="4984" end="4992" title="Ramayana" label="Ramayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="4998" end="5009" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="5015" end="5020" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="5034" end="5039" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="5056" end="5063" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q170406" start="5129" end="5135" title="rhythm" label="rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661" start="5138" end="5143" title="Verse (poetry)" label="verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142448" start="5212" end="5227" title="Homeric epithet" label="Homeric epithet"/>
<link wikidata="Q191062" start="5274" end="5282" title="mnemonic" label="mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="5655" end="5667" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193206" start="5676" end="5684" title="anecdote" label="anecdote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519433" start="5824" end="5839" title="Gesta Romanorum" label="Gesta Romanorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359194" start="5982" end="5999" title="Roger de Coverley" label="Roger de Coverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402" start="6125" end="6143" title="Giovanni Boccaccio" label="Giovanni Boccaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16438" start="6157" end="6166" title="Decameron" label="Decameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="6177" end="6193" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Geoffrey Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191663" start="6207" end="6223" title="Canterbury Tales" label="Canterbury Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505819" start="6411" end="6422" title="frame story" label="frame story"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="6598" end="6605" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q19054" start="6630" end="6645" title="Matteo Bandello" label="Matteo Bandello"/>
<link wikidata="Q237090" start="6810" end="6829" title="Madame de Lafayette" label="Madame de Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q699" start="6843" end="6853" title="fairy tale" label="fairy tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q128460" start="6945" end="6961" title="Charles Perrault" label="Charles Perrault"/>
<link wikidata="Q319399" start="6981" end="6996" title="Antoine Galland" label="Antoine Galland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8258" start="7036" end="7055" title="One Thousand and One Nights" label="1001 Arabian Nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q8258" start="7123" end="7146" title="Thousand and One Nights" label="Thousand and One Nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="7334" end="7342" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q448" start="7344" end="7351" title="Diderot" label="Diderot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="7543" end="7551" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q233780" start="7615" end="7627" title="Panchatantra" label="Panchatantra"/>
<link wikidata="Q606278" start="7629" end="7640" title="Hitopadesha" label="Hitopadesha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195043" start="7645" end="7661" title="Kathasaritsagara" label="Kathasaritsagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q668439" start="7663" end="7675" title="Jataka tales" label="Jataka tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="7699" end="7703" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="7770" end="7784" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Gautama Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505819" start="7790" end="7801" title="Frame story" label="Frame story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306994" start="7840" end="7860" title="story within a story" label="story within a story"/>
<link wikidata="Q233780" start="7944" end="7956" title="Panchatantra" label="Panchatantra"/>
<link wikidata="Q621154" start="8157" end="8170" title="Western canon" label="Western canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="8191" end="8206" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685" start="8225" end="8238" title="Anton Chekhov" label="Anton Chekhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q9327" start="8249" end="8266" title="Guy de Maupassant" label="Guy de Maupassant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="8277" end="8296" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637654" start="8321" end="8344" title="Manuel Gutiérrez Nájera" label="Manuel Gutiérrez Nájera"/>
<link wikidata="Q173767" start="8358" end="8369" title="Rubén Darío" label="Rubén Darío"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669641" start="8636" end="8648" title="Gothic fiction" label="gothic tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439360" start="8654" end="8672" title="Richard Cumberland (dramatist)" label="Richard Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="8782" end="8794" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="8799" end="8814" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q28494" start="8999" end="9018" title="Heinrich von Kleist" label="Heinrich von Kleist"/>
<link wikidata="Q181667" start="9059" end="9076" title="Washington Irving" label="Washington Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q72309" start="9164" end="9191" title="The Legend of Sleepy Hollow" label="The Legend of Sleepy Hollow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129589" start="9208" end="9222" title="Rip Van Winkle" label="Rip Van Winkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="9231" end="9246" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="9453" end="9459" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q160333" start="9463" end="9478" title="Prosper Mérimée" label="Prosper Mérimée"/>
<link wikidata="Q653141" start="9483" end="9496" title="Mateo Falcone" label="Mateo Falcone"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="9506" end="9513" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q150471" start="9517" end="9534" title="E. T. A. Hoffmann" label="E. T. A. Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q744557" start="9545" end="9578" title="The Nutcracker and the Mouse King" label="The Nutcracker and the Mouse King"/>
<link wikidata="Q798227" start="9603" end="9614" title="The Sandman (short story)" label="The Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793" start="9625" end="9639" title="Brothers Grimm" label="Brothers Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q163027" start="9644" end="9681" title="Grimms&amp;#x27; Fairy Tales" label="first volume of collected fairy tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="9691" end="9704" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="9708" end="9723" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197735" start="9734" end="9764" title="The Fall of the House of Usher" label="The Fall of the House of Usher"/>
<link wikidata="Q762206" start="9782" end="9801" title="The Tell-Tale Heart" label="The Tell-Tale Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130590" start="9819" end="9842" title="The Cask of Amontillado" label="The Cask of Amontillado"/>
<link wikidata="Q379449" start="9860" end="9884" title="The Pit and the Pendulum" label="The Pit and the Pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q878580" start="9902" end="9914" title="The Gold Bug" label="The Gold Bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q459667" start="9932" end="9961" title="The Murders in the Rue Morgue" label="The Murders in the Rue Morgue"/>
<link wikidata="Q186424" start="9987" end="10004" title="Detective fiction" label="detective stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q733448" start="10015" end="10035" title="The Purloined Letter" label="The Purloined Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q69339" start="10082" end="10101" title="Nathaniel Hawthorne" label="Nathaniel Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920815" start="10112" end="10128" title="Twice-Told Tales" label="Twice-Told Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345564" start="10144" end="10153" title="John Neal" label="John Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q926352" start="10472" end="10487" title="The Yellow Book" label="The Yellow Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640780" start="10501" end="10518" title="Black &amp;amp; White (magazine)" label="Black &amp;amp; White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126800" start="10536" end="10555" title="The Strand Magazine" label="The Strand Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9327" start="10683" end="10700" title="Guy de Maupassant" label="Guy de Maupassant"/>
<link wikidata="Q63971" start="10734" end="10747" title="Boule de Suif" label="Boule de Suif"/>
<link wikidata="Q667661" start="10903" end="10910" title="Literary realism" label="realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685" start="10927" end="10940" title="Anton Chekhov" label="Anton Chekhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="11159" end="11178" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q404622" start="11336" end="11363" title="Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay" label="Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay"/>
<link wikidata="Q174152" start="11625" end="11641" title="Munshi Premchand" label="Munshi Premchand"/>
<link wikidata="Q11051" start="11670" end="11689" title="Hindustani language" label="Hindustani language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956679" start="11874" end="11890" title="Brander Matthews" label="Brander Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318295" start="12124" end="12133" title="narrative" label="narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q8253" start="12134" end="12141" title="fiction" label="fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q170509" start="12146" end="12157" title="Henry James" label="Henry James"/>
<link wikidata="Q311145" start="12335" end="12351" title="Joaquim Maria Machado de Assis" label="Machado de Assis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737006" start="12437" end="12454" title="Xavier de Maistre" label="Xavier de Maistre"/>
<link wikidata="Q218960" start="12456" end="12471" title="Laurence Sterne" label="Laurence Sterne"/>
<link wikidata="Q9327" start="12473" end="12490" title="Guy de Maupassant" label="Guy de Maupassant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710229" start="12549" end="12560" title="João do Rio" label="João do Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q207175" start="12603" end="12614" title="bohemianism" label="bohemianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q383442" start="12616" end="12628" title="Lima Barreto" label="Lima Barreto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="12663" end="12674" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844169" start="12728" end="12760" title="Triste Fim de Policarpo Quaresma" label="Triste Fim de Policarpo Quaresma"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="12790" end="12795" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="12798" end="12817" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q404622" start="12988" end="13015" title="Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay" label="Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay"/>
<link wikidata="Q174152" start="13203" end="13212" title="Premchand" label="Premchand"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="13295" end="13301" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q144439" start="13305" end="13318" title="Bolesław Prus" label="Bolesław Prus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657670" start="13329" end="13350" title="A Legend of Old Egypt" label="A Legend of Old Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q240174" start="13367" end="13383" title="Eliza Orzeszkowa" label="Eliza Orzeszkowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41502" start="13464" end="13482" title="Henryk Sienkiewicz" label="Henryk Sienkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="13568" end="13576" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q316806" start="13579" end="13594" title="Almeida Garrett" label="Almeida Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q520688" start="13597" end="13616" title="Alexandre Herculano" label="Alexandre Herculano"/>
<link wikidata="Q316327" start="13619" end="13633" title="Eça de Queiroz" label="Eça de Queiroz"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="13635" end="13641" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42831" start="13645" end="13658" title="Ivan Turgenev" label="Ivan Turgenev"/>
<link wikidata="Q760143" start="13669" end="13696" title="A Sportsman&amp;#x27;s Sketches" label="A Sportsman&amp;#x27;s Sketches"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="13706" end="13724" title="Fyodor Dostoyevski" label="Fyodor Dostoyevski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215953" start="13735" end="13747" title="A Gentle Creature" label="The Meek One"/>
<link wikidata="Q971152" start="13771" end="13800" title="The Dream of a Ridiculous Man" label="The Dream of a Ridiculous Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="13817" end="13828" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15388909" start="13839" end="13852" title="Ivan the Fool (story)" label="Ivan the Fool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269280" start="13876" end="13906" title="How Much Land Does a Man Need?" label="How Much Land Does a Man Need?"/>
<link wikidata="Q4063807" start="13930" end="13945" title="Alyosha the Pot" label="Alyosha the Pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685" start="13962" end="13975" title="Anton Chekhov" label="Anton Chekhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q394247" start="13986" end="13993" title="The Bet (short story)" label="The Bet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418554" start="14051" end="14072" title="The Lady with the Dog" label="The Lady with the Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q12706" start="14089" end="14100" title="Maxim Gorky" label="Maxim Gorky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6009635" start="14111" end="14136" title="Twenty-six Men and a Girl" label="Twenty-six Men and a Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="14152" end="14166" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q132805" start="14170" end="14182" title="Thomas Hardy" label="Thomas Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670495" start="14193" end="14212" title="The Three Strangers" label="The Three Strangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976833" start="14237" end="14253" title="A Mere Interlude" label="A Mere Interlude"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192904" start="14278" end="14307" title="Barbara of the House of Grebe" label="Barbara of the House of Grebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="14324" end="14339" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484772" start="14350" end="14376" title="Plain Tales from the Hills" label="Plain Tales from the Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q189509" start="14400" end="14415" title="The Jungle Book" label="The Jungle Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="14432" end="14450" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q392147" start="14461" end="14494" title="The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes" label="The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q186424" start="14509" end="14524" title="Detective fiction" label="detective story"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="14528" end="14538" title="H.G. Wells" label="H.G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="14540" end="14555" title="Science fiction" label="Science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q823691" start="14566" end="14590" title="The Country of the Blind" label="The Country of the Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="14606" end="14619" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985" start="14623" end="14638" title="Herman Melville" label="Herman Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757032" start="14649" end="14665" title="The Piazza Tales" label="The Piazza Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="14682" end="14692" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208053" start="14703" end="14750" title="The Celebrated Jumping Frog of Calaveras County" label="The Celebrated Jumping Frog of Calaveras County"/>
<link wikidata="Q170509" start="14760" end="14771" title="Henry James" label="Henry James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759651" start="14782" end="14796" title="The Real Thing (story)" label="The Real Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q27331" start="14848" end="14871" title="The Beast in the Jungle" label="The Beast in the Jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q230476" start="14887" end="14898" title="Kate Chopin" label="Kate Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q206534" start="14901" end="14914" title="Stephen Crane" label="Stephen Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126800" start="14980" end="14999" title="The Strand Magazine" label="The Strand Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620361" start="15016" end="15028" title="Story-Teller" label="Story-Teller"/>
<link wikidata="Q311526" start="15261" end="15265" title="Saki" label="Saki"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="15273" end="15282" title="Satire" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q185852" start="15303" end="15312" title="Edwardian era" label="Edwardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q207515" start="15322" end="15336" title="P.G. Wodehouse" label="P.G. Wodehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q521812" start="15404" end="15410" title="Jeeves" label="Jeeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q186424" start="15504" end="15521" title="Detective fiction" label="detective stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q183167" start="15601" end="15616" title="G.K. Chesterton" label="G.K. Chesterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q35064" start="15618" end="15633" title="Agatha Christie" label="Agatha Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q106740" start="15639" end="15656" title="Dorothy L. Sayers" label="Dorothy L. Sayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q128560" start="15658" end="15671" title="Graham Greene" label="Graham Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857731" start="15711" end="15729" title="Twenty-One Stories" label="Twenty-One Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="15940" end="15951" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q459592" start="15995" end="16004" title="Dubliners" label="Dubliners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="16266" end="16282" title="Atlantic Monthly" label="Atlantic Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170076" start="16296" end="16318" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="16332" end="16346" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476462" start="16360" end="16375" title="Scribner&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Scribner&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302345" start="16389" end="16414" title="The Saturday Evening Post" label="The Saturday Evening Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q762195" start="16428" end="16435" title="Esquire (magazine)" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719348" start="16453" end="16464" title="The Bookman (New York)" label="The Bookman"/>
<link wikidata="Q93354" start="16592" end="16611" title="F. Scott Fitzgerald" label="F. Scott Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850705" start="16708" end="16733" title="Flappers and Philosophers" label="Flappers and Philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q206534" start="16895" end="16908" title="Stephen Crane" label="Stephen Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q45765" start="16913" end="16924" title="Jack London" label="Jack London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924838" start="17116" end="17139" title="Blanche Colton Williams" label="Blanche Colton Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="17425" end="17432" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16864" start="17434" end="17449" title="Horacio Quiroga" label="Horacio Quiroga"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="17558" end="17573" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="17609" end="17621" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="17720" end="17734" title="mental illness" label="mental illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q130741" start="17739" end="17752" title="Hallucination" label="hallucinatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q156501" start="17772" end="17790" title="Saadat Hasan Manto" label="Saadat Hasan Manto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659599" start="18221" end="18235" title="Toba Tek Singh" label="Toba Tek Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080325" start="18391" end="18405" title="Ismat Chughtai" label="Ismat Chughtai"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="18664" end="18671" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q905" start="18675" end="18686" title="Franz Kafka" label="Franz Kafka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304684" start="18697" end="18712" title="A Hunger Artist" label="A Hunger Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="18727" end="18733" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q203623" start="18736" end="18752" title="Mário de Andrade" label="Mário de Andrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713403" start="18755" end="18783" title="Antônio Castilho de Alcântara Machado" label="António de Alcantâra Machado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392121" start="18835" end="18851" title="Graciliano Ramos" label="Graciliano Ramos"/>
<link wikidata="Q379745" start="18854" end="18880" title="Carlos Drummond de Andrade" label="Carlos Drummond de Andrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="18883" end="18890" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q40909" start="18893" end="18907" title="Virginia Woolf" label="Virginia Woolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814864" start="18917" end="18928" title="Kew Gardens (short story)" label="Kew Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q134942" start="18973" end="18992" title="W. Somerset Maugham" label="W. Somerset Maugham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885875" start="18995" end="19009" title="V.S. Pritchett" label="V.S. Pritchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q107002" start="19012" end="19024" title="Evelyn Waugh" label="Evelyn Waugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q233956" start="19027" end="19039" title="Muriel Spark" label="Muriel Spark"/>
<link wikidata="Q654747" start="19042" end="19054" title="L.P. Hartley" label="L.P. Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q47087" start="19057" end="19073" title="Arthur C. Clarke" label="Arthur C. Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q609490" start="19083" end="19098" title="Travel by Wire!" label="Travel by Wire!"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="19113" end="19120" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q37030" start="19123" end="19134" title="Thomas Mann" label="Thomas Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="19137" end="19142" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193180" start="19145" end="19162" title="Jaishankar Prasad" label="Jaishankar Prasad"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="19164" end="19169" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q186326" start="19172" end="19191" title="Ryūnosuke Akutagawa" label="Ryūnosuke Akutagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="19193" end="19204" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q270632" start="19207" end="19226" title="Katherine Mansfield" label="Katherine Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385507" start="19236" end="19257" title="The Doll&amp;#x27;s House (short story)" label="The Doll&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="19272" end="19280" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q466945" start="19283" end="19303" title="Mário de Sá-Carneiro" label="Mário de Sá-Carneiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q467179" start="19306" end="19322" title="Florbela Espanca" label="Florbela Espanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q173481" start="19325" end="19340" title="Fernando Pessoa" label="Fernando Pessoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="19343" end="19356" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q172788" start="19360" end="19368" title="O. Henry" label="O. Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114599" start="19379" end="19402" title="The Ransom of Red Chief" label="The Ransom of Red Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727575" start="19420" end="19442" title="The Cop and the Anthem" label="The Cop and the Anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q48772379" start="19460" end="19477" title="The Skylight Room" label="The Skylight Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q15723815" start="19495" end="19513" title="After Twenty Years" label="After Twenty Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149225" start="19531" end="19544" title="The Last Leaf" label="The Last Leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659205" start="19562" end="19585" title="A Retrieved Reformation" label="A Retrieved Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q93354" start="19594" end="19613" title="F. Scott Fitzgerald" label="F. Scott Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711892" start="19623" end="19637" title="The Ice Palace (short story)" label="The Ice Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574830" start="19653" end="19688" title="The Curious Case of Benjamin Button (short story)" label="The Curious Case of Benjamin Button"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760410" start="19704" end="19714" title="Absolution (short story)" label="Absolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760643" start="19730" end="19742" title="The Rich Boy" label="The Rich Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="19752" end="19768" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4450746" start="19779" end="19806" title="A Clean, Well-Lighted Place" label="A Clean, Well-Lighted Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363263" start="19830" end="19856" title="Hills Like White Elephants" label="Hills Like White Elephants"/>
<link wikidata="Q15587387" start="19880" end="19904" title="The Snows of Kilimanjaro (short story)" label="The Snows of Kilimanjaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q38392" start="19920" end="19936" title="William Faulkner" label="William Faulkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065524" start="19946" end="19960" title="Go Down, Moses (book)" label="Go Down, Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q270707" start="19969" end="19983" title="Dorothy Parker" label="Dorothy Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="20019" end="20031" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138091" start="20041" end="20050" title="Nightfall (Asimov short story and novel)" label="Nightfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="20087" end="20099" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q548345" start="20223" end="20239" title="John O&amp;#x27;Hara" label="John O&amp;#x27;Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="20247" end="20261" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q239910" start="20379" end="20394" title="Shirley Jackson" label="Shirley Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817456" start="20415" end="20426" title="The Lottery" label="The Lottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q39212" start="20572" end="20586" title="John Steinbeck" label="John Steinbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q290633" start="20588" end="20601" title="Jean Stafford" label="Jean Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q259364" start="20603" end="20615" title="Eudora Welty" label="Eudora Welty"/>
<link wikidata="Q336151" start="20621" end="20633" title="John Cheever" label="John Cheever"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767670" start="20657" end="20674" title="The Swimmer (short story)" label="&amp;quot;The Swimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q79904" start="20845" end="20859" title="J. D. Salinger" label="J. D. Salinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q234579" start="20948" end="20977" title="Flannery O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Flannery O&amp;#x27;Connor&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657121" start="21002" end="21028" title="A Good Man is Hard to Find" label="A Good Man is Hard to Find"/>
<link wikidata="Q276709" start="21061" end="21076" title="Southern Gothic" label="Southern Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q187019" start="21183" end="21194" title="Philip Roth" label="Philip Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q443966" start="21199" end="21210" title="Grace Paley" label="Grace Paley"/>
<link wikidata="Q272393" start="21258" end="21270" title="Tillie Olsen" label="Tillie Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5979017" start="21284" end="21304" title="I Stand Here Ironing" label="I Stand Here Ironing"/>
<link wikidata="Q273210" start="21362" end="21375" title="James Baldwin (writer)" label="James Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385843" start="21401" end="21422" title="Going to Meet the Man" label="Going to Meet the Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="21476" end="21491" title="Science fiction" label="Science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q40640" start="21580" end="21592" title="Ray Bradbury" label="Ray Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="21594" end="21606" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q353869" start="21757" end="21773" title="Donald Barthelme" label="Donald Barthelme"/>
<link wikidata="Q315683" start="21778" end="21788" title="John Barth" label="John Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q173436" start="21962" end="21972" title="minimalism" label="minimalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q219862" start="22043" end="22057" title="Raymond Carver" label="Raymond Carver"/>
<link wikidata="Q452145" start="22062" end="22073" title="Ann Beattie" label="Ann Beattie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280035" start="22190" end="22201" title="Lydia Davis" label="Lydia Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365041" start="22253" end="22262" title="Argentine" label="Argentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q909" start="22270" end="22287" title="Jorge Luis Borges" label="Jorge Luis Borges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="22345" end="22361" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q473" start="22369" end="22389" title="The Library of Babel" label="The Library of Babel"/>
<link wikidata="Q952043" start="22413" end="22422" title="The Aleph (short story)" label="The Aleph"/>
<link wikidata="Q205" start="22467" end="22475" title="infinity" label="infinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097462" start="22513" end="22540" title="The Garden of Forking Paths" label="The Garden of Forking Paths"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051459" start="22592" end="22628" title="Ellery Queen&amp;#x27;s Mystery Magazine" label="Ellery Queen&amp;#x27;s Mystery Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q147516" start="22682" end="22697" title="Magical realism" label="Magical realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q298035" start="22757" end="22776" title="Adolfo Bioy Casares" label="Adolfo Bioy Casares"/>
<link wikidata="Q174210" start="22781" end="22795" title="Julio Cortázar" label="Julio Cortázar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="22801" end="22806" title="Nobel prize" label="Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5878" start="22823" end="22845" title="Gabriel García Márquez" label="Gabriel García Márquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q16873" start="22871" end="22889" title="Juan Carlos Onetti" label="Juan Carlos Onetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q10311068" start="22986" end="22998" title="João Antônio Ferreira Filho" label="João Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q693827" start="23056" end="23062" title="favela" label="favela"/>
<link wikidata="Q470133" start="23103" end="23116" title="Rubem Fonseca" label="Rubem Fonseca"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012" start="23118" end="23137" title="João Guimarães Rosa" label="João Guimarães Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264127" start="23302" end="23306" title="Desh (magazine)" label="Desh"/>
<link wikidata="Q117737" start="23458" end="23482" title="Sharadindu Bandyopadhyay" label="Sharadindu Bandyopadhyay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723894" start="23499" end="23514" title="Byomkesh Bakshi" label="Byomkesh Bakshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8873" start="23520" end="23532" title="Satyajit Ray" label="Satyajit Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723899" start="23549" end="23555" title="Feluda" label="Feluda"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="23620" end="23626" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q558950" start="23630" end="23650" title="José Luandino Vieira" label="José Luandino Vieira"/>
<link wikidata="Q363927" start="23654" end="23675" title="José Eduardo Agualusa" label="José Eduardo Agualusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="23678" end="23685" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351726" start="23689" end="23713" title="Tarasankar Bandyopadhyay" label="Tarasankar Bandyopadhyay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115772" start="23717" end="23736" title="Manik Bandyopadhyay" label="Manik Bandyopadhyay"/>
<link wikidata="Q144391" start="23740" end="23754" title="Mahasweta Devi" label="Mahasweta Devi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498978" start="23758" end="23781" title="Shirshendu Mukhopadhyay" label="Shirshendu Mukhopadhyay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632914" start="23785" end="23806" title="Suchitra Bhattacharya" label="Suchitra Bhattacharya"/>
<link wikidata="Q47671034" start="23810" end="23828" title="Ramapada Chowdhury" label="Ramapada Chowdhury"/>
<link wikidata="Q12052777" start="23832" end="23845" title="Humayun Ahmed" label="Humayun Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="23848" end="23854" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q235955" start="23858" end="23875" title="Clarice Lispector" label="Clarice Lispector"/>
<link wikidata="Q465421" start="23879" end="23900" title="Lygia Fagundes Telles" label="Lygia Fagundes Telles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356293" start="23904" end="23916" title="Adélia Prado" label="Adélia Prado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351596" start="23920" end="23935" title="Dalton Trevisan" label="Dalton Trevisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139463" start="23939" end="23953" title="Autran Dourado" label="Autran Dourado"/>
<link wikidata="Q956187" start="23957" end="23970" title="Moacyr Scliar" label="Moacyr Scliar"/>
<link wikidata="Q457370" start="23974" end="23992" title="Carlos Heitor Cony" label="Carlos Heitor Cony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135589" start="23996" end="24007" title="Hilda Hilst" label="Hilda Hilst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746906" start="24011" end="24030" title="Caio Fernando Abreu" label="Caio Fernando Abreu"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="24033" end="24038" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q439761" start="24042" end="24053" title="José Donoso" label="José Donoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q769883" start="24057" end="24078" title="Augusto d&amp;#x27;Halmar" label="Augusto d&amp;#x27;Halmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891716" start="24082" end="24094" title="Manuel Rojas (author)" label="Manuel Rojas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032745" start="24098" end="24111" title="Diamela Eltit" label="Diamela Eltit"/>
<link wikidata="Q362638" start="24115" end="24129" title="Alberto Fuguet" label="Alberto Fuguet"/>
<link wikidata="Q111516396" start="24133" end="24144" title="José Baroja" label="José Baroja"/>
<link wikidata="Q554224" start="24148" end="24164" title="Alejandro Zambra" label="Alejandro Zambra"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="24167" end="24172" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176" start="24176" end="24190" title="Naguib Mahfouz" label="Naguib Mahfouz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="24223" end="24228" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705018" start="24232" end="24245" title="Amrita Pritam" label="Amrita Pritam"/>
<link wikidata="Q283267" start="24249" end="24266" title="Dharamvir Bharati" label="Dharamvir Bharati"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631381" start="24270" end="24283" title="Bhisham Sahni" label="Bhisham Sahni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631806" start="24287" end="24300" title="Krishna Sobti" label="Krishna Sobti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993428" start="24304" end="24316" title="Nirmal Verma" label="Nirmal Verma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630389" start="24320" end="24339" title="Kamleshwar (writer)" label="Kamleshwar (writer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632745" start="24343" end="24357" title="Mannu Bhandari" label="Mannu Bhandari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635837" start="24361" end="24379" title="Harishankar Parsai" label="Harishankar Parsai"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="24381" end="24386" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154756" start="24389" end="24402" title="Italo Calvino" label="Italo Calvino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638837" start="24413" end="24423" title="Marcovaldo" label="Marcovaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="24438" end="24443" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80095" start="24447" end="24459" title="Kenzaburō Ōe" label="Kenzaburō Ōe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="24461" end="24472" title="Nobel prize" label="Nobel prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q134456" start="24492" end="24505" title="Yukio Mishima" label="Yukio Mishima"/>
<link wikidata="Q134798" start="24509" end="24524" title="Haruki Murakami" label="Haruki Murakami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="24526" end="24536" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095435" start="24540" end="24556" title="Suleiman Cassamo" label="Suleiman Cassamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q270580" start="24560" end="24576" title="Paulina Chiziane" label="Paulina Chiziane"/>
<link wikidata="Q952238" start="24580" end="24593" title="Eduardo White" label="Eduardo White"/>
<link wikidata="Q382101" start="24597" end="24606" title="Mia Couto" label="Mia Couto"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="24608" end="24612" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q39803" start="24615" end="24633" title="Mario Vargas Llosa" label="Mario Vargas Llosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="24665" end="24676" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452158" start="24679" end="24695" title="Peter Solis Nery" label="Peter Solis Nery"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="24840" end="24846" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q828373" start="24849" end="24866" title="Kornel Filipowicz" label="Kornel Filipowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348055" start="24869" end="24887" title="Katarzyna Grochola" label="Katarzyna Grochola"/>
<link wikidata="Q928556" start="24890" end="24902" title="Paweł Huelle" label="Paweł Huelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18832" start="24905" end="24920" title="Sławomir Mrożek" label="Sławomir Mrożek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068682" start="24923" end="24938" title="Magdalena Tulli" label="Magdalena Tulli"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="24940" end="24948" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q643437" start="24952" end="24969" title="Vergílio Ferreira" label="Vergílio Ferreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406784" start="24973" end="24998" title="Fernando Goncalves Namora" label="Fernando Goncalves Namora"/>
<link wikidata="Q235992" start="25002" end="25034" title="Sophia de Mello Breyner Andresen" label="Sophia de Mello Breyner Andresen"/>
<link wikidata="Q37060" start="25038" end="25051" title="José Saramago" label="José Saramago"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="25053" end="25067" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161" start="25070" end="25080" title="Roald Dahl" label="Roald Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q910123" start="25083" end="25096" title="Helen Simpson (author)" label="Helen Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q193357" start="25099" end="25116" title="Daphne du Maurier" label="Daphne du Maurier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718091" start="25126" end="25135" title="The Birds (story)" label="The Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q660245" start="25158" end="25177" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Look Now" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Look Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="25192" end="25205" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351972" start="25208" end="25227" title="Frank O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Frank O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748142" start="25237" end="25253" title="The Lonely Voice" label="The Lonely Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q203460" start="25262" end="25277" title="Wallace Stegner" label="Wallace Stegner"/>
<link wikidata="Q105756" start="25280" end="25291" title="John Updike" label="John Updike"/>
<link wikidata="Q217557" start="25294" end="25311" title="Joyce Carol Oates" label="Joyce Carol Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q340016" start="25314" end="25327" title="Denis Johnson" label="Denis Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6188048" start="25331" end="25346" title="Jesus&amp;#x27; Son (short story collection)" label="Jesus&amp;#x27; Son"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25387" end="25419" title=":Category:21st-century short story writers" label="21st-century short story writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="25828" end="25837" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q576342" start="25946" end="25952" title="Salon (gathering)" label="salons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216369" start="26261" end="26270" title="Sam Baker (writer)" label="Sam Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q234819" start="26377" end="26388" title="Alice Munro" label="Alice Munro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550824" start="26390" end="26403" title="Mavis Gallant" label="Mavis Gallant"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="26512" end="26537" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215273" start="26595" end="26620" title="Dance of the Happy Shades" label="Dance of the Happy Shades"/>
<link wikidata="Q60675668" start="26622" end="26646" title="Lives of Girls and Women" label="Lives of Girls and Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667381" start="26648" end="26673" title="Who Do You Think You Are? (book)" label="Who Do You Think You Are?"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795094" start="26675" end="26695" title="The Progress of Love" label="The Progress of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795880" start="26697" end="26721" title="The Love of a Good Woman" label="The Love of a Good Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797308" start="26738" end="26745" title="Runaway (book)" label="Runaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639566" start="26808" end="26838" title="Sunday Times EFG Private Bank Short Story Award" label="Sunday Times Short Story Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834854" start="26844" end="26874" title="BBC National Short Story Award" label="BBC National Short Story Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q234819" start="27186" end="27197" title="Alice Munro" label="Alice Munro"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="27214" end="27239" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q76487" start="27593" end="27603" title="Paul Heyse" label="Paul Heyse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5878" start="27616" end="27638" title="Gabriel García Márquez" label="Gabriel García Márquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635894" start="27726" end="27737" title="Radio drama" label="Radio drama"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27752" end="27777" title="NBC Presents: Short Story" label="NBC Presents: Short Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739849" start="27830" end="27845" title="The Hitch-Hiker (radio play)" label="The Hitch-Hiker"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="27861" end="27873" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q24862" start="27877" end="27887" title="Short film" label="Short film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443779" start="27977" end="27997" title="Children of the Corn" label="Children of the Corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q172241" start="28011" end="28035" title="The Shawshank Redemption" label="The Shawshank Redemption"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718091" start="28049" end="28058" title="The Birds (story)" label="The Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q160618" start="28072" end="28090" title="Brokeback Mountain" label="Brokeback Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617836" start="28104" end="28119" title="Who Goes There?" label="Who Goes There?"/>
<link wikidata="Q583407" start="28133" end="28137" title="Duel (1971 film)" label="Duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q783017" start="28151" end="28169" title="A Sound of Thunder" label="A Sound of Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120143" start="28183" end="28191" title="The Body (2001 film)" label="The Body"/>
<link wikidata="Q222018" start="28205" end="28217" title="Total Recall (1990 film)" label="Total Recall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878483" start="28231" end="28248" title="The Lawnmower Man" label="The Lawnmower Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q756675" start="28262" end="28280" title="Hearts in Atlantis" label="Hearts in Atlantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177112" start="28298" end="28329" title="The Secret Life of Walter Mitty" label="The Secret Life of Walter Mitty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261214" start="28339" end="28357" title="Television special" label="Television special"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28374" end="28382" title="12:01 PM" label="12:01 PM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793913" start="28422" end="28446" title="Nightmare at 20,000 Feet" label="Nightmare at 20,000 Feet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817456" start="28524" end="28535" title="The Lottery" label="The Lottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q573836" start="28553" end="28567" title="Button, Button (The Twilight Zone)" label="Button, Button"/>
<link wikidata="Q847829" start="28666" end="28675" title="Narrative structure" label="narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q847829" start="28784" end="28802" title="dramatic structure" label="dramatic structure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28933" end="28946" title="Three-act structure#Structure" label="rising action"/>
<link wikidata="Q277720" start="29409" end="29422" title="in medias res" label="in medias res"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="30154" end="30163" title="Anthology" label="Anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679101" start="30166" end="30171" title="Conte (literature)" label="Conte"/>
<link wikidata="Q21609546" start="30174" end="30185" title="Conte cruel" label="Conte cruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254176" start="30188" end="30195" title="Drabble" label="Drabble"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457615" start="30198" end="30211" title="Flash fiction" label="Flash fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368848" start="30241" end="30257" title="Literary journal" label="Literary journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936984" start="30260" end="30268" title="Minisaga" label="Minisaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q909887" start="30271" end="30283" title="Sketch story" label="Sketch story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951220" start="30286" end="30295" title="Tall tale" label="Tall tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656062" start="30298" end="30306" title="Vignette (literature)" label="Vignette"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28297" wikidata="Q9165" url="?curid=28297" title="Soul">
<text>The soul, regarded as the immaterial self which most ordinary people initially believe in, is often discussed in the context of religion, theology, psychology and philosophy. According to Stewart Goetz, anthropologists and psychologists have found that ordinary humans interculturally have distinguished between souls and bodies.

The soul may also be considered to be the animating force (&quot;spirit&quot;) of a person,
including that person&#x27;s personal identity, personality, or memory. Many people believe that a soul (an immortal soul), as an immaterial aspect of a living being, can survive physical death. In the Abrahamic religions, the concept of a soul generally applies only to humans, although other worldviews, such as animism, may assign souls to other living 
and non-living entities.

In modern sciences, psychology, and philosophy, beliefs in souls comes under criticism. Evidence from the fields of neurosciences suggest that all mental processes correlate to a brain-function and thus, there might be no additional soul beyond matter. Proponents of the idea of a matter-independent soul have argued that the soul may exist parallel to brain activities or a byproduct of the brain (Epiphenomenalism). Others have written defenses on the interactionism, i.e. the view that the soul interacts with the body as a separate instance.

==Etymology==
The Modern English noun &quot;soul&quot; is derived from Old English &quot;sāwol, sāwel&quot;. The earliest attestations reported in the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; are from the 8th century. In King Alfred&#x27;s translation of &quot;De Consolatione Philosophiae&quot;, it is used to refer to the immaterial, spiritual, or thinking aspect of a person, as contrasted with the person&#x27;s physical body; in the Vespasian Psalter 77.50, it means &quot;life&quot; or &quot;animate existence&quot;. The Old English word is cognate with other historical Germanic terms for the same idea, including Old Frisian &quot;sēle, sēl&quot; (which could also mean &quot;salvation&quot;, or &quot;solemn oath&quot;), Gothic &quot;saiwala&quot;, Old High German &quot;sēula, sēla&quot;, Old Saxon &quot;sēola&quot;, and Old Norse &quot;sāla&quot;. Present-day cognates include Dutch &quot;ziel&quot; and German &quot;Seele&quot;.

==Religious views==
In Judaism and in some Christian denominations, only human beings have immortal souls. Immortality is disputed within Judaism and the concept of immortality was most likely influenced by Plato. For example, Thomas Aquinas, borrowing directly from Aristotle&#x27;s &quot;On the Soul&quot;, attributed &quot;soul&quot; (&quot;&quot;) to all organisms but argued that only human souls are immortal. Other religions (most notably Hinduism and Jainism) believe that all living things from the smallest bacterium to the largest of mammals are the souls themselves (Atman and jiva) and have their physical representative (the body) in the world. The actual self is the soul, while the body is only a mechanism to experience the karma of that life. Thus, if one sees a tiger then there is a self-conscious identity residing in it (the soul), and a physical representative (the whole body of the tiger, which is observable) in the world. Many people believe that non-biological things, such as rivers and mountains, also possess souls. This belief is called animism.

=== Ancient Near East ===
In the ancient Egyptian religion, an individual was believed to be made up of various elements, some physical and some spiritual. Similar ideas are found in ancient Assyrian and Babylonian religion. The Kuttamuwa stele, a funeral stele for an 8th-century BCE royal official from Sam&#x27;al, describes Kuttamuwa requesting that his mourners commemorate his life and his afterlife with feasts &quot;for my soul that is in this stele&quot;. It is one of the earliest references to a soul as a separate entity from the body. The basalt stele is tall and wide. It was uncovered in the third season of excavations by the Neubauer Expedition of the Oriental Institute in Chicago, Illinois.

===Baháʼí Faith===
The Baháʼí Faith affirms that &quot;the soul is a sign of God, a heavenly gem whose reality the most learned of men hath failed to grasp, and whose mystery no mind, however acute, can ever hope to unravel&quot;. Bahá&#x27;u&#x27;lláh stated that the soul not only continues to live after the physical death of the human body but is in fact immortal. Heaven can be seen partly as the soul&#x27;s state of nearness to God, and hell as a state of remoteness from God. Each state follows as a natural consequence of individual efforts, or the lack thereof, to develop spiritually. Bahá&#x27;u&#x27;lláh taught that individuals have no existence prior to their life here on earth and the soul&#x27;s evolution is always towards God and away from the material world.

===Buddhism===
The traditional doctrine in Buddhism regarding the soul, self, or ego is that it is non-existent as a separate, permanent entity. The non-existence of self (anatman), the impermanence of all things (anitya), and the suffering (dukkha) experienced by living beings due to attachment to ideas of self and permanence are central concepts in almost all Buddhist schools. The doctrine of Buddha-nature, while sometimes misinterpreted as referring to a &quot;true self&quot; or &quot;soul&quot; of some kind, actually depends upon acceptance of the concept of anatman to be properly understood.

===Christianity===

According to some Christian eschatology, when people die, their souls will be judged by God and determined to go to Heaven or to Hades awaiting a resurrection. The oldest existing branches of Christianity, the Catholic Church and the Eastern and Oriental Orthodox churches, adhere to this view, as well as many Protestant denominations. Some Protestant Christians understand the soul as life, and believe that the dead have no conscious existence until after the resurrection (this is known as Christian conditionalism). Some Protestant Christians believe that the souls and bodies of the unrighteous will be destroyed in Hell rather than suffering eternally (annihilationism). Believers will inherit eternal life either in Heaven, or in a Kingdom of God on earth, and enjoy eternal fellowship with God. Other Christians reject the punishment of the soul.

Paul the Apostle used &quot;psychē&quot; () and &quot;pneuma&quot; () specifically to distinguish between the Jewish notions of &quot;nephesh&quot; (נפש) and &quot;ruah&quot; (רוח), meaning spirit, (also in the Septuagint, e.g. Genesis 1:2 רוּחַ אֱלֹהִים = = &quot;spiritus Dei&quot; = &quot;the Spirit of God&quot;). Christians generally believe in the existence and eternal, infinite nature of the soul.

====Origin of the soul====
The &quot;origin of the soul&quot; has provided a vexing question in Christianity. The major theories put forward include soul creationism, traducianism, and pre-existence. According to soul creationism, God creates each individual soul directly, either at the moment of conception or at some later time. According to traducianism, the soul comes from the parents by natural generation. According to the preexistence theory, the soul exists before the moment of conception. There have been differing thoughts regarding whether human embryos have souls from conception, or whether there is a point between conception and birth where the fetus acquires a soul, consciousness, and / or personhood. Stances in this question play a role in judgments on the morality of abortion.

====Trichotomy of the soul====
Some Christians espouse a trichotomic view of humans, which characterizes humans as consisting of a body (&quot;soma&quot;), soul (&quot;psyche&quot;), and spirit (&quot;pneuma&quot;); however, the majority of modern Bible scholars point out how the concepts of &quot;spirit&quot; and of &quot;soul&quot; are used interchangeably in many biblical passages, and so hold to dichotomy: the view that each human comprises a body and a soul. Paul said that the &quot;body wars against&quot; the soul, &quot;For the word of God is living and active and sharper than any two-edged sword, and piercing as far as the division of soul and spirit&quot; (Heb 4:12 NASB), and that &quot;I buffet my body&quot;, to keep it under control.

====&quot;Tota in toto corpore&quot;====
According to Thomas Aquinas, the soul is &quot;tota in toto corpore&quot;. This means that the soul is entirely contained in every single part of the human body, and therefore ubiquitous and cannot be placed in a single organ, such as heart or brain, nor it is separable from the body (except after the body&#x27;s death). In the fourth book of &quot;De Trinitate&quot;, Augustine of Hippo states that the soul is all in the whole body and all in any part of it.

====Views of various denominations====
; Roman Catholicism
The present Catechism of the Catholic Church states that &quot;[The term &#x27;soul&#x27;] refers to the innermost aspect of [persons], that which is of greatest value in [them], that by which [they are] most especially in God&#x27;s image: &#x27;soul&#x27; signifies the spiritual principle in [humanity].&quot; All souls living and dead will be judged by Jesus Christ when he comes back to earth. The Catholic Church teaches that the existence of each individual soul is dependent wholly upon God, stating: &quot;The doctrine of the faith affirms that the spiritual and immortal soul is created immediately by God.&quot;
;Protestantism
Protestants generally believe in the soul&#x27;s existence and immortality, but fall into two major camps about what this means in terms of an afterlife. Some, following John Calvin, believe that the soul persists as consciousness after death. Others, following Martin Luther, believe that the soul dies with the body, and is unconscious (&quot;sleeps&quot;) until the resurrection of the dead.

;Adventism:
Various new religious movements deriving from Adventism including Christadelphians, Seventh-day Adventists, and Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, similarly believe that the dead do not possess a soul separate from the body and are unconscious until the resurrection.

;Latter-day Saints (Mormonism):
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints teaches that the spirit and body together constitute the Soul of Man (Mankind), stating: &quot;The spirit and the body are the soul of man.&quot; Latter-day Saints believe that the soul is the union of a pre-existing, God-made spirit, and a temporal body, which is formed by physical conception on earth. After death, the spirit continues to live and progress in the spirit world until the resurrection, when it is reunited with the body that once housed it. This reuniting of body and spirit results in a perfect soul that is immortal, and eternal, and capable of receiving a fulness of joy. Latter-day Saint cosmology also describes &quot;intelligences&quot; as the essence of consciousness or agency. These are co-eternal with God, and animate the spirits. The union of a newly-created spirit body with an eternally-existing intelligence constitutes a &quot;spirit birth&quot;, and justifies God&#x27;s title &quot;Father of our spirits&quot;.

=== Confucianism ===
Some Confucian traditions contrast a spiritual soul with a corporeal soul.

===Hinduism===

&quot;Ātman&quot; is a Sanskrit word that means inner self or soul.
In Hindu philosophy, especially in the Vedanta school of Hinduism, &quot;ātman&quot; is the first principle, the true self of an individual beyond identification with phenomena, the essence of an individual. In order to attain liberation (&quot;moksha&quot;), a human being must acquire self-knowledge (&quot;atma jnana&quot;), which is to realize that one&#x27;s true self (&quot;ātman&quot;) is identical with the transcendent self Brahman according to Advaita Vedanta.
The six orthodox schools of Hinduism believe that there is &quot;ātman&quot; (self, essence) in every being.

In Hinduism and Jainism, a &quot;jiva&quot; (, &#x27;, alternative spelling &quot;jiwa&quot;; , &#x27;, alternative spelling &quot;jeev&quot;) is a living being, or any entity imbued with a life force.
The concept of &quot;jiva&quot; in Jainism is similar to &quot;ātman&quot; in Hinduism; however, some Hindu traditions differentiate between the two concepts, with &quot;jiva&quot; considered as individual self, while atman as that which is universal unchanging self that is present in all living beings and everything else as the metaphysical Brahman. The latter is sometimes referred to as &quot;jiva-ātman&quot; (a soul in a living body).

===Islam===
The Quran, the holy book of Islam, uses two words to refer to the soul: &quot;rūḥ&quot; (translated as spirit, consciousness, pneuma, or soul) and &quot;nafs&quot; (translated as self, ego, psyche, or soul), cognates of the Hebrew &quot;ruach&quot; and &quot;nefesh&quot;. The two terms are frequently used interchangeably, although &quot;rūḥ&quot; is more often used to denote the divine spirit or &quot;the breath of life&quot;, while &quot;nafs&quot; designates one&#x27;s disposition or characteristics. In Islamic philosophy, the immortal rūḥ &quot;drives&quot; the mortal nafs, which comprises temporal desires and perceptions necessary for living.

Several verses of the Quran that mention the rûh occur in chapters 17 (&quot;The Night Journey&quot;) and 39 (&quot;The Troops&quot;).


===Jainism===
In Jainism, every living being, from plant or bacterium to human, has a soul and the concept forms the very basis of Jainism. According to Jainism, there is no beginning or end to the existence of soul. It is eternal in nature and changes its form until it attains liberation. In Jainism, &quot;jiva&quot; is the immortal essence or soul of a living organism, such as human, animal, fish, or plant, which survives physical death. The concept of &quot;Ajiva&quot; in Jainism means &quot;not soul&quot;, and represents matter (including body), time, space, non-motion and motion. In Jainism, a &quot;Jiva&quot; is either &quot;samsari&quot; (mundane, caught in cycle of rebirths) or &quot;mukta&quot; (liberated).

According to this belief until the time the soul is liberated from the &quot;saṃsāra&quot; (cycle of repeated birth and death), it gets attached to one of these bodies based on the karma (actions) of the individual soul. Irrespective of which state the soul is in, it has got the same attributes and qualities. The difference between the liberated and non-liberated souls is that the qualities and attributes are manifested completely in case of &quot;siddha&quot; (liberated soul) as they have overcome all the karmic bondages whereas in case of non-liberated souls they are partially exhibited. Souls who rise victorious over wicked emotions while still remaining within physical bodies are referred to as arihants.

Concerning the Jain view of the soul, Virchand Gandhi said that &quot;the soul lives its own life, not for the purpose of the body, but the body lives for the purpose of the soul. If we believe that the soul is to be controlled by the body then soul misses its power.&quot;
===Judaism===
The Hebrew terms &quot;nefesh&quot; (literally &quot;living being&quot;), &quot;ruach&quot; (literally &quot;wind&quot;), &quot;neshamah&quot; (literally &quot;breath&quot;), &quot;chayah&quot; (literally &quot;life&quot;) and &quot;yechidah&quot; (literally &quot;singularity&quot;) are used to describe the soul or spirit. In Judaism, there was originally little to no concept of a soul. As seen in the Genesis, the divine breath simply animated bodies.

Judaism relates the quality of one&#x27;s soul to one&#x27;s performance of the commandments (&quot;mitzvot)&quot; and reaching higher levels of understanding, and thus closeness to God. A person with such closeness is called a &quot;tzadik&quot;. Therefore, Judaism embraces the commemoration of the day of one&#x27;s death, &quot;nahala&quot;/&quot;Yahrtzeit&quot;, and not the birthday, as a festivity of remembrance, for only toward the end of life&#x27;s struggles, tests and challenges could human souls be judged and credited for righteousness. Judaism places great importance on the study of the souls.

Kabbalah and other mystic traditions go into greater detail into the nature of the soul. Kabbalah separates the soul into five elements, corresponding to the five worlds:

# Nefesh, related to natural instinct.
# Ruach, related to emotion.
# Neshamah, related to intellect.
# Chayah, which gazes at the transcendence of God.
# Yechidah, essence of the soul, which is bound to God.

Kabbalah proposed a concept of reincarnation, the &quot;gilgul&quot; (&quot;nefesh habehamit&quot; – the &quot;animal soul&quot;). Some Jewish traditions assert that the soul is housed in the &quot;luz&quot; bone, though traditions disagree as to whether it is the atlas at the top of the spine, or the sacrum at bottom of the spine.

===Shamanism===
Soul dualism, also called &quot;multiple souls&quot; or &quot;dualistic pluralism&quot;, is a common belief in Shamanism, and is essential in the universal and central concept of &quot;soul flight&quot; (also called &quot;soul journey&quot;, &quot;out-of-body experience&quot;, &quot;ecstasy&quot;, or &quot;astral projection&quot;). It is the belief that humans have two or more souls, generally termed the &quot;body soul&quot;, or &quot;life soul&quot;, and the &quot;free soul&quot;. The former is linked to bodily functions and awareness when awake, while the latter can freely wander during sleep or trance states. In some cases, there are a plethora of soul types with different functions. Soul dualism and multiple souls are prominent in the traditional animistic beliefs of the Austronesian peoples, the Chinese people (&quot;hún&quot; and &quot;pò&quot;), the Tibetan people, most African peoples, most Native North Americans, ancient South Asian peoples, Northern Eurasian peoples, and in Ancient Egyptians (the &quot;ka&quot; and &quot;ba&quot;).

The belief in soul dualism is found throughout most Austronesian shamanistic traditions. The reconstructed Proto-Austronesian word for the &quot;body soul&quot; is &quot;*nawa&quot; (&quot;breath&quot;, &quot;life&quot;, or &quot;vital spirit&quot;). It is located somewhere in the abdominal cavity, often in the liver or the heart (Proto-Austronesian &quot;*qaCay&quot;). The &quot;free soul&quot; is located in the head. Its names are usually derived from Proto-Austronesian &quot;*qaNiCu&quot; (&quot;ghost&quot;, &quot;spirit [of the dead]&quot;), which also apply to other non-human nature spirits. The &quot;free soul&quot; is also referred to in names that literally mean &quot;twin&quot; or &quot;double&quot;, from Proto-Austronesian &quot;*duSa&quot; (&quot;two&quot;). A virtuous person is said to be one whose souls are in harmony with each other, while an evil person is one whose souls are in conflict.

The &quot;free soul&quot; is said to leave the body and journey to the spirit world during sleep, trance-like states, delirium, insanity, and death. The duality is also seen in the healing traditions of Austronesian shamans, where illnesses are regarded as a &quot;soul loss&quot; and thus to heal the sick, one must &quot;return&quot; the &quot;free soul&quot; (which may have been stolen by an evil spirit or got lost in the spirit world) into the body. If the &quot;free soul&quot; can not be returned, the afflicted person dies or goes permanently insane.

The shaman heals within the spiritual dimension by returning &#x27;lost&#x27; parts of the human soul from wherever they have gone. The shaman also cleanses excess negative energies, which confuse or pollute the soul. In some ethnic groups, there can also be more than two souls. Like among the Tagbanwa people, where a person is said to have six souls – the &quot;free soul&quot; (which is regarded as the &quot;true&quot; soul) and five secondary souls with various functions. Several Inuit groups believe that a person has more than one type of soul. One is associated with respiration, the other can accompany the body as a shadow. In some cases, it is connected to shamanistic beliefs among the various Inuit groups. Caribou Inuit groups also believed in several types of souls.

===Sikhism===
Sikhism considers soul (&quot;atma&quot;) to be part of God (Waheguru). Various hymns are cited from the holy book Guru Granth Sahib (SGGS) that suggests this belief. &quot;God is in the Soul and the Soul is in the God.&quot; The same concept is repeated at various pages of the SGGS. Example include that &quot;The soul is divine; divine is the soul. Worship Him with love&quot;, and &quot;The soul is the Lord, and the Lord is the soul; contemplating the Shabad, the Lord is found.&quot;

The &quot;atma&quot; or soul according to Sikhism is an entity or &quot;spiritual spark&quot; or &quot;light&quot; in the human body - because of which the body can sustain life. On the departure of this entity from the body, the body becomes lifeless – no amount of manipulations to the body can make the person make any physical actions. The soul is the &quot;driver&quot; in the body. It is the &quot;roohu&quot; or spirit or &quot;atma&quot;, the presence of which makes the physical body alive.

Many religious and philosophical traditions support the view that the soul is the ethereal substance – a spirit; a non-material spark – particular to a unique living being. Such traditions often consider the soul both immortal and innately aware of its immortal nature, as well as the true basis for sentience in each living being. The concept of the soul has strong links with notions of an afterlife, but opinions may vary wildly even within a given religion as to what happens to the soul after death. Many within these religions and philosophies see the soul as immaterial, while others consider it possibly material.

===Taoism===
According to Chinese traditions, every person has two types of soul called hun and po (), which are respectively yang and yin. Taoism believes in Ten souls, &quot;Sanhunqipo&quot; () (三魂七魄) &quot;three &quot;hun&quot; and seven &quot;po&quot;&quot;. A living being that loses any of them is said to have mental illness or unconsciousness, while a dead soul may reincarnate to a disability, lower desire realms, or may even be unable to reincarnate.

===Spirituality, New Age, and new religions===

====Brahma Kumaris====
In Brahma Kumaris, human souls are believed to be incorporeal and eternal. God is considered to be the Supreme Soul, with maximum degrees of spiritual qualities, such as peace, love and purity.

====Theosophy====
In Helena Blavatsky&#x27;s Theosophy, the soul is the field of our psychological activity (thinking, emotions, memory, desires, will, and so on) as well as of the paranormal or psychic phenomena, such as extrasensory perception or out-of-body experiences; however, the soul is not the highest, but a middle dimension of human beings. Higher than the soul is the spirit, which is considered to be the real self; the source of everything is called good—happiness, wisdom, love, compassion, harmony, peace, and so on. While the spirit is eternal and incorruptible, the soul is not. The soul acts as a link between the material body and the spiritual self, and therefore shares some characteristics of both. The soul can be attracted either towards the spiritual or towards the material realm, being thus the battlefield of good and evil. It is only when the soul is attracted towards the spiritual and merges with the Self that it becomes eternal and divine.

====Anthroposophy====
Rudolf Steiner claimed classical trichotomic stages of soul development, which interpenetrated one another in consciousness:
* The &quot;sentient soul&quot;, centering on sensations, drives, and passions, with strong conative (will) and emotional components;
* The &quot;intellectual&quot; or &quot;mind soul&quot;, internalizing and reflecting on outer experience, with strong affective (feeling) and cognitive (thinking) components; and
* The &quot;consciousness soul&quot;, in search of universal, objective truths.

====Miscellaneous====
In Surat Shabda Yoga, the soul is considered to be an exact replica and spark of the Divine. The purpose of Surat Shabd Yoga is to realize one&#x27;s True Self as soul (Self-Realisation), True Essence (Spirit-Realisation) and True Divinity (God-Realisation) while living in the physical body. Similarly, the spiritual teacher Meher Baba held that &quot;Atman, or the soul, is in reality identical with Paramatma the Oversoul – which is one, infinite, and eternal ... [and] [t]he sole purpose of creation is for the soul to enjoy the infinite state of the Oversoul consciously.&quot; Eckankar, founded by Paul Twitchell in 1965, defines Soul as the true self; the inner, most sacred part of each person. George Gurdjieff taught that humans are not born with immortal souls but could develop them through certain efforts.

==Philosophical views==
Greek philosophers, such as Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, understood that the soul (ψυχή, &quot;&quot;) must have a logical faculty, the exercise of which was the most divine of human actions. At his defense trial, Socrates even summarized his teachings as nothing other than an exhortation for his fellow Athenians to excel in matters of the psyche since all bodily goods are dependent on such excellence (&quot;Apology&quot; 30a–b). Aristotle reasoned that a man&#x27;s body and soul were his matter and form respectively: the body is a collection of elements and the soul is the essence. Soul or psyche (Ancient Greek: ψυχή &quot;psykhḗ&quot;, of ψύχειν &quot;psýkhein&quot;, &quot;to breathe&quot;, cf. Latin &quot;anima&quot;) comprises the mental abilities of a living being: reason, character, free will, feeling, consciousness, qualia, memory, perception, thinking, and so on. Depending on the philosophical system, a soul can either be mortal or immortal.

The ancient Greeks used the term &quot;ensouled&quot; to represent the concept of being alive, indicating that the earliest surviving Western philosophical view believed that the soul was that which gave the body life. The soul was considered the incorporeal or spiritual &quot;breath&quot; that animates (from the Latin &quot;anima&quot;, cf. &quot;animal&quot;) the living organism. Francis M. Cornford quotes Pindar by saying that the soul sleeps while the limbs are active, but when one is sleeping, the soul is active and reveals &quot;an award of joy or sorrow drawing near&quot; in dreams. Erwin Rohde writes that an early pre-Pythagorean belief presented the soul as lifeless when it departed the body, and that it retired into Hades with no hope of returning to a body. Plato was the first thinker in antiquity to combine the various functions of the soul into one coherent conception: the soul is that which moves things (i.e., that which gives life, on the view that life is self-motion) by means of its thoughts, requiring that it be both a mover and a thinker.

===Socrates and Plato===
Drawing on the words of his teacher Socrates, Plato considered the psyche to be the essence of a person, being that which decides how humans behave. He considered this essence to be an incorporeal, eternal occupant of our being. Plato said that even after death, the soul exists and is able to think. He believed that as bodies die, the soul is continually reborn (metempsychosis) in subsequent bodies; however, Aristotle believed that only one part of the soul was immortal, namely the intellect (&quot;logos&quot;). The Platonic soul consists of three parts:
# The &quot;logos&quot;, or &quot;logistikon&quot; (mind, nous, or reason).
# The &quot;thymos&quot;, or &quot;thumetikon&quot; (emotion, spiritedness, or masculine).
# The &quot;eros&quot;, or &quot;epithumetikon&quot; (appetitive, desire, or feminine).

The parts are located in different regions of the body:
# &quot;Logos&quot; is located in the head, is related to reason and regulates the other part.
# &quot;Thymos&quot; is located near the chest region and is related to anger.
# &quot;Eros&quot; is located in the stomach and is related to one&#x27;s desires.

Plato compares the three parts of the soul or psyche to a societal caste system. According to Plato&#x27;s theory, the three-part soul is essentially the same thing as a state&#x27;s class system because, to function well, each part must contribute so that the whole functions well. &quot;Logos&quot; keeps the other functions of the soul regulated.

The soul is at the heart of Plato&#x27;s philosophy. Francis Cornford described the twin pillars of Platonism as being the theory of forms on the one hand, the doctrine of the immortality of the soul on the other. Plato was the first person in the history of philosophy to believe that the soul was both the source of life and the mind. In Plato&#x27;s dialogues, the soul plays many disparate roles. Among other things, Plato believes that the soul is what gives life to the body (which was articulated most of all in the &quot;Laws&quot; and &quot;Phaedrus&quot;) in terms of self-motion: to be alive is to be capable of moving yourself, and the soul is a self-mover. He also thinks that the soul is the bearer of moral properties (i.e., when one is virtuous, it is their soul that is virtuous as opposed to, say, their body). The soul is also the mind: it is that which thinks in them. This casual oscillation between different roles of the soul in observed many dialogues, including in the &quot;Republic&quot;.Is there any function of the soul that you could not accomplish with anything else, such as taking care of something (&quot;epimeleisthai&quot;), ruling, and deliberating, and other such things? Could we correctly assign these things to anything besides the soul, and say that they are characteristic (&quot;idia&quot;) of it?

No, to nothing else.

What about living? Will we deny that this is a function of the soul?

That absolutely is.The &quot;Phaedo&quot; most famously caused problems to scholars who were trying to make sense of this aspect of Plato&#x27;s theory of the soul, such as Dorothea Frede and Sarah Broadie. 2020s scholarship overturned this accusation by arguing that part of the novelty of Plato&#x27;s theory of the soul is that it was the first to unite the different features and powers of the soul that became commonplace in later ancient and medieval philosophy. For Plato, the soul moves things by means of its thoughts, as one scholar puts it, and accordingly the soul is both a mover (i.e., the principle of life, where life is conceived of as self-motion) and a thinker.

===Aristotle===

Aristotle (384–322 BCE) defined the soul, or &quot;Psūchê&quot; (ψυχή), as the &quot;first actuality&quot; of a naturally organized body, and argued against its separate existence from the physical body. In Aristotle&#x27;s view, the primary activity, or full actualization, of a living thing constitutes its soul. For example, the full actualization of an eye, as an independent organism, is to see (its purpose or final cause). Another example is that the full actualization of a human being would be living a fully functional human life in accordance with reason (which he considered to be a faculty unique to humanity). For Aristotle, the soul is the organization of the form and matter of a natural being which allows it to strive for its full actualization. This organization between form and matter is necessary for any activity, or functionality, to be possible in a natural being. Using an artifact (non-natural being) as an example, a house is a building for human habituation but for a house to be actualized requires the material, such as wood, nails, or bricks necessary for its actuality (i.e., being a fully functional house); however, this does not imply that a house has a soul. In regards to artifacts, the source of motion that is required for their full actualization is outside of themselves (for example, a builder builds a house). In natural beings, this source of motion is contained within the being itself.

Aristotle addressed the faculties of the soul. The various faculties of the soul, such as nutrition, movement (peculiar to animals), reason (peculiar to humans), sensation (special, common, and incidental), and so forth, when exercised, constitute the &quot;second actuality&quot;, or fulfillment, of the capacity to be alive. For example, someone who falls asleep, as opposed to someone who falls dead, can wake up and live their life, while the latter can no longer do so. Aristotle identified three hierarchical levels of natural beings: plants, animals, and people, having three different degrees of soul: &quot;Bios&quot; (life), &quot;Zoë&quot; (animate life), and &quot;Psuchë&quot; (self-conscious life). For these groups, he identified three corresponding levels of soul, or biological activity: the nutritive activity of growth, sustenance and reproduction which all life shares (&quot;Bios&quot;); the self-willed motive activity and sensory faculties, which only animals and people have in common (&quot;Zoë&quot;); and finally &quot;reason&quot;, of which humans alone are capable (&quot;Pseuchë&quot;). Aristotle&#x27;s discussion of the soul is in his work, &quot;De Anima&quot; (&quot;On the Soul&quot;). 

Although mostly seen as opposing Plato in regard to the immortality of the soul, a controversy can be found in relation to the fifth chapter of the third book: in this text both interpretations can be argued for, soul as a whole can be deemed mortal, and a part called &quot;active intellect&quot; or &quot;active mind&quot; is immortal and eternal. Advocates exist for both sides of the controversy; it is argued that there will be permanent disagreement about its final conclusions, as no other Aristotelian text contains this specific point, and this part of &quot;De Anima&quot; is obscure. Furthermore, Aristotle states that the soul helps humans find the truth, and understanding the true purpose or role of the soul is extremely difficult.

===Avicenna and Ibn al-Nafis===

Following Aristotle, Avicenna (Ibn Sina) and Ibn al-Nafis, an Arab physician, further elaborated upon the Aristotelian understanding of the soul and developed their own theories on the soul. They both made a distinction between the soul and the spirit, and the Avicennian doctrine on the nature of the soul was influential among the Scholastics. Some of Avicenna&#x27;s views on the soul include the idea that the immortality of the soul is a consequence of its nature, and not a purpose for it to fulfill. In his theory of &quot;The Ten Intellects&quot;, he viewed the human soul as the tenth and final intellect.

While he was imprisoned, Avicenna wrote his famous &quot;Floating man&quot; thought experiment to demonstrate human self-awareness and the substantial nature of the soul. He told his readers to imagine themselves suspended in the air, isolated from all sensations, which includes no sensory contact with even their own bodies. He argues that in this scenario one would still have self-consciousness. He thus concludes that the idea of the self is not logically dependent on any physical thing, and that the soul should not be seen in relative terms but as a primary given, a substance. This argument was later refined and simplified by René Descartes in epistemic terms, when he stated: &quot;I can abstract from the supposition of all external things, but not from the supposition of my own consciousness.&quot;

Avicenna generally supported Aristotle&#x27;s idea of the soul originating from the heart, whereas Ibn al-Nafis rejected this idea and instead argued that the soul &quot;is related to the entirety and not to one or a few organs&quot;. He further criticized Aristotle&#x27;s idea whereby every unique soul requires the existence of a unique source, in this case the heart. Al-Nafis concluded that &quot;the soul is related primarily neither to the spirit nor to any organ, but rather to the entire matter whose temperament is prepared to receive that soul,&quot; and he defined the soul as nothing other than &quot;what a human indicates by saying &quot;I&quot;.

===Thomas Aquinas===
Following Aristotle (whom he referred to as &quot;the Philosopher&quot;) and Avicenna, Thomas Aquinas (1225–1274) understood the soul to be the first actuality of the living body. Consequent to this, he distinguished three orders of life: plants, which feed and grow; animals, which add sensation to the operations of plants; and humans, which add intellect to the operations of animals. Concerning the human soul, his epistemological theory required that, since &quot;the knower becomes what he knows&quot;, the soul is definitely not corporeal – if it is corporeal when it knows what some corporeal thing is, that thing would come to be within it. Therefore, the soul has an operation which does not rely on a body organ, and therefore the soul can exist without a body. Furthermore, since the rational soul of human beings is a subsistent form and not something made of matter and form, it cannot be destroyed in any natural process.

The full argument for the immortality of the soul and Aquinas&#x27; elaboration of Aristotelian theory is found in the &quot;Summa Theologica&quot;. Aquinas affirmed in the doctrine of the divine effusion of the soul, the particular judgement of the soul after the separation from a dead body, and the final resurrection of the flesh. He recalled two canons of the 4th century, for which &quot;the rational soul is not engendered by coition&quot;,
and &quot;is one and the same soul in man, that both gives life to the body by being united to it, and orders itself by its own reasoning.&quot;
Moreover, he believed in a unique and tripartite soul, within which are distinctively present a nutritive, a sensitive, and intellectual soul. The latter is created by God and is taken solely by human beings, includes the other two types of soul and makes the sensitive soul incorruptible.

===Immanuel Kant===
In his discussions of rational psychology, Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) identified the soul as the &quot;I&quot; in the strictest sense, and argued that the existence of inner experience can neither be proved nor disproved. He said: &quot;We cannot prove a priori the immateriality of the soul, but rather only so much: that all properties and actions of the soul cannot be recognized from materiality.&quot; It is from the &quot;I&quot;, or soul, that Kant proposes transcendental rationalization but cautions that such rationalization can only determine the limits of knowledge if it is to remain practical.

===Philosophy of mind===
==== Theories ====
If body and mind are of two distinct realms, the question remains how these two are related. Philosophy of mind distinguishes three major theories about the relationship between mental properties and the body. Interactionism, Parallelism, and Epiphenomenalism. Behaviorism asserts that mental properties are sufficiently explained by observable behavior, and thus, there is no necessity for the existence of body-independent concepts.

Interactionism holds that physical events and mental events interact with each other. This view is often considered to be the most intuitive: One perceives the mind reacting upon physical stimualtion and then thoughts and feelings to act upon a physical actions, such as movement of the body. Thus, there is a natural prejudice in favor of interactionism. However, the theory cannot answer how both concepts interact with one another, leading to various philosophical discussions and criticism.

Parallelism avoids the discussion about the interactions between body and mind by asserting both run harmoneously parallel to each other. The impression of interaction between body and mind results from coincidene. However, the theory lacks an explanation how such coincidence came to begin with.

Epiphenomenalism, asserts that mental properties are caused by physical events. As such, mental states are a byproduct of evolution without any necessary purpose. The theory allows to accept mental objects and physical objects as distinct, whithout resorting to a coincidental order and without the need to explain how mind could have an impact on matter.

==== Criticism on body/mind dualism ====
If mental properties can be reduced to physical objects, there is not need to accept the reality of a non-material object as per Occam&#x27;s razor. Critics further argue that, even if mental properties exist independent from matter, they are too elusive to have explanatory power.

Gilbert Ryle&#x27;s ghost in the machine argument, which is a rejection of Descartes&#x27;s mind–body dualism, can provide a contemporary understanding of the soul/mind, and the problem concerning its connection to the brain/body. Unlike Ryle’s view, many contemporary philosophers of mind advocate for substance dualism and have presented arguments in its defense. Richard Swinburne, for instance, appeals to personal identity to establish the existence of the soul.

One of the most famous arguments in favor of body-mind dualism, and as such also against reductionism, is based on the existence of qualia.

Seyyed Jaaber Mousavirad contends that free will necessitates the soul’s existence. Given that the natural world functions either deterministically or probabilistically, no naturalistic account seems to explain free will sufficiently. Therefore, the acceptance of free will necessitates the existence of a non-physical soul.

===Psychology===
Soul belief prominently figures in Otto Rank&#x27;s work recovering the importance of immortality in the psychology of primitive, classical and modern interest in life and death. Rank&#x27;s work directly opposed the scientific psychology that concedes the possibility of the soul&#x27;s existence and postulates it as an object of research without really admitting that it exists. He says: &quot;Just as religion represents a psychological commentary on the social evolution of man, various psychologies represent our current attitudes toward spiritual belief. In the animistic era, psychologizing was a &quot;creating&quot; of the soul; in the religious era, it was a &quot;representing&quot; of the soul to one&#x27;s self; in our era of natural science it is a &quot;knowing&quot; of the individual soul.&quot; Rank&#x27;s &quot;Seelenglaube&quot; translates to &quot;Soul Belief&quot;. Rank&#x27;s work had a significant influence on Ernest Becker&#x27;s understanding of a universal interest in immortality. In &quot;The Denial of Death&quot;, Becker describes &quot;soul&quot; in terms of Søren Kierkegaard use of &quot;self&quot; when he says that &quot;what we call schizophrenia is an attempt by the symbolic self to deny the limitations of the finite body.&quot;

According to Cognitive scientist Jesse Bering and psychologist Nicholas Humphrey argued that humans are initially inclined to believe in a soul and are born as mind-body dualists. As such, religious institutions did not need to invent or inherent the idea of the soul from previous traditions, rather the concept has always been present throughout human history.

==Science==
The search for the soul is seen to have been instrumental in driving the understanding of the anatomy and physiology of the human body, particularly in the fields of cardiovascular and neurology. In the two dominant conflicting concepts of the soul – one seeing it to be spiritual and immortal, and the other seeing it to be material and the mortal, both have described the soul as being located in a particular organ or as pervading the whole body.

===Neuroscience===
As an interdisciplinary field and its branch of cognitive neuroscience particularly, neuroscience operates under the ontological assumption of physicalism. In other words, it assumes that only the fundamental phenomena studied by physics exist. Thus, neuroscience seeks to understand mental phenomena within the framework according to which human thought and behavior are caused solely by physical processes taking place inside the brain, and it operates by the way of reductionism by seeking an explanation for the mind in terms of brain activity.

To study the mind in terms of the brain, several methods of functional neuroimaging are used to study the neuroanatomical correlates of various cognitive processes that constitute the mind. The evidence from brain-imaging indicates that all processes of the mind have physical correlates in brain function; however, such correlational studies cannot determine whether neural activity plays a causal role in the occurrence of these cognitive processes (correlation does not imply causation) and they cannot determine if the neural activity is either necessary or sufficient for such processes to occur. Identification of causation, and of necessary and sufficient conditions, requires explicit experimental manipulation of that activity. If manipulation of brain activity changes consciousness, then a causal role for that brain activity can be inferred.

Two of the most common types of manipulation experiments are loss-of-function and gain-of-function experiments. In a loss-of-function (also called &quot;necessity&quot;) experiment, a part of the nervous system is diminished or removed in an attempt to determine if it is necessary for a certain process to occur, and in a gain-of-function (also called &quot;sufficiency&quot;) experiment, an aspect of the nervous system is increased relative to normal. Manipulations of brain activity can be performed with direct electrical brain stimulation, magnetic brain stimulation using transcranial magnetic stimulation, psychopharmacological manipulation, optogenetic manipulation, and by studying the symptoms of brain damage (case studies) and lesions. In addition, neuroscientists are also investigating how the mind develops with the development of the brain.

====Near-death experience====
Neuroscience research hypothesizes that a near-death experience (NDE) is a phenomenon resulting from &quot;disturbed bodily multisensory integration&quot; that occurs during life-threatening events.
Some researchers of near-death experiences consider such a phenomenon as a challenge to the materialist assumptions about the relationship between mind and brain.
Sam Parnia and others have suggested that a mind that is mediated by, but not produced by, the brain is a possible way to explain NDE.

===Physics===
Quantum indeterminism has been invoked as an explanatory mechanism for possible soul / brain interaction. Neuroscientist Peter Clarke found errors with this viewpoint, observing there is no evidence that such processes play a role in brain function; Clarke concluded that a Cartesian soul has no basis from quantum physics.

==Parapsychology==
Some parapsychologists attempted to establish, by scientific experiment, whether a soul separate from the brain exists, as is more commonly defined in religion rather than as a synonym of psyche or mind. Milbourne Christopher (1979) and Mary Roach (2010) have argued that none of the attempts by parapsychologists have yet succeeded.

===Weight of the soul===
In 1901, Duncan MacDougall conducted an experiment (&quot;21 grams experiment&quot;) in which he made weight-measurements of patients as they died. He claimed that there was weight-loss of varying amounts at the time of death; he concluded the soul weighed 21 grams based on measurements of a single patient, discarding conflicting results. The physicist Robert L. Park wrote that MacDougall&#x27;s experiments &quot;are not regarded today as having any scientific merit&quot;, and the psychologist Bruce Hood wrote that &quot;because the weight loss was not reliable or replicable, his findings were unscientific.&quot;

==See also==

* Ancient Egyptian concept of the soul
* Ātman (Buddhism)
* Being
* Chinese room
* Consciousness
* Ekam
* History of the location of the soul
* Kami
* Knowledge argument
* Metaphysical naturalism
* Mind–body problem
* Nafs in Islam
* Nishimta in Mandaeism
* Open individualism
* The Over-Soul (essay)
* Paramatman (or oversoul)
* Philosophical zombie
* Plant soul
* Qualia
* Self
* Self-awareness
* Shade (mythology)
* Soul dualism
* Soul flight
* Spirit (vital essence) (seen as a synonym of soul)
* Substance dualism
* Vitalism
* Vertiginous question
==Footnotes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Batchelor, Stephen. (1998). &quot;Buddhism Without Beliefs&quot;. Bloomsbury Publishing.
* 
* Chalmers, David. J. (1996). &quot;The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory&quot;, New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.
* Christopher, Milbourne. (1979). &quot;Search for the Soul: An Insider&#x27;s Report on the Continuing Quest By Psychics &amp; Scientists For Evidence of Life After Death&quot;. Thomas Y. Crowell, Publishers.
* Claus, David. 1981. &quot;Toward the Soul: An Inquiry into the Meaning of Psyche Before Plato&quot;. New Haven and London: Yale University Press
* Hood, Bruce. (2009). &quot;Supersense: From Superstition to Religion – The Brain Science of Belief&quot;. Constable. 
* McGraw, John J. (2004). &quot;Brain &amp; Belief: An Exploration of the Human Soul&quot;. Aegis Press.
* Martin, Michael; Augustine, Keith. (2015). &quot;The Myth of an Afterlife: The Case against Life After Death&quot;. Rowman &amp; Littlefield. 
* Park, Robert L. (2009). &quot;Superstition: Belief in the Age of Science&quot;. Princeton University Press. 
* Rohde, Erwin. (1925). &quot;Psyche: The Cult of Souls and Belief in Immortality Among the Greeks&quot;, London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner &amp; Co., Ltd.
* Ryle, Gilbert. (1949) &quot;The Concept of Mind&quot;, London: Hutchinson.
* Spenard, Michael (2011) &quot;Dueling with Dualism: the forlorn quest for the immaterial soul&quot;, essay. An historical account of mind-body duality and a comprehensive conceptual and empirical critique on the position. 
* Swinburne, Richard. (1997). &quot;The Evolution of the Soul&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
* Leibowitz, Aryeh. (2018). The Neshama: A Study of the Human Soul. Feldheim Publishers. 
* Translation of the original: 

==External links==
* Quantum Theory Won&#x27;t Save The Soul 
* What Science Really Says About the Soul by Stephen Cave
* Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Ancient Theories of the Soul
* The soul in Judaism at Chabad.org
* The Old Testament Concept of the Soul by Heinrich J. Vogel]
* Body, Soul and Spirit Article in the Journal of Biblical Accuracy
* Is Another Human Living Inside You?
* &quot;The Soul&quot;, BBC Radio 4 discussion with Richard Sorabji, Ruth Padel and Martin Palmer (&quot;In Our Time&quot;, 6 June 2002)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="4" end="8" title="Soul" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252737" start="26" end="36" title="Mind–body dualism" label="immaterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236990" start="37" end="41" title="self" label="self"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="128" end="136" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="138" end="146" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="148" end="158" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="163" end="173" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q105572059" start="188" end="201" title="Stewart Goetz" label="Stewart Goetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="203" end="218" title="Anthropology" label="anthropologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="223" end="236" title="Psychology" label="psychologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q120312205" start="373" end="388" title="Spirit (vital essence)" label="animating force"/>
<link wikidata="Q844569" start="452" end="469" title="Identity (social science)" label="personal identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q641118" start="471" end="482" title="personality" label="personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="487" end="493" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794963" start="531" end="544" title="immortal soul" label="immortal soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q13644563" start="576" end="588" title="living being" label="living being"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="602" end="616" title="physical death" label="physical death"/>
<link wikidata="Q47280" start="625" end="644" title="Abrahamic religions" label="Abrahamic religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="737" end="744" title="animism" label="animism"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="816" end="823" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="826" end="836" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="842" end="852" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="922" end="935" title="Neuroscience" label="neurosciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q112812" start="1181" end="1203" title="Epiphenomenalism" label="byproduct of the brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649537" start="1371" end="1385" title="Modern English" label="Modern English"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1397" end="1401" title=":wikt:soul" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1424" end="1435" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="1510" end="1535" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q83476" start="1571" end="1582" title="King Alfred" label="King Alfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q861927" start="1611" end="1639" title="De Consolatione Philosophiae" label="De Consolatione Philosophiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923273" start="1788" end="1805" title="Vespasian Psalter" label="Vespasian Psalter"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="1927" end="1935" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35133" start="1971" end="1982" title="Old Frisian" label="Old Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35722" start="2080" end="2086" title="Gothic language" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="2108" end="2123" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q35219" start="2149" end="2158" title="Old Saxon" label="Old Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="2182" end="2191" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="2316" end="2323" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="2336" end="2345" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="2400" end="2411" title="Immortality" label="Immortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="2458" end="2469" title="immortality" label="immortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="2500" end="2505" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="2520" end="2534" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="2560" end="2569" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180576" start="2583" end="2594" title="On the Soul" label="On the Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="2739" end="2747" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="2752" end="2759" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052811" start="2872" end="2877" title="Ātman (Hinduism)" label="Atman"/>
<link wikidata="Q282492" start="2882" end="2886" title="jiva" label="jiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236990" start="2963" end="2967" title="self" label="self"/>
<link wikidata="Q132196" start="3034" end="3039" title="karma" label="karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="3362" end="3369" title="animism" label="animism"/>
<link wikidata="Q447131" start="3405" end="3430" title="ancient Egyptian religion" label="ancient Egyptian religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q26047346" start="3601" end="3616" title="Kuttamuwa stele" label="Kuttamuwa stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039186" start="3677" end="3688" title="Sam&amp;#x27;al" label="Sam&amp;#x27;al"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122428" start="3700" end="3709" title="Kuttamuwa" label="Kuttamuwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q623282" start="3768" end="3777" title="afterlife" label="afterlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="3924" end="3930" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276053" start="4041" end="4059" title="University of Chicago Oriental Institute" label="Oriental Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="4106" end="4118" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q101054" start="4314" end="4335" title="Bahá&amp;#x27;u&amp;#x27;lláh" label="Bahá&amp;#x27;u&amp;#x27;lláh"/>
<link wikidata="Q564" start="4527" end="4531" title="hell" label="hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="4907" end="4915" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q488506" start="5036" end="5043" title="anatman" label="anatman"/>
<link wikidata="Q220797" start="5078" end="5084" title="anitya" label="anitya"/>
<link wikidata="Q726297" start="5106" end="5112" title="dukkha" label="dukkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q222516" start="5228" end="5244" title="Schools of Buddhism" label="Buddhist schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q640962" start="5262" end="5275" title="Buddha-nature" label="Buddha-nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q488506" start="5433" end="5440" title="anatman" label="anatman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261111" start="5507" end="5528" title="Christian eschatology" label="Christian eschatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q595273" start="5567" end="5580" title="particular judgment" label="judged by God"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694585" start="5605" end="5611" title="Heaven (Christianity)" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452850" start="5618" end="5623" title="Christian views on Hades" label="Hades"/>
<link wikidata="Q188681" start="5635" end="5647" title="resurrection" label="resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="5699" end="5714" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="5723" end="5730" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="5735" end="5743" title="Oriental Orthodox Churches" label="Oriental"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532357" start="5942" end="5964" title="General judgment" label="after the resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001644" start="5983" end="6007" title="Christian conditionalism" label="Christian conditionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276239" start="6111" end="6115" title="Christian views on Hell" label="Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q567076" start="6149" end="6164" title="annihilationism" label="annihilationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q509071" start="6190" end="6202" title="eternal life (Christianity)" label="eternal life"/>
<link wikidata="Q126363589" start="6229" end="6243" title="Kingdom of God" label="Kingdom of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="6346" end="6362" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430216" start="6902" end="6918" title="creationism (soul)" label="soul creationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456261" start="6920" end="6932" title="traducianism" label="traducianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848820" start="6938" end="6951" title="pre-existence" label="pre-existence"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="7313" end="7319" title="embryo" label="embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q26513" start="7416" end="7421" title="fetus" label="fetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15407834" start="7422" end="7437" title="ensoulment" label="acquires a soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="7439" end="7452" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170675" start="7463" end="7473" title="personhood" label="personhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497600" start="7532" end="7552" title="Christianity and abortion" label="morality of abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13134154" start="7612" end="7623" title="trichotomy (philosophy)" label="trichotomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048935" start="7756" end="7762" title="pneuma" label="pneuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="8365" end="8379" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180413" start="8703" end="8715" title="De Trinitate" label="De Trinitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="8723" end="8741" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q75561" start="8887" end="8919" title="Catechism of the Catholic Church" label="Catechism of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q51663" start="9232" end="9244" title="Jesus in Christianity" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q51639" start="9250" end="9272" title="Second Coming" label="he comes back to earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q623282" start="9656" end="9665" title="afterlife" label="afterlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q37577" start="9683" end="9694" title="John Calvin" label="John Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="9713" end="9726" title="immortality of the soul" label="soul persists"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="9775" end="9788" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794963" start="9807" end="9830" title="mortality of the soul" label="soul dies with the body"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894158" start="9882" end="9906" title="resurrection of the dead" label="resurrection of the dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q477544" start="9929" end="9951" title="new religious movement" label="new religious movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q215168" start="9967" end="9976" title="Adventism" label="Adventism"/>
<link wikidata="Q27827" start="9987" end="10003" title="Christadelphians" label="Christadelphians"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="10005" end="10027" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventists"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="10033" end="10057" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="10213" end="10260" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301566" start="10628" end="10640" title="Spirit world (Latter Day Saints)" label="spirit world"/>
<link wikidata="Q188681" start="10651" end="10663" title="resurrection" label="resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="11345" end="11353" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236990" start="11376" end="11380" title="self" label="self"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079293" start="11393" end="11409" title="Hindu philosophy" label="Hindu philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512051" start="11429" end="11436" title="Vedanta" label="Vedanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="11447" end="11455" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q536351" start="11482" end="11497" title="first principle" label="first principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q183379" start="11617" end="11648" title="moksha" label="liberation (&amp;quot;moksha&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191096" start="11704" end="11709" title="jnana" label="jnana"/>
<link wikidata="Q746990" start="11824" end="11831" title="Brahman" label="Brahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348383" start="11845" end="11860" title="Advaita Vedanta" label="Advaita Vedanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079293" start="11866" end="11898" title="Hindu philosophy" label="six orthodox schools of Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="11975" end="11983" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="11988" end="11995" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q746990" start="12518" end="12525" title="Brahman" label="Brahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="12633" end="12638" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="12657" end="12662" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410318" start="14226" end="14233" title="Saṃsāra (Jainism)" label="saṃsāra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372679" start="14330" end="14335" title="Karma in Jainism" label="karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668214" start="14601" end="14607" title="siddha" label="siddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790595" start="14857" end="14865" title="Arihant (Jainism)" label="arihants"/>
<link wikidata="Q16381" start="14906" end="14921" title="Virchand Gandhi" label="Virchand Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="15160" end="15166" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038839" start="15179" end="15185" title="nephesh" label="nefesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604769" start="15236" end="15241" title="ruach" label="ruach"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="15484" end="15491" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="15561" end="15568" title="Book of Genesis" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q265424" start="15713" end="15720" title="mitzvot" label="mitzvot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432036" start="15847" end="15853" title="tzadik" label="tzadik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006856" start="15945" end="15951" title="Yartzeit" label="nahala"/>
<link wikidata="Q47223" start="15993" end="16001" title="birthday" label="birthday"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="16225" end="16233" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093529" start="16383" end="16394" title="five worlds" label="five worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038839" start="16399" end="16405" title="Nephesh" label="Nefesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604769" start="16438" end="16443" title="Ruach" label="Ruach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266353" start="16663" end="16669" title="gilgul" label="gilgul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764979" start="16683" end="16699" title="nefesh habehamit" label="nefesh habehamit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706514" start="16805" end="16808" title="Luz (bone)" label="luz"/>
<link wikidata="Q655357" start="16872" end="16877" title="Atlas (anatomy)" label="atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q233316" start="16910" end="16916" title="sacrum" label="sacrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="17069" end="17078" title="Shamanism" label="Shamanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q790012" start="17206" end="17228" title="out-of-body experience" label="out-of-body experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q8096310" start="17242" end="17249" title="Religious ecstasy" label="ecstasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q818844" start="17266" end="17283" title="astral projection" label="astral projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="17745" end="17765" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059771" start="17771" end="17778" title="Hun and po" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059771" start="17787" end="17821" title="Hun and po" label="&amp;quot;hún&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;pò&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q187985" start="17828" end="17842" title="Tibetan people" label="Tibetan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183734" start="17849" end="17856" title="Ethnic groups of Africa" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17871" end="17893" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas#North America" label="Native North Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="17903" end="17913" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="17933" end="17940" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="17958" end="17975" title="Ancient Egyptians" label="Ancient Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q853611" start="17981" end="18014" title="Ancient Egyptian conception of the soul" label="&amp;quot;ka&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;ba&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="18070" end="18082" title="Austronesian people" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="18083" end="18094" title="shamanistic" label="shamanistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49230" start="18125" end="18143" title="Proto-Austronesian" label="Proto-Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q682466" start="18300" end="18316" title="abdominal cavity" label="abdominal cavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="18331" end="18336" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072" start="18344" end="18349" title="heart" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578061" start="19007" end="19019" title="Spirit world (spiritualism)" label="spirit world"/>
<link wikidata="Q466475" start="19034" end="19052" title="trance" label="trance-like states"/>
<link wikidata="Q160796" start="19054" end="19062" title="delirium" label="delirium"/>
<link wikidata="Q505619" start="19064" end="19072" title="insanity" label="insanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4374800" start="19201" end="19210" title="soul loss" label="soul loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="19501" end="19507" title="shaman" label="shaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q838452" start="19792" end="19807" title="Tagbanwa people" label="Tagbanwa people"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="19984" end="19989" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473866" start="20167" end="20217" title="Inuit religion" label="shamanistic beliefs among the various Inuit groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q642019" start="20219" end="20232" title="Caribou Inuit" label="Caribou Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="20296" end="20303" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576021" start="20352" end="20355" title="God in Sikhism" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650920" start="20357" end="20365" title="Waheguru" label="Waheguru"/>
<link wikidata="Q203249" start="20411" end="20428" title="Guru Granth Sahib" label="Guru Granth Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059771" start="21999" end="22009" title="hun and po" label="hun and po"/>
<link wikidata="Q62744" start="22037" end="22049" title="yin and yang" label="yang and yin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="22051" end="22057" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22108" end="22112" title=":zh:三魂七魄" label="三魂七魄"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829165" start="22246" end="22261" title="unconsciousness" label="unconsciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q128593" start="22285" end="22296" title="reincarnate" label="reincarnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="22302" end="22312" title="disability" label="disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q4447630" start="22320" end="22332" title="desire realm" label="desire realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q897299" start="22448" end="22462" title="Brahma Kumaris" label="Brahma Kumaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q138045" start="22511" end="22518" title="eternity" label="eternal"/>
<link wikidata="Q189454" start="22661" end="22677" title="Helena Blavatsky" label="Helena Blavatsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q178671" start="22685" end="22694" title="Theosophy" label="Theosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917466" start="22835" end="22842" title="psychic" label="psychic"/>
<link wikidata="Q78484" start="23637" end="23651" title="Rudolf Steiner" label="Rudolf Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q13134154" start="23670" end="23681" title="trichotomy (philosophy)" label="trichotomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q248966" start="23854" end="23862" title="conatus" label="conative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712272" start="24182" end="24199" title="Surat Shabd Yoga" label="Surat Shabda Yoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q312701" start="24505" end="24515" title="Meher Baba" label="Meher Baba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281268" start="24762" end="24770" title="Eckankar" label="Eckankar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633690" start="24783" end="24797" title="Paul Twitchell" label="Paul Twitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q217771" start="24882" end="24898" title="George Gurdjieff" label="George Gurdjieff"/>
<link wikidata="Q913" start="25052" end="25060" title="Socrates" label="Socrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="25062" end="25067" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="25073" end="25082" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q273668" start="25439" end="25446" title="Apology (Plato)" label="Apology"/>
<link wikidata="Q194034" start="25625" end="25631" title="Psyche (psychology)" label="psyche"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="25633" end="25646" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="25733" end="25738" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="25827" end="25836" title="free will" label="free will"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="25847" end="25860" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q282250" start="25862" end="25868" title="qualia" label="qualia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794963" start="25971" end="25977" title="Mortality of the soul" label="mortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="25981" end="25989" title="immortality of the soul" label="immortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="25996" end="26010" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q15407834" start="26031" end="26039" title="ensouled" label="ensouled"/>
<link wikidata="Q842333" start="26126" end="26147" title="Western philosophical" label="Western philosophical"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26319" end="26324" title=":wikt:anima" label="anima"/>
<link wikidata="Q725999" start="26377" end="26396" title="F. M. Cornford" label="Francis M. Cornford"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="26404" end="26410" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q65486" start="26589" end="26600" title="Erwin Rohde" label="Erwin Rohde"/>
<link wikidata="Q191359" start="26626" end="26637" title="Pythagoreanism" label="Pythagorean"/>
<link wikidata="Q41410" start="26728" end="26733" title="Hades" label="Hades"/>
<link wikidata="Q190995" start="27176" end="27183" title="essence" label="essence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262856" start="27457" end="27471" title="metempsychosis" label="metempsychosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27596" end="27601" title="Logos#Ancient Greek philosophy" label="logos"/>
<link wikidata="Q835041" start="27711" end="27715" title="nous" label="nous"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="27720" end="27726" title="reason" label="reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706580" start="27741" end="27747" title="Thumos" label="thymos"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="27782" end="27789" title="emotion" label="emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361301" start="27832" end="27836" title="Eros (concept)" label="eros"/>
<link wikidata="Q644302" start="27886" end="27892" title="motivation" label="desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493077" start="28290" end="28302" title="Plato&amp;#x27;s tripartite theory of soul" label="caste system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068658" start="28697" end="28712" title="theory of forms" label="theory of forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q344579" start="30793" end="30808" title="first actuality" label="first actuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140529" start="31124" end="31135" title="final cause" label="final cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428868" start="32201" end="32222" title="faculties of the soul" label="faculties of the soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180576" start="33343" end="33354" title="On the Soul" label="On the Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q263307" start="33862" end="33874" title="Aristotelianism" label="Aristotelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="34167" end="34175" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q319146" start="34191" end="34203" title="Ibn al-Nafis" label="Ibn al-Nafis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874323" start="34407" end="34417" title="Avicennism" label="Avicennian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="34479" end="34490" title="Scholasticism" label="Scholastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q83500" start="34750" end="34759" title="intelligence" label="intellect"/>
<link wikidata="Q20987798" start="34819" end="34831" title="Floating man" label="Floating man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314553" start="34878" end="34892" title="self-awareness" label="self-awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q173253" start="35045" end="35052" title="sense" label="sensory"/>
<link wikidata="Q238372" start="35142" end="35160" title="self-consciousness" label="self-consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q830757" start="35201" end="35205" title="self (philosophy)" label="self"/>
<link wikidata="Q41798914" start="35249" end="35254" title="object (philosophy)" label="thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q378078" start="35337" end="35346" title="substance theory" label="substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="35398" end="35412" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="35416" end="35425" title="epistemology" label="epistemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072" start="35660" end="35665" title="heart" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q712378" start="35797" end="35803" title="organ (anatomy)" label="organs"/>
<link wikidata="Q49404" start="36229" end="36230" title="I (pronoun)" label="I"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="36347" end="36361" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="37224" end="37247" title="immortality of the soul" label="immortality of the soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q653871" start="37323" end="37339" title="Summa Theologica" label="Summa Theologica"/>
<link wikidata="Q595273" start="37420" end="37440" title="particular judgement" label="particular judgement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894158" start="37506" end="37531" title="resurrection of the flesh" label="resurrection of the flesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="38145" end="38158" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q23407" start="38847" end="38865" title="Philosophy of mind" label="Philosophy of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q635704" start="38964" end="38978" title="Interactionism" label="Interactionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580020" start="38980" end="38991" title="Psychophysical parallelism" label="Parallelism"/>
<link wikidata="Q112812" start="38997" end="39013" title="Epiphenomenalism" label="Epiphenomenalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447688" start="39015" end="39026" title="Logical behaviorism" label="Behaviorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741122" start="39559" end="39623" title="Mind–body problem" label="theory cannot answer how both concepts interact with one another"/>
<link wikidata="Q131012" start="40511" end="40529" title="Occam&amp;#x27;s razor" label="Occam&amp;#x27;s razor"/>
<link wikidata="Q313386" start="40665" end="40677" title="Gilbert Ryle" label="Gilbert Ryle"/>
<link wikidata="Q760931" start="40685" end="40705" title="ghost in the machine" label="ghost in the machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252737" start="40757" end="40774" title="mind–body dualism" label="mind–body dualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q206829" start="41223" end="41235" title="reductionism" label="reductionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q282250" start="41266" end="41272" title="qualia" label="qualia"/>
<link wikidata="Q84172" start="41653" end="41662" title="Otto Rank" label="Otto Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q938094" start="42557" end="42570" title="Ernest Becker" label="Ernest Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841991" start="42641" end="42660" title="The Denial of Death" label="The Denial of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q6512" start="42714" end="42731" title="Søren Kierkegaard" label="Søren Kierkegaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="42906" end="42925" title="Cognitive science" label="Cognitive scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186146" start="42926" end="42938" title="Jesse Bering" label="Jesse Bering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984899" start="42956" end="42973" title="Nicholas Humphrey" label="Nicholas Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q849359" start="43745" end="43762" title="interdisciplinary" label="interdisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138951" start="43787" end="43809" title="cognitive neuroscience" label="cognitive neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="43824" end="43836" title="neuroscience" label="neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="43856" end="43867" title="ontology" label="ontological"/>
<link wikidata="Q269114" start="43882" end="43893" title="physicalism" label="physicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="43969" end="43976" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9420" start="44086" end="44093" title="thought" label="thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="44098" end="44106" title="behavior" label="behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q206829" start="44208" end="44220" title="reductionism" label="reductionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004354" start="44349" end="44372" title="functional neuroimaging" label="functional neuroimaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="44433" end="44452" title="cognition" label="cognitive processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q310486" start="44741" end="44777" title="correlation does not imply causation" label="correlation does not imply causation"/>
<link wikidata="Q875267" start="44838" end="44861" title="necessity and sufficiency" label="necessary or sufficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="44909" end="44918" title="causality" label="causation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357702" start="45660" end="45688" title="electrical brain stimulation" label="electrical brain stimulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q263962" start="45723" end="45756" title="transcranial magnetic stimulation" label="transcranial magnetic stimulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706669" start="45758" end="45779" title="psychoactive drug" label="psychopharmacological"/>
<link wikidata="Q781492" start="45794" end="45805" title="optogenetics" label="optogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q720026" start="45852" end="45864" title="brain damage" label="brain damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q827023" start="45884" end="45890" title="lesion" label="lesion"/>
<link wikidata="Q219566" start="46075" end="46096" title="near-death experience" label="near-death experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q130741" start="46108" end="46118" title="hallucination" label="phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081" start="46324" end="46335" title="materialist" label="materialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269059" start="46545" end="46566" title="Quantum indeterminism" label="Quantum indeterminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252737" start="46819" end="46828" title="Cartesian dualism" label="Cartesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q179098" start="46894" end="46911" title="parapsychologists" label="parapsychologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="46939" end="46949" title="scientific" label="scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691765" start="47093" end="47114" title="Milbourne Christopher" label="Milbourne Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q444136" start="47126" end="47136" title="Mary Roach" label="Mary Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393257" start="47258" end="47275" title="Duncan MacDougall (doctor)" label="Duncan MacDougall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393257" start="47307" end="47326" title="21 grams experiment" label="21 grams experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773629" start="47604" end="47618" title="Robert L. Park" label="Robert L. Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424760" start="47748" end="47758" title="Bruce Hood (psychologist)" label="Bruce Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q853611" start="47887" end="47923" title="Ancient Egyptian concept of the soul" label="Ancient Egyptian concept of the soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370415" start="47926" end="47942" title="Ātman (Buddhism)" label="Ātman (Buddhism)"/>
<link wikidata="Q468777" start="47945" end="47950" title="Being" label="Being"/>
<link wikidata="Q304726" start="47953" end="47965" title="Chinese room" label="Chinese room"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="47968" end="47981" title="Consciousness" label="Consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102299" start="47984" end="47988" title="Ekam" label="Ekam"/>
<link wikidata="Q56274235" start="47991" end="48026" title="History of the location of the soul" label="History of the location of the soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q524158" start="48029" end="48033" title="Kami" label="Kami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068312" start="48036" end="48054" title="Knowledge argument" label="Knowledge argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q260994" start="48057" end="48080" title="Metaphysical naturalism" label="Metaphysical naturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741122" start="48083" end="48100" title="Mind–body problem" label="Mind–body problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963451" start="48103" end="48107" title="Nafs" label="Nafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q111475841" start="48119" end="48127" title="Nishimta" label="Nishimta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760788" start="48143" end="48161" title="Open individualism" label="Open individualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358882" start="48164" end="48177" title="The Over-Soul" label="The Over-Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q947490" start="48188" end="48198" title="Paramatman" label="Paramatman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664539" start="48215" end="48235" title="Philosophical zombie" label="Philosophical zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q126616544" start="48238" end="48248" title="Plant soul" label="Plant soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q282250" start="48251" end="48257" title="Qualia" label="Qualia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236990" start="48260" end="48264" title="Self" label="Self"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314553" start="48267" end="48281" title="Self-awareness" label="Self-awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460262" start="48284" end="48301" title="Shade (mythology)" label="Shade (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q936170" start="48304" end="48316" title="Soul dualism" label="Soul dualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q115826696" start="48319" end="48330" title="Soul flight" label="Soul flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q120312205" start="48333" end="48355" title="Spirit (vital essence)" label="Spirit (vital essence)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252737" start="48386" end="48403" title="Substance dualism" label="Substance dualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q191631" start="48406" end="48414" title="Vitalism" label="Vitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18455813" start="48417" end="48437" title="Vertiginous question" label="Vertiginous question"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691765" start="48726" end="48748" title="Milbourne Christopher" label="Christopher, Milbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424760" start="49083" end="49094" title="Bruce Hood (psychologist)" label="Hood, Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q725012" start="49308" end="49323" title="Michael Martin (philosopher)" label="Martin, Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773629" start="49453" end="49467" title="Robert L. Park" label="Park, Robert L"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708210" start="49533" end="49559" title="Princeton University Press" label="Princeton University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q65486" start="49564" end="49576" title="Erwin Rohde" label="Rohde, Erwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="49676" end="49719" title="Routledge" label="Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner &amp;amp; Co., Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q712709" start="50024" end="50042" title="Richard Swinburne" label="Swinburne, Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q942400" start="50468" end="50478" title="Chabad.org" label="Chabad.org"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28299" wikidata="Q177612" url="?curid=28299" title="Steradian">
<text>The steradian (symbol: sr) or square radian is the unit of solid angle in the International System of Units (SI). It is used in three dimensional geometry, and is analogous to the radian, which quantifies planar angles. A solid angle in the form of a right circular cone can be projected onto a sphere, defining a spherical cap where the cone intersects the sphere. The magnitude of the solid angle expressed in steradians is defined as the quotient of the surface area of the spherical cap and the square of the sphere&#x27;s radius. This is analogous to the way a plane angle projected onto a circle defines a circular arc on the circumference, whose length is proportional to the angle. Steradians can be used to measure a solid angle of any shape. The solid angle subtended is the same as that of a cone with the same projected area. A solid angle of one steradian subtends a cone aperture of approximately 1.144 radians or 65.54 degrees.

In the SI, solid angle is considered to be a dimensionless quantity, the ratio of the area projected onto a surrounding sphere and the square of the sphere&#x27;s radius. This is the number of square radians in the solid angle. This means that the SI steradian is the number of square radians in a solid angle equal to one square radian, which of course is the number one. It is useful to distinguish between dimensionless quantities of a different kind, such as the radian (in the SI, a ratio of quantities of dimension length), so the symbol sr is used. For example, radiant intensity can be measured in watts per steradian (W⋅sr−1). The steradian was formerly an SI supplementary unit, but this category was abolished in 1995 and the steradian is now considered an SI derived unit.

The name &quot;steradian&quot; is derived from the Greek &#x27;solid&#x27; + radian.

== Definition ==

A steradian can be defined as the solid angle subtended at the centre of a unit sphere by a unit area (of any shape) on its surface. For a general sphere of radius , any portion of its surface with area subtends one steradian at its centre.

A solid angle in the form of a circular cone is related to the area it cuts out of a sphere:
: formula_1
where
* is the solid angle
* is the surface area of the spherical cap, formula_2,
* is the radius of the sphere,
* is the height of the cap, and
*sr is the unit, steradian, sr = rad.

Because the surface area of a sphere is , the definition implies that a sphere subtends steradians (≈ 12.56637 sr) at its centre, or that a steradian subtends of a sphere. By the same argument, the maximum solid angle that can be subtended at any point is .

== Other properties ==
The area of a spherical cap is , where is the &quot;height&quot; of the cap. If , then formula_3. From this, one can compute the cone aperture (a plane angle) of the cross-section of a simple spherical cone whose solid angle equals one steradian:
: formula_4

giving 0.572 rad 32.77° and aperture 1.144 rad 65.54°.

The solid angle of a spherical cone whose cross-section subtends the angle is:
: formula_5

A steradian is also equal to formula_6 of a complete sphere (spat), to formula_7 3282.80635 square degrees, and to the spherical area of a polygon having an angle excess of 1 radian.

== SI multiples ==
Millisteradians (msr) and microsteradians (μsr) are occasionally used to describe light and particle beams. Other multiples are rarely used.

== See also ==
* &quot;n&quot;-sphere
* Spat (angular unit)
* IAU designated constellations by area

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q177612" start="4" end="13" title="Steradian" label="steradian"/>
<link wikidata="Q177612" start="23" end="25" title="Steradian" label="sr"/>
<link wikidata="Q177612" start="30" end="43" title="Steradian" label="square radian"/>
<link wikidata="Q208476" start="59" end="70" title="solid angle" label="solid angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="78" end="107" title="International System of Units" label="International System of Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q207648" start="128" end="154" title="three dimensional geometry" label="three dimensional geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q33680" start="180" end="186" title="radian" label="radian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="205" end="218" title="planar angles" label="planar angles"/>
<link wikidata="Q42344" start="251" end="270" title="right circular cone" label="right circular cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q575597" start="314" end="327" title="spherical cap" label="spherical cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335820" start="612" end="624" title="circular arc" label="circular arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q42344" start="880" end="893" title="cone aperture" label="cone aperture"/>
<link wikidata="Q126818" start="989" end="1002" title="Dimensionless quantity" label="dimensionless"/>
<link wikidata="Q107715" start="1393" end="1397" title="Kind of quantity" label="kind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253365" start="1513" end="1530" title="radiant intensity" label="radiant intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208469" start="1610" end="1631" title="SI supplementary unit" label="SI supplementary unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q208469" start="1712" end="1727" title="SI derived unit" label="SI derived unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1781" end="1786" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671969" start="1880" end="1889" title="subtended angle" label="subtended"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307800" start="1909" end="1920" title="unit sphere" label="unit sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q11500" start="1931" end="1935" title="area" label="area"/>
<link wikidata="Q173817" start="1991" end="1997" title="radius" label="radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379273" start="2217" end="2229" title="surface area" label="surface area"/>
<link wikidata="Q575597" start="2237" end="2250" title="spherical cap" label="spherical cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q575597" start="2661" end="2674" title="spherical cap" label="spherical cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q42344" start="2776" end="2789" title="cone aperture" label="cone aperture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304927" start="2839" end="2853" title="Spherical sector" label="spherical cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="3108" end="3114" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574000" start="3116" end="3120" title="Spat (angular unit)" label="spat"/>
<link wikidata="Q254532" start="3147" end="3160" title="square degree" label="square degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q37555" start="3194" end="3201" title="polygon" label="polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q46463" start="3212" end="3224" title="angle excess" label="angle excess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493660" start="3340" end="3345" title="light beam" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739927" start="3350" end="3358" title="particle beam" label="particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q306610" start="3417" end="3437" title="N-sphere" label="&amp;quot;n&amp;quot;-sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574000" start="3440" end="3459" title="Spat (angular unit)" label="Spat (angular unit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q716764" start="3462" end="3499" title="IAU designated constellations by area" label="IAU designated constellations by area"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28305" wikidata="Q33198" url="?curid=28305" title="String theory">
<text>In physics, string theory is a theoretical framework in which the point-like particles of particle physics are replaced by one-dimensional objects called strings. String theory describes how these strings propagate through space and interact with each other. On distance scales larger than the string scale, a string acts like a particle, with its mass, charge, and other properties determined by the vibrational state of the string. In string theory, one of the many vibrational states of the string corresponds to the graviton, a quantum mechanical particle that carries the gravitational force. Thus, string theory is a theory of quantum gravity.

String theory is a broad and varied subject that attempts to address a number of deep questions of fundamental physics. String theory has contributed a number of advances to mathematical physics, which have been applied to a variety of problems in black hole physics, early universe cosmology, nuclear physics, and condensed matter physics, and it has stimulated a number of major developments in pure mathematics. Because string theory potentially provides a unified description of gravity and particle physics, it is a candidate for a theory of everything, a self-contained mathematical model that describes all fundamental forces and forms of matter. Despite much work on these problems, it is not known to what extent string theory describes the real world or how much freedom the theory allows in the choice of its details.

String theory was first studied in the late 1960s as a theory of the strong nuclear force, before being abandoned in favor of quantum chromodynamics. Subsequently, it was realized that the very properties that made string theory unsuitable as a theory of nuclear physics made it a promising candidate for a quantum theory of gravity. The earliest version of string theory, bosonic string theory, incorporated only the class of particles known as bosons. It later developed into superstring theory, which posits a connection called supersymmetry between bosons and the class of particles called fermions. Five consistent versions of superstring theory were developed before it was conjectured in the mid-1990s that they were all different limiting cases of a single theory in eleven dimensions known as M-theory. In late 1997, theorists discovered an important relationship called the anti-de Sitter/conformal field theory correspondence (AdS/CFT correspondence), which relates string theory to another type of physical theory called a quantum field theory.

One of the challenges of string theory is that the full theory does not have a satisfactory definition in all circumstances. Another issue is that the theory is thought to describe an enormous landscape of possible universes, which has complicated efforts to develop theories of particle physics based on string theory. These issues have led some in the community to criticize these approaches to physics, and to question the value of continued research on string theory unification.

== Fundamentals ==
=== Overview ===
In the 20th century, two theoretical frameworks emerged for formulating the laws of physics. The first is Albert Einstein&#x27;s general theory of relativity, a theory that explains the force of gravity and the structure of spacetime at the macro-level. The other is quantum mechanics, a completely different formulation, which uses known probability principles to describe physical phenomena at the micro-level. By the late 1970s, these two frameworks had proven to be sufficient to explain most of the observed features of the universe, from elementary particles to atoms to the evolution of stars and the universe as a whole.

In spite of these successes, there are still many problems that remain to be solved. One of the deepest problems in modern physics is the problem of quantum gravity. The general theory of relativity is formulated within the framework of classical physics, whereas the other fundamental forces are described within the framework of quantum mechanics. A quantum theory of gravity is needed in order to reconcile general relativity with the principles of quantum mechanics, but difficulties arise when one attempts to apply the usual prescriptions of quantum theory to the force of gravity.

String theory is a theoretical framework that attempts to address these questions. 

The starting point for string theory is the idea that the point-like particles of particle physics can also be modeled as one-dimensional objects called strings. String theory describes how strings propagate through space and interact with each other. In a given version of string theory, there is only one kind of string, which may look like a small loop or segment of ordinary string, and it can vibrate in different ways. On distance scales larger than the string scale, a string will look just like an ordinary particle consistent with non-string models of elementary particles, with its mass, charge, and other properties determined by the vibrational state of the string. String theory&#x27;s application as a form of quantum gravity proposes a vibrational state responsible for the graviton, a yet unproven quantum particle that is theorized to carry gravitational force.

One of the main developments of the past several decades in string theory was the discovery of certain &#x27;dualities&#x27;, mathematical transformations that identify one physical theory with another. Physicists studying string theory have discovered a number of these dualities between different versions of string theory, and this has led to the conjecture that all consistent versions of string theory are subsumed in a single framework known as M-theory.

Studies of string theory have also yielded a number of results on the nature of black holes and the gravitational interaction. There are certain paradoxes that arise when one attempts to understand the quantum aspects of black holes, and work on string theory has attempted to clarify these issues. In late 1997 this line of work culminated in the discovery of the anti-de Sitter/conformal field theory correspondence or AdS/CFT. This is a theoretical result that relates string theory to other physical theories which are better understood theoretically. The AdS/CFT correspondence has implications for the study of black holes and quantum gravity, and it has been applied to other subjects, including nuclear and condensed matter physics.

Since string theory incorporates all of the fundamental interactions, including gravity, many physicists hope that it will eventually be developed to the point where it fully describes our universe, making it a theory of everything. One of the goals of current research in string theory is to find a solution of the theory that reproduces the observed spectrum of elementary particles, with a small cosmological constant, containing dark matter and a plausible mechanism for cosmic inflation. While there has been progress toward these goals, it is not known to what extent string theory describes the real world or how much freedom the theory allows in the choice of details.

One of the challenges of string theory is that the full theory does not have a satisfactory definition in all circumstances. The scattering of strings is most straightforwardly defined using the techniques of perturbation theory, but it is not known in general how to define string theory nonperturbatively. It is also not clear whether there is any principle by which string theory selects its vacuum state, the physical state that determines the properties of our universe. These problems have led some in the community to criticize these approaches to the unification of physics and question the value of continued research on these problems.

=== Strings ===


The application of quantum mechanics to physical objects such as the electromagnetic field, which are extended in space and time, is known as quantum field theory. In particle physics, quantum field theories form the basis for our understanding of elementary particles, which are modeled as excitations in the fundamental fields.

In quantum field theory, one typically computes the probabilities of various physical events using the techniques of perturbation theory. Developed by Richard Feynman and others in the first half of the twentieth century, perturbative quantum field theory uses special diagrams called Feynman diagrams to organize computations. One imagines that these diagrams depict the paths of point-like particles and their interactions.

The starting point for string theory is the idea that the point-like particles of quantum field theory can also be modeled as one-dimensional objects called strings. The interaction of strings is most straightforwardly defined by generalizing the perturbation theory used in ordinary quantum field theory. At the level of Feynman diagrams, this means replacing the one-dimensional diagram representing the path of a point particle by a two-dimensional (2D) surface representing the motion of a string. Unlike in quantum field theory, string theory does not have a full non-perturbative definition, so many of the theoretical questions that physicists would like to answer remain out of reach.

In theories of particle physics based on string theory, the characteristic length scale of strings is assumed to be on the order of the Planck length, or meters, the scale at which the effects of quantum gravity are believed to become significant. On much larger length scales, such as the scales visible in physics laboratories, such objects would be indistinguishable from zero-dimensional point particles, and the vibrational state of the string would determine the type of particle. One of the vibrational states of a string corresponds to the graviton, a quantum mechanical particle that carries the gravitational force.

The original version of string theory was bosonic string theory, but this version described only bosons, a class of particles that transmit forces between the matter particles, or fermions. Bosonic string theory was eventually superseded by theories called superstring theories. These theories describe both bosons and fermions, and they incorporate a theoretical idea called supersymmetry. In theories with supersymmetry, each boson has a counterpart which is a fermion, and vice versa.

There are several versions of superstring theory: type I, type IIA, type IIB, and two flavors of heterotic string theory ( and ). The different theories allow different types of strings, and the particles that arise at low energies exhibit different symmetries. For example, the type I theory includes both open strings (which are segments with endpoints) and closed strings (which form closed loops), while types IIA, IIB and heterotic include only closed strings.

=== Extra dimensions ===

In everyday life, there are three familiar dimensions (3D) of space: height, width and length. Einstein&#x27;s general theory of relativity treats time as a dimension on par with the three spatial dimensions; in general relativity, space and time are not modeled as separate entities but are instead unified to a four-dimensional (4D) spacetime. In this framework, the phenomenon of gravity is viewed as a consequence of the geometry of spacetime.

In spite of the fact that the Universe is well described by 4D spacetime, there are several reasons why physicists consider theories in other dimensions. In some cases, by modeling spacetime in a different number of dimensions, a theory becomes more mathematically tractable, and one can perform calculations and gain general insights more easily. There are also situations where theories in two or three spacetime dimensions are useful for describing phenomena in condensed matter physics. Finally, there exist scenarios in which there could actually be more than 4D of spacetime which have nonetheless managed to escape detection.

String theories require extra dimensions of spacetime for their mathematical consistency. In bosonic string theory, spacetime is 26-dimensional, while in superstring theory it is 10-dimensional, and in M-theory it is 11-dimensional. In order to describe real physical phenomena using string theory, one must therefore imagine scenarios in which these extra dimensions would not be observed in experiments.

Compactification is one way of modifying the number of dimensions in a physical theory. In compactification, some of the extra dimensions are assumed to &quot;close up&quot; on themselves to form circles. In the limit where these curled up dimensions become very small, one obtains a theory in which spacetime has effectively a lower number of dimensions. A standard analogy for this is to consider a multidimensional object such as a garden hose. If the hose is viewed from a sufficient distance, it appears to have only one dimension, its length. However, as one approaches the hose, one discovers that it contains a second dimension, its circumference. Thus, an ant crawling on the surface of the hose would move in two dimensions.

Compactification can be used to construct models in which spacetime is effectively four-dimensional. However, not every way of compactifying the extra dimensions produces a model with the right properties to describe nature. In a viable model of particle physics, the compact extra dimensions must be shaped like a Calabi–Yau manifold. A Calabi–Yau manifold is a special space which is typically taken to be six-dimensional in applications to string theory. It is named after mathematicians Eugenio Calabi and Shing-Tung Yau.

Another approach to reducing the number of dimensions is the so-called brane-world scenario. In this approach, physicists assume that the observable universe is a four-dimensional subspace of a higher dimensional space. In such models, the force-carrying bosons of particle physics arise from open strings with endpoints attached to the four-dimensional subspace, while gravity arises from closed strings propagating through the larger ambient space. This idea plays an important role in attempts to develop models of real-world physics based on string theory, and it provides a natural explanation for the weakness of gravity compared to the other fundamental forces.

=== Dualities ===

A notable fact about string theory is that the different versions of the theory all turn out to be related in highly nontrivial ways. One of the relationships that can exist between different string theories is called S-duality. This is a relationship that says that a collection of strongly interacting particles in one theory can, in some cases, be viewed as a collection of weakly interacting particles in a completely different theory. Roughly speaking, a collection of particles is said to be strongly interacting if they combine and decay often and weakly interacting if they do so infrequently. Type I string theory turns out to be equivalent by S-duality to the heterotic string theory. Similarly, type IIB string theory is related to itself in a nontrivial way by S-duality.

Another relationship between different string theories is T-duality. Here one considers strings propagating around a circular extra dimension. T-duality states that a string propagating around a circle of radius is equivalent to a string propagating around a circle of radius in the sense that all observable quantities in one description are identified with quantities in the dual description. For example, a string has momentum as it propagates around a circle, and it can also wind around the circle one or more times. The number of times the string winds around a circle is called the winding number. If a string has momentum and winding number in one description, it will have momentum and winding number in the dual description. For example, type IIA string theory is equivalent to type IIB string theory via T-duality, and the two versions of heterotic string theory are also related by T-duality.

In general, the term &quot;duality&quot; refers to a situation where two seemingly different physical systems turn out to be equivalent in a nontrivial way. Two theories related by a duality need not be string theories. For example, Montonen–Olive duality is an example of an S-duality relationship between quantum field theories. The AdS/CFT correspondence is an example of a duality that relates string theory to a quantum field theory. If two theories are related by a duality, it means that one theory can be transformed in some way so that it ends up looking just like the other theory. The two theories are then said to be &quot;dual&quot; to one another under the transformation. Put differently, the two theories are mathematically different descriptions of the same phenomena.

=== Branes ===

In string theory and other related theories, a brane is a physical object that generalizes the notion of a point particle to higher dimensions. For instance, a point particle can be viewed as a brane of dimension zero, while a string can be viewed as a brane of dimension one. It is also possible to consider higher-dimensional branes. In dimension &quot;p&quot;, these are called &quot;p&quot;-branes. The word brane comes from the word &quot;membrane&quot; which refers to a two-dimensional brane.

Branes are dynamical objects which can propagate through spacetime according to the rules of quantum mechanics. They have mass and can have other attributes such as charge. A &quot;p&quot;-brane sweeps out a (&quot;p&quot;+1)-dimensional volume in spacetime called its &quot;worldvolume&quot;. Physicists often study fields analogous to the electromagnetic field which live on the worldvolume of a brane.

In string theory, D-branes are an important class of branes that arise when one considers open strings. As an open string propagates through spacetime, its endpoints are required to lie on a D-brane. The letter &quot;D&quot; in D-brane refers to a certain mathematical condition on the system known as the Dirichlet boundary condition. The study of D-branes in string theory has led to important results such as the AdS/CFT correspondence, which has shed light on many problems in quantum field theory.

Branes are frequently studied from a purely mathematical point of view, and they are described as objects of certain categories, such as the derived category of coherent sheaves on a complex algebraic variety, or the Fukaya category of a symplectic manifold. The connection between the physical notion of a brane and the mathematical notion of a category has led to important mathematical insights in the fields of algebraic and symplectic geometry and representation theory.

== M-theory ==
Prior to 1995, theorists believed that there were five consistent versions of superstring theory (type I, type IIA, type IIB, and two versions of heterotic string theory). This understanding changed in 1995 when Edward Witten suggested that the five theories were just special limiting cases of an eleven-dimensional theory called M-theory. Witten&#x27;s conjecture was based on the work of a number of other physicists, including Ashoke Sen, Chris Hull, Paul Townsend, and Michael Duff. His announcement led to a flurry of research activity now known as the second superstring revolution.

=== Unification of superstring theories ===

In the 1970s, many physicists became interested in supergravity theories, which combine general relativity with supersymmetry. Whereas general relativity makes sense in any number of dimensions, supergravity places an upper limit on the number of dimensions. In 1978, work by Werner Nahm showed that the maximum spacetime dimension in which one can formulate a consistent supersymmetric theory is eleven. In the same year, Eugene Cremmer, Bernard Julia, and Joël Scherk of the École Normale Supérieure showed that supergravity not only permits up to eleven dimensions but is in fact most elegant in this maximal number of dimensions.

Initially, many physicists hoped that by compactifying eleven-dimensional supergravity, it might be possible to construct realistic models of our four-dimensional world. The hope was that such models would provide a unified description of the four fundamental forces of nature: electromagnetism, the strong and weak nuclear forces, and gravity. Interest in eleven-dimensional supergravity soon waned as various flaws in this scheme were discovered. One of the problems was that the laws of physics appear to distinguish between clockwise and counterclockwise, a phenomenon known as chirality. Edward Witten and others observed this chirality property cannot be readily derived by compactifying from eleven dimensions.

In the first superstring revolution in 1984, many physicists turned to string theory as a unified theory of particle physics and quantum gravity. Unlike supergravity theory, string theory was able to accommodate the chirality of the standard model, and it provided a theory of gravity consistent with quantum effects. Another feature of string theory that many physicists were drawn to in the 1980s and 1990s was its high degree of uniqueness. In ordinary particle theories, one can consider any collection of elementary particles whose classical behavior is described by an arbitrary Lagrangian. In string theory, the possibilities are much more constrained: by the 1990s, physicists had argued that there were only five consistent supersymmetric versions of the theory.

Although there were only a handful of consistent superstring theories, it remained a mystery why there was not just one consistent formulation. However, as physicists began to examine string theory more closely, they realized that these theories are related in intricate and nontrivial ways. They found that a system of strongly interacting strings can, in some cases, be viewed as a system of weakly interacting strings. This phenomenon is known as S-duality. It was studied by Ashoke Sen in the context of heterotic strings in four dimensions and by Chris Hull and Paul Townsend in the context of the type IIB theory. Theorists also found that different string theories may be related by T-duality. This duality implies that strings propagating on completely different spacetime geometries may be physically equivalent.

At around the same time, as many physicists were studying the properties of strings, a small group of physicists were examining the possible applications of higher dimensional objects. In 1987, Eric Bergshoeff, Ergin Sezgin, and Paul Townsend showed that eleven-dimensional supergravity includes two-dimensional branes. Intuitively, these objects look like sheets or membranes propagating through the eleven-dimensional spacetime. Shortly after this discovery, Michael Duff, Paul Howe, Takeo Inami, and Kellogg Stelle considered a particular compactification of eleven-dimensional supergravity with one of the dimensions curled up into a circle. In this setting, one can imagine the membrane wrapping around the circular dimension. If the radius of the circle is sufficiently small, then this membrane looks just like a string in ten-dimensional spacetime. Duff and his collaborators showed that this construction reproduces exactly the strings appearing in type IIA superstring theory.

Speaking at a string theory conference in 1995, Edward Witten made the surprising suggestion that all five superstring theories were in fact just different limiting cases of a single theory in eleven spacetime dimensions. Witten&#x27;s announcement drew together all of the previous results on S- and T-duality and the appearance of higher-dimensional branes in string theory. In the months following Witten&#x27;s announcement, hundreds of new papers appeared on the Internet confirming different parts of his proposal. Today this flurry of work is known as the second superstring revolution.

Initially, some physicists suggested that the new theory was a fundamental theory of membranes, but Witten was skeptical of the role of membranes in the theory. In a paper from 1996, Hořava and Witten wrote &quot;As it has been proposed that the eleven-dimensional theory is a supermembrane theory but there are some reasons to doubt that interpretation, we will non-committally call it the M-theory, leaving to the future the relation of M to membranes.&quot; In the absence of an understanding of the true meaning and structure of M-theory, Witten has suggested that the &quot;M&quot; should stand for &quot;magic&quot;, &quot;mystery&quot;, or &quot;membrane&quot; according to taste, and the true meaning of the title should be decided when a more fundamental formulation of the theory is known.

=== Matrix theory ===
In mathematics, a matrix is a rectangular array of numbers or other data. In physics, a matrix model is a particular kind of physical theory whose mathematical formulation involves the notion of a matrix in an important way. A matrix model describes the behavior of a set of matrices within the framework of quantum mechanics.

One important example of a matrix model is the BFSS matrix model proposed by Tom Banks, Willy Fischler, Stephen Shenker, and Leonard Susskind in 1997. This theory describes the behavior of a set of nine large matrices. In their original paper, these authors showed, among other things, that the low energy limit of this matrix model is described by eleven-dimensional supergravity. These calculations led them to propose that the BFSS matrix model is exactly equivalent to M-theory. The BFSS matrix model can therefore be used as a prototype for a correct formulation of M-theory and a tool for investigating the properties of M-theory in a relatively simple setting.

The development of the matrix model formulation of M-theory has led physicists to consider various connections between string theory and a branch of mathematics called noncommutative geometry. This subject is a generalization of ordinary geometry in which mathematicians define new geometric notions using tools from noncommutative algebra. In a paper from 1998, Alain Connes, Michael R. Douglas, and Albert Schwarz showed that some aspects of matrix models and M-theory are described by a noncommutative quantum field theory, a special kind of physical theory in which spacetime is described mathematically using noncommutative geometry. This established a link between matrix models and M-theory on the one hand, and noncommutative geometry on the other hand. It quickly led to the discovery of other important links between noncommutative geometry and various physical theories.

== Black holes ==

In general relativity, a black hole is defined as a region of spacetime in which the gravitational field is so strong that no particle or radiation can escape. In the currently accepted models of stellar evolution, black holes are thought to arise when massive stars undergo gravitational collapse, and many galaxies are thought to contain supermassive black holes at their centers. Black holes are also important for theoretical reasons, as they present profound challenges for theorists attempting to understand the quantum aspects of gravity. String theory has proved to be an important tool for investigating the theoretical properties of black holes because it provides a framework in which theorists can study their thermodynamics.

=== Bekenstein–Hawking formula ===

In the branch of physics called statistical mechanics, entropy is a measure of the randomness or disorder of a physical system. This concept was studied in the 1870s by the Austrian physicist Ludwig Boltzmann, who showed that the thermodynamic properties of a gas could be derived from the combined properties of its many constituent molecules. Boltzmann argued that by averaging the behaviors of all the different molecules in a gas, one can understand macroscopic properties such as volume, temperature, and pressure. In addition, this perspective led him to give a precise definition of entropy as the natural logarithm of the number of different states of the molecules (also called &quot;microstates&quot;) that give rise to the same macroscopic features.

In the twentieth century, physicists began to apply the same concepts to black holes. In most systems such as gases, the entropy scales with the volume. In the 1970s, the physicist Jacob Bekenstein suggested that the entropy of a black hole is instead proportional to the &quot;surface area&quot; of its event horizon, the boundary beyond which matter and radiation may escape its gravitational attraction. When combined with ideas of the physicist Stephen Hawking, Bekenstein&#x27;s work yielded a precise formula for the entropy of a black hole. The Bekenstein–Hawking formula expresses the entropy as
: formula_1

where is the speed of light, is the Boltzmann constant, is the reduced Planck constant, is Newton&#x27;s constant, and is the surface area of the event horizon.

Like any physical system, a black hole has an entropy defined in terms of the number of different microstates that lead to the same macroscopic features. The Bekenstein–Hawking entropy formula gives the expected value of the entropy of a black hole, but by the 1990s, physicists still lacked a derivation of this formula by counting microstates in a theory of quantum gravity. Finding such a derivation of this formula was considered an important test of the viability of any theory of quantum gravity such as string theory.

=== Derivation within string theory ===

In a paper from 1996, Andrew Strominger and Cumrun Vafa showed how to derive the Bekenstein–Hawking formula for certain black holes in string theory. Their calculation was based on the observation that D-branes—which look like fluctuating membranes when they are weakly interacting—become dense, massive objects with event horizons when the interactions are strong. In other words, a system of strongly interacting D-branes in string theory is indistinguishable from a black hole. Strominger and Vafa analyzed such D-brane systems and calculated the number of different ways of placing D-branes in spacetime so that their combined mass and charge is equal to a given mass and charge for the resulting black hole. Their calculation reproduced the Bekenstein–Hawking formula exactly, including the factor of . Subsequent work by Strominger, Vafa, and others refined the original calculations and gave the precise values of the &quot;quantum corrections&quot; needed to describe very small black holes.

The black holes that Strominger and Vafa considered in their original work were quite different from real astrophysical black holes. One difference was that Strominger and Vafa considered only extremal black holes in order to make the calculation tractable. These are defined as black holes with the lowest possible mass compatible with a given charge. Strominger and Vafa also restricted attention to black holes in five-dimensional spacetime with unphysical supersymmetry.

Although it was originally developed in this very particular and physically unrealistic context in string theory, the entropy calculation of Strominger and Vafa has led to a qualitative understanding of how black hole entropy can be accounted for in any theory of quantum gravity. Indeed, in 1998, Strominger argued that the original result could be generalized to an arbitrary consistent theory of quantum gravity without relying on strings or supersymmetry. In collaboration with several other authors in 2010, he showed that some results on black hole entropy could be extended to non-extremal astrophysical black holes.

== AdS/CFT correspondence ==
One approach to formulating string theory and studying its properties is provided by the anti-de Sitter/conformal field theory (AdS/CFT) correspondence. This is a theoretical result that implies that string theory is in some cases equivalent to a quantum field theory. In addition to providing insights into the mathematical structure of string theory, the AdS/CFT correspondence has shed light on many aspects of quantum field theory in regimes where traditional calculational techniques are ineffective. The AdS/CFT correspondence was first proposed by Juan Maldacena in late 1997. Important aspects of the correspondence were elaborated in articles by Steven Gubser, Igor Klebanov, and Alexander Markovich Polyakov, and by Edward Witten. By 2010, Maldacena&#x27;s article had over 7000 citations, becoming the most highly cited article in the field of high energy physics.

=== Overview of the correspondence ===

In the AdS/CFT correspondence, the geometry of spacetime is described in terms of a certain vacuum solution of Einstein&#x27;s equation called anti-de Sitter space. In very elementary terms, anti-de Sitter space is a mathematical model of spacetime in which the notion of distance between points (the metric) is different from the notion of distance in ordinary Euclidean geometry. It is closely related to hyperbolic space, which can be viewed as a disk as illustrated on the left. This image shows a tessellation of a disk by triangles and squares. One can define the distance between points of this disk in such a way that all the triangles and squares are the same size and the circular outer boundary is infinitely far from any point in the interior.

One can imagine a stack of hyperbolic disks where each disk represents the state of the universe at a given time. The resulting geometric object is three-dimensional anti-de Sitter space. It looks like a solid cylinder in which any cross section is a copy of the hyperbolic disk. Time runs along the vertical direction in this picture. The surface of this cylinder plays an important role in the AdS/CFT correspondence. As with the hyperbolic plane, anti-de Sitter space is curved in such a way that any point in the interior is actually infinitely far from this boundary surface.

This construction describes a hypothetical universe with only two space dimensions and one time dimension, but it can be generalized to any number of dimensions. Indeed, hyperbolic space can have more than two dimensions and one can &quot;stack up&quot; copies of hyperbolic space to get higher-dimensional models of anti-de Sitter space.

An important feature of anti-de Sitter space is its boundary (which looks like a cylinder in the case of three-dimensional anti-de Sitter space). One property of this boundary is that, within a small region on the surface around any given point, it looks just like Minkowski space, the model of spacetime used in non-gravitational physics. One can therefore consider an auxiliary theory in which &quot;spacetime&quot; is given by the boundary of anti-de Sitter space. This observation is the starting point for AdS/CFT correspondence, which states that the boundary of anti-de Sitter space can be regarded as the &quot;spacetime&quot; for a quantum field theory. The claim is that this quantum field theory is equivalent to a gravitational theory, such as string theory, in the bulk anti-de Sitter space in the sense that there is a &quot;dictionary&quot; for translating entities and calculations in one theory into their counterparts in the other theory. For example, a single particle in the gravitational theory might correspond to some collection of particles in the boundary theory. In addition, the predictions in the two theories are quantitatively identical so that if two particles have a 40 percent chance of colliding in the gravitational theory, then the corresponding collections in the boundary theory would also have a 40 percent chance of colliding.

=== Applications to quantum gravity ===

The discovery of the AdS/CFT correspondence was a major advance in physicists&#x27; understanding of string theory and quantum gravity. One reason for this is that the correspondence provides a formulation of string theory in terms of quantum field theory, which is well understood by comparison. Another reason is that it provides a general framework in which physicists can study and attempt to resolve the paradoxes of black holes.

In 1975, Stephen Hawking published a calculation which suggested that black holes are not completely black but emit a dim radiation due to quantum effects near the event horizon. At first, Hawking&#x27;s result posed a problem for theorists because it suggested that black holes destroy information. More precisely, Hawking&#x27;s calculation seemed to conflict with one of the basic postulates of quantum mechanics, which states that physical systems evolve in time according to the Schrödinger equation. This property is usually referred to as unitarity of time evolution. The apparent contradiction between Hawking&#x27;s calculation and the unitarity postulate of quantum mechanics came to be known as the black hole information paradox.

The AdS/CFT correspondence resolves the black hole information paradox, at least to some extent, because it shows how a black hole can evolve in a manner consistent with quantum mechanics in some contexts. Indeed, one can consider black holes in the context of the AdS/CFT correspondence, and any such black hole corresponds to a configuration of particles on the boundary of anti-de Sitter space. These particles obey the usual rules of quantum mechanics and in particular evolve in a unitary fashion, so the black hole must also evolve in a unitary fashion, respecting the principles of quantum mechanics. In 2005, Hawking announced that the paradox had been settled in favor of information conservation by the AdS/CFT correspondence, and he suggested a concrete mechanism by which black holes might preserve information.

=== Applications to nuclear physics ===


In addition to its applications to theoretical problems in quantum gravity, the AdS/CFT correspondence has been applied to a variety of problems in quantum field theory. One physical system that has been studied using the AdS/CFT correspondence is the quark–gluon plasma, an exotic state of matter produced in particle accelerators. This state of matter arises for brief instants when heavy ions such as gold or lead nuclei are collided at high energies. Such collisions cause the quarks that make up atomic nuclei to deconfine at temperatures of approximately two trillion kelvin, conditions similar to those present at around seconds after the Big Bang.

The physics of the quark–gluon plasma is governed by a theory called quantum chromodynamics, but this theory is mathematically intractable in problems involving the quark–gluon plasma. In an article appearing in 2005, Đàm Thanh Sơn and his collaborators showed that the AdS/CFT correspondence could be used to understand some aspects of the quark-gluon plasma by describing it in the language of string theory. By applying the AdS/CFT correspondence, Sơn and his collaborators were able to describe the quark-gluon plasma in terms of black holes in five-dimensional spacetime. The calculation showed that the ratio of two quantities associated with the quark-gluon plasma, the shear viscosity and volume density of entropy, should be approximately equal to a certain universal constant. In 2008, the predicted value of this ratio for the quark-gluon plasma was confirmed at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider at Brookhaven National Laboratory.

=== Applications to condensed matter physics ===
The AdS/CFT correspondence has also been used to study aspects of condensed matter physics. Over the decades, experimental condensed matter physicists have discovered a number of exotic states of matter, including superconductors and superfluids. These states are described using the formalism of quantum field theory, but some phenomena are difficult to explain using standard field theoretic techniques. Some condensed matter theorists including Subir Sachdev hope that the AdS/CFT correspondence will make it possible to describe these systems in the language of string theory and learn more about their behavior.

So far some success has been achieved in using string theory methods to describe the transition of a superfluid to an insulator. A superfluid is a system of electrically neutral atoms that flows without any friction. Such systems are often produced in the laboratory using liquid helium, but recently experimentalists have developed new ways of producing artificial superfluids by pouring trillions of cold atoms into a lattice of criss-crossing lasers. These atoms initially behave as a superfluid, but as experimentalists increase the intensity of the lasers, they become less mobile and then suddenly transition to an insulating state. During the transition, the atoms behave in an unusual way. For example, the atoms slow to a halt at a rate that depends on the temperature and on the Planck constant, the fundamental parameter of quantum mechanics, which does not enter into the description of the other phases. This behavior has recently been understood by considering a dual description where properties of the fluid are described in terms of a higher dimensional black hole.

== Phenomenology ==
In addition to being an idea of considerable theoretical interest, string theory provides a framework for constructing models of real-world physics that combine general relativity and particle physics. Phenomenology is the branch of theoretical physics in which physicists construct realistic models of nature from more abstract theoretical ideas. String phenomenology is the part of string theory that attempts to construct realistic or semi-realistic models based on string theory.

Partly because of theoretical and mathematical difficulties and partly because of the extremely high energies needed to test these theories experimentally, there is so far no experimental evidence that would unambiguously point to any of these models being a correct fundamental description of nature. This has led some in the community to criticize these approaches to unification and question the value of continued research on these problems.

=== Particle physics ===

The currently accepted theory describing elementary particles and their interactions is known as the standard model of particle physics. This theory provides a unified description of three of the fundamental forces of nature: electromagnetism and the strong and weak nuclear forces. Despite its remarkable success in explaining a wide range of physical phenomena, the standard model cannot be a complete description of reality. This is because the standard model fails to incorporate the force of gravity and because of problems such as the hierarchy problem and the inability to explain the structure of fermion masses or dark matter.

String theory has been used to construct a variety of models of particle physics going beyond the standard model. Typically, such models are based on the idea of compactification. Starting with the ten- or eleven-dimensional spacetime of string or M-theory, physicists postulate a shape for the extra dimensions. By choosing this shape appropriately, they can construct models roughly similar to the standard model of particle physics, together with additional undiscovered particles. One popular way of deriving realistic physics from string theory is to start with the heterotic theory in ten dimensions and assume that the six extra dimensions of spacetime are shaped like a six-dimensional Calabi–Yau manifold. Such compactifications offer many ways of extracting realistic physics from string theory. Other similar methods can be used to construct realistic or semi-realistic models of our four-dimensional world based on M-theory.

=== Cosmology ===


The Big Bang theory is the prevailing cosmological model for the universe from the earliest known periods through its subsequent large-scale evolution. Despite its success in explaining many observed features of the universe including galactic redshifts, the relative abundance of light elements such as hydrogen and helium, and the existence of a cosmic microwave background, there are several questions that remain unanswered. For example, the standard Big Bang model does not explain why the universe appears to be the same in all directions, why it appears flat on very large distance scales, or why certain hypothesized particles such as magnetic monopoles are not observed in experiments.

Currently, the leading candidate for a theory going beyond the Big Bang is the theory of cosmic inflation. Developed by Alan Guth and others in the 1980s, inflation postulates a period of extremely rapid accelerated expansion of the universe prior to the expansion described by the standard Big Bang theory. The theory of cosmic inflation preserves the successes of the Big Bang while providing a natural explanation for some of the mysterious features of the universe. The theory has also received striking support from observations of the cosmic microwave background, the radiation that has filled the sky since around 380,000 years after the Big Bang.

In the theory of inflation, the rapid initial expansion of the universe is caused by a hypothetical particle called the inflaton. The exact properties of this particle are not fixed by the theory but should ultimately be derived from a more fundamental theory such as string theory. Indeed, there have been a number of attempts to identify an inflaton within the spectrum of particles described by string theory and to study inflation using string theory. While these approaches might eventually find support in observational data such as measurements of the cosmic microwave background, the application of string theory to cosmology is still in its early stages.

== Connections to mathematics ==

In addition to influencing research in theoretical physics, string theory has stimulated a number of major developments in pure mathematics. Like many developing ideas in theoretical physics, string theory does not at present have a mathematically rigorous formulation in which all of its concepts can be defined precisely. As a result, physicists who study string theory are often guided by physical intuition to conjecture relationships between the seemingly different mathematical structures that are used to formalize different parts of the theory. These conjectures are later proved by mathematicians, and in this way, string theory serves as a source of new ideas in pure mathematics.

=== Mirror symmetry ===


After Calabi–Yau manifolds had entered physics as a way to compactify extra dimensions in string theory, many physicists began studying these manifolds. In the late 1980s, several physicists noticed that given such a compactification of string theory, it is not possible to reconstruct uniquely a corresponding Calabi–Yau manifold. Instead, two different versions of string theory, type IIA and type IIB, can be compactified on completely different Calabi–Yau manifolds giving rise to the same physics. In this situation, the manifolds are called mirror manifolds, and the relationship between the two physical theories is called mirror symmetry.

Regardless of whether Calabi–Yau compactifications of string theory provide a correct description of nature, the existence of the mirror duality between different string theories has significant mathematical consequences. The Calabi–Yau manifolds used in string theory are of interest in pure mathematics, and mirror symmetry allows mathematicians to solve problems in enumerative geometry, a branch of mathematics concerned with counting the numbers of solutions to geometric questions.

Enumerative geometry studies a class of geometric objects called algebraic varieties which are defined by the vanishing of polynomials. For example, the Clebsch cubic illustrated on the right is an algebraic variety defined using a certain polynomial of degree three in four variables. A celebrated result of nineteenth-century mathematicians Arthur Cayley and George Salmon states that there are exactly 27 straight lines that lie entirely on such a surface.

Generalizing this problem, one can ask how many lines can be drawn on a quintic Calabi–Yau manifold, such as the one illustrated above, which is defined by a polynomial of degree five. This problem was solved by the nineteenth-century German mathematician Hermann Schubert, who found that there are exactly 2,875 such lines. In 1986, geometer Sheldon Katz proved that the number of curves, such as circles, that are defined by polynomials of degree two and lie entirely in the quintic is 609,250.

By the year 1991, most of the classical problems of enumerative geometry had been solved and interest in enumerative geometry had begun to diminish. The field was reinvigorated in May 1991 when physicists Philip Candelas, Xenia de la Ossa, Paul Green, and Linda Parkes showed that mirror symmetry could be used to translate difficult mathematical questions about one Calabi–Yau manifold into easier questions about its mirror. In particular, they used mirror symmetry to show that a six-dimensional Calabi–Yau manifold can contain exactly 317,206,375 curves of degree three. In addition to counting degree-three curves, Candelas and his collaborators obtained a number of more general results for counting rational curves which went far beyond the results obtained by mathematicians.

Originally, these results of Candelas were justified on physical grounds. However, mathematicians generally prefer rigorous proofs that do not require an appeal to physical intuition. Inspired by physicists&#x27; work on mirror symmetry, mathematicians have therefore constructed their own arguments proving the enumerative predictions of mirror symmetry. Today mirror symmetry is an active area of research in mathematics, and mathematicians are working to develop a more complete mathematical understanding of mirror symmetry based on physicists&#x27; intuition. Major approaches to mirror symmetry include the homological mirror symmetry program of Maxim Kontsevich and the SYZ conjecture of Andrew Strominger, Shing-Tung Yau, and Eric Zaslow.

=== Monstrous moonshine ===


Group theory is the branch of mathematics that studies the concept of symmetry. For example, one can consider a geometric shape such as an equilateral triangle. There are various operations that one can perform on this triangle without changing its shape. One can rotate it through 120°, 240°, or 360°, or one can reflect in any of the lines labeled , , or in the picture. Each of these operations is called a &quot;symmetry&quot;, and the collection of these symmetries satisfies certain technical properties making it into what mathematicians call a group. In this particular example, the group is known as the dihedral group of order 6 because it has six elements. A general group may describe finitely many or infinitely many symmetries; if there are only finitely many symmetries, it is called a finite group.

Mathematicians often strive for a classification (or list) of all mathematical objects of a given type. It is generally believed that finite groups are too diverse to admit a useful classification. A more modest but still challenging problem is to classify all finite &quot;simple&quot; groups. These are finite groups that may be used as building blocks for constructing arbitrary finite groups in the same way that prime numbers can be used to construct arbitrary whole numbers by taking products. One of the major achievements of contemporary group theory is the classification of finite simple groups, a mathematical theorem that provides a list of all possible finite simple groups.

This classification theorem identifies several infinite families of groups as well as 26 additional groups which do not fit into any family. The latter groups are called the &quot;sporadic&quot; groups, and each one owes its existence to a remarkable combination of circumstances. The largest sporadic group, the so-called monster group, has over elements, more than a thousand times the number of atoms in the Earth.

A seemingly unrelated construction is the -function of number theory. This object belongs to a special class of functions called modular functions, whose graphs form a certain kind of repeating pattern. Although this function appears in a branch of mathematics that seems very different from the theory of finite groups, the two subjects turn out to be intimately related. In the late 1970s, mathematicians John McKay and John Thompson noticed that certain numbers arising in the analysis of the monster group (namely, the dimensions of its irreducible representations) are related to numbers that appear in a formula for the -function (namely, the coefficients of its Fourier series). This relationship was further developed by John Horton Conway and Simon Norton who called it monstrous moonshine because it seemed so far fetched.

In 1992, Richard Borcherds constructed a bridge between the theory of modular functions and finite groups and, in the process, explained the observations of McKay and Thompson. Borcherds&#x27; work used ideas from string theory in an essential way, extending earlier results of Igor Frenkel, James Lepowsky, and Arne Meurman, who had realized the monster group as the symmetries of a particular version of string theory. In 1998, Borcherds was awarded the Fields medal for his work.

Since the 1990s, the connection between string theory and moonshine has led to further results in mathematics and physics. In 2010, physicists Tohru Eguchi, Hirosi Ooguri, and Yuji Tachikawa discovered connections between a different sporadic group, the Mathieu group, and a certain version of string theory. Miranda Cheng, John Duncan, and Jeffrey A. Harvey proposed a generalization of this moonshine phenomenon called umbral moonshine, and their conjecture was proved mathematically by Duncan, Michael Griffin, and Ken Ono. Witten has also speculated that the version of string theory appearing in monstrous moonshine might be related to a certain simplified model of gravity in three spacetime dimensions.

== History ==
=== Early results ===

Some of the structures reintroduced by string theory arose for the first time much earlier as part of the program of classical unification started by Albert Einstein. The first person to add a fifth dimension to a theory of gravity was Gunnar Nordström in 1914, who noted that gravity in five dimensions describes both gravity and electromagnetism in four. Nordström attempted to unify electromagnetism with his theory of gravitation, which was however superseded by Einstein&#x27;s general relativity in 1919. Thereafter, German mathematician Theodor Kaluza combined the fifth dimension with general relativity, and only Kaluza is usually credited with the idea. In 1926, the Swedish physicist Oskar Klein gave a physical interpretation of the unobservable extra dimension—it is wrapped into a small circle. Einstein introduced a non-symmetric metric tensor, while much later Brans and Dicke added a scalar component to gravity. These ideas would be revived within string theory, where they are demanded by consistency conditions.

String theory was originally developed during the late 1960s and early 1970s as a never completely successful theory of hadrons, the subatomic particles like the proton and neutron that feel the strong interaction. In the 1960s, Geoffrey Chew and Steven Frautschi discovered that the mesons make families called Regge trajectories with masses related to spins in a way that was later understood by Yoichiro Nambu, Holger Bech Nielsen and Leonard Susskind to be the relationship expected from rotating strings. Chew advocated making a theory for the interactions of these trajectories that did not presume that they were composed of any fundamental particles, but would construct their interactions from self-consistency conditions on the S-matrix. The S-matrix approach was started by Werner Heisenberg in the 1940s as a way of constructing a theory that did not rely on the local notions of space and time, which Heisenberg believed break down at the nuclear scale. While the scale was off by many orders of magnitude, the approach he advocated was ideally suited for a theory of quantum gravity.

Working with experimental data, R. Dolen, D. Horn and C. Schmid developed some sum rules for hadron exchange. When a particle and antiparticle scatter, virtual particles can be exchanged in two qualitatively different ways. In the s-channel, the two particles annihilate to make temporary intermediate states that fall apart into the final state particles. In the t-channel, the particles exchange intermediate states by emission and absorption. In field theory, the two contributions add together, one giving a continuous background contribution, the other giving peaks at certain energies. In the data, it was clear that the peaks were stealing from the background—the authors interpreted this as saying that the t-channel contribution was dual to the s-channel one, meaning both described the whole amplitude and included the other.

The result was widely advertised by Murray Gell-Mann, leading Gabriele Veneziano to construct a scattering amplitude that had the property of Dolen–Horn–Schmid duality, later renamed world-sheet duality. The amplitude needed poles where the particles appear, on straight-line trajectories, and there is a special mathematical function whose poles are evenly spaced on half the real line—the gamma function—which was widely used in Regge theory. By manipulating combinations of gamma functions, Veneziano was able to find a consistent scattering amplitude with poles on straight lines, with mostly positive residues, which obeyed duality and had the appropriate Regge scaling at high energy. The amplitude could fit near-beam scattering data as well as other Regge type fits and had a suggestive integral representation that could be used for generalization.

Over the next years, hundreds of physicists worked to complete the bootstrap program for this model, with many surprises. Veneziano himself discovered that for the scattering amplitude to describe the scattering of a particle that appears in the theory, an obvious self-consistency condition, the lightest particle must be a tachyon. Miguel Virasoro and Joel Shapiro found a different amplitude now understood to be that of closed strings, while Ziro Koba and Holger Nielsen generalized Veneziano&#x27;s integral representation to multiparticle scattering. Veneziano and Sergio Fubini introduced an operator formalism for computing the scattering amplitudes that was a forerunner of world-sheet conformal theory, while Virasoro understood how to remove the poles with wrong-sign residues using a constraint on the states. Claud Lovelace calculated a loop amplitude, and noted that there is an inconsistency unless the dimension of the theory is 26. Charles Thorn, Peter Goddard and Richard Brower went on to prove that there are no wrong-sign propagating states in dimensions less than or equal to 26.

In 1969–1970, Yoichiro Nambu, Holger Bech Nielsen, and Leonard Susskind recognized that the theory could be given a description in space and time in terms of strings. The scattering amplitudes were derived systematically from the action principle by Peter Goddard, Jeffrey Goldstone, Claudio Rebbi, and Charles Thorn, giving a space-time picture to the vertex operators introduced by Veneziano and Fubini and a geometrical interpretation to the Virasoro conditions.

In 1971, Pierre Ramond added fermions to the model, which led him to formulate a two-dimensional supersymmetry to cancel the wrong-sign states. John Schwarz and André Neveu added another sector to the fermi theory a short time later. In the fermion theories, the critical dimension was 10. Stanley Mandelstam formulated a world sheet conformal theory for both the bose and fermi case, giving a two-dimensional field theoretic path-integral to generate the operator formalism. Michio Kaku and Keiji Kikkawa gave a different formulation of the bosonic string, as a string field theory, with infinitely many particle types and with fields taking values not on points, but on loops and curves.

In 1974, Tamiaki Yoneya discovered that all the known string theories included a massless spin-two particle that obeyed the correct Ward identities to be a graviton. John Schwarz and Joël Scherk came to the same conclusion and made the bold leap to suggest that string theory was a theory of gravity, not a theory of hadrons. They reintroduced Kaluza–Klein theory as a way of making sense of the extra dimensions. At the same time, quantum chromodynamics was recognized as the correct theory of hadrons, shifting the attention of physicists and apparently leaving the bootstrap program in the dustbin of history.

String theory eventually made it out of the dustbin, but for the following decade, all work on the theory was completely ignored. Still, the theory continued to develop at a steady pace thanks to the work of a handful of devotees. Ferdinando Gliozzi, Joël Scherk, and David Olive realized in 1977 that the original Ramond and Neveu Schwarz-strings were separately inconsistent and needed to be combined. The resulting theory did not have a tachyon and was proven to have space-time supersymmetry by John Schwarz and Michael Green in 1984. The same year, Alexander Polyakov gave the theory a modern path integral formulation, and went on to develop conformal field theory extensively. In 1979, Daniel Friedan showed that the equations of motions of string theory, which are generalizations of the Einstein equations of general relativity, emerge from the renormalization group equations for the two-dimensional field theory. Schwarz and Green discovered T-duality, and constructed two superstring theories—IIA and IIB related by T-duality, and type I theories with open strings. The consistency conditions had been so strong, that the entire theory was nearly uniquely determined, with only a few discrete choices.

=== First superstring revolution ===

In the early 1980s, Edward Witten discovered that most theories of quantum gravity could not accommodate chiral fermions like the neutrino. This led him, in collaboration with Luis Álvarez-Gaumé, to study violations of the conservation laws in gravity theories with anomalies, concluding that type I string theories were inconsistent. Green and Schwarz discovered a contribution to the anomaly that Witten and Alvarez-Gaumé had missed, which restricted the gauge group of the type I string theory to be SO(32). In coming to understand this calculation, Edward Witten became convinced that string theory was truly a consistent theory of gravity, and he became a high-profile advocate. Following Witten&#x27;s lead, between 1984 and 1986, hundreds of physicists started to work in this field, and this is sometimes called the first superstring revolution.

During this period, David Gross, Jeffrey Harvey, Emil Martinec, and Ryan Rohm discovered heterotic strings. The gauge group of these closed strings was two copies of E8, and either copy could easily and naturally include the standard model. Philip Candelas, Gary Horowitz, Andrew Strominger and Edward Witten found that the Calabi–Yau manifolds are the compactifications that preserve a realistic amount of supersymmetry, while Lance Dixon and others worked out the physical properties of orbifolds, distinctive geometrical singularities allowed in string theory. Cumrun Vafa generalized T-duality from circles to arbitrary manifolds, creating the mathematical field of mirror symmetry. Daniel Friedan, Emil Martinec and Stephen Shenker further developed the covariant quantization of the superstring using conformal field theory techniques. David Gross and Vipul Periwal discovered that string perturbation theory was divergent. Stephen Shenker showed it diverged much faster than in field theory suggesting that new non-perturbative objects were missing.

In the 1990s, Joseph Polchinski discovered that the theory requires higher-dimensional objects, called D-branes and identified these with the black-hole solutions of supergravity. These were understood to be the new objects suggested by the perturbative divergences, and they opened up a new field with rich mathematical structure. It quickly became clear that D-branes and other p-branes, not just strings, formed the matter content of the string theories, and the physical interpretation of the strings and branes was revealed—they are a type of black hole. Leonard Susskind had incorporated the holographic principle of Gerardus &#x27;t Hooft into string theory, identifying the long highly excited string states with ordinary thermal black hole states. As suggested by &#x27;t Hooft, the fluctuations of the black hole horizon, the world-sheet or world-volume theory, describes not only the degrees of freedom of the black hole, but all nearby objects too.

=== Second superstring revolution ===

In 1995, at the annual conference of string theorists at the University of Southern California (USC), Edward Witten gave a speech on string theory that in essence united the five string theories that existed at the time, and giving birth to a new 11-dimensional theory called M-theory. M-theory was also foreshadowed in the work of Paul Townsend at approximately the same time. The flurry of activity that began at this time is sometimes called the second superstring revolution.

During this period, Tom Banks, Willy Fischler, Stephen Shenker and Leonard Susskind formulated matrix theory, a full holographic description of M-theory using IIA D0 branes. This was the first definition of string theory that was fully non-perturbative and a concrete mathematical realization of the holographic principle. It is an example of a gauge-gravity duality and is now understood to be a special case of the AdS/CFT correspondence. Andrew Strominger and Cumrun Vafa calculated the entropy of certain configurations of D-branes and found agreement with the semi-classical answer for extreme charged black holes. Petr Hořava and Witten found the eleven-dimensional formulation of the heterotic string theories, showing that orbifolds solve the chirality problem. Witten noted that the effective description of the physics of D-branes at low energies is by a supersymmetric gauge theory, and found geometrical interpretations of mathematical structures in gauge theory that he and Nathan Seiberg had earlier discovered in terms of the location of the branes.

In 1997, Juan Maldacena noted that the low energy excitations of a theory near a black hole consist of objects close to the horizon, which for extreme charged black holes looks like an anti-de Sitter space. He noted that in this limit the gauge theory describes the string excitations near the branes. So he hypothesized that string theory on a near-horizon extreme-charged black-hole geometry, an anti-de Sitter space times a sphere with flux, is equally well described by the low-energy limiting gauge theory, the N = 4 supersymmetric Yang–Mills theory. This hypothesis, which is called the AdS/CFT correspondence, was further developed by Steven Gubser, Igor Klebanov and Alexander Polyakov, and by Edward Witten, and it is now well-accepted. It is a concrete realization of the holographic principle, which has far-reaching implications for black holes, locality and information in physics, as well as the nature of the gravitational interaction. Through this relationship, string theory has been shown to be related to gauge theories like quantum chromodynamics and this has led to a more quantitative understanding of the behavior of hadrons, bringing string theory back to its roots.

== Criticism ==

=== Number of solutions ===
To construct models of particle physics based on string theory, physicists typically begin by specifying a shape for the extra dimensions of spacetime. Each of these different shapes corresponds to a different possible universe, or &quot;vacuum state&quot;, with a different collection of particles and forces. String theory as it is currently understood has an enormous number of vacuum states, typically estimated to be around , and these might be sufficiently diverse to accommodate almost any phenomenon that might be observed at low energies.

Many critics of string theory have expressed concerns about the large number of possible universes described by string theory. In his book &quot;Not Even Wrong&quot;, Peter Woit, a lecturer in the mathematics department at Columbia University, has argued that the large number of different physical scenarios renders string theory vacuous as a framework for constructing models of particle physics. According to Woit,

Some physicists believe this large number of solutions is actually a virtue because it may allow a natural anthropic explanation of the observed values of physical constants, in particular the small value of the cosmological constant. The anthropic principle is the idea that some of the numbers appearing in the laws of physics are not fixed by any fundamental principle but must be compatible with the evolution of intelligent life. In 1987, Steven Weinberg published an article in which he argued that the cosmological constant could not have been too large, or else galaxies and intelligent life would not have been able to develop. Weinberg suggested that there might be a huge number of possible consistent universes, each with a different value of the cosmological constant, and observations indicate a small value of the cosmological constant only because humans happen to live in a universe that has allowed intelligent life, and hence observers, to exist.

String theorist Leonard Susskind has argued that string theory provides a natural anthropic explanation of the small value of the cosmological constant. According to Susskind, the different vacuum states of string theory might be realized as different universes within a larger multiverse. The fact that the observed universe has a small cosmological constant is just a tautological consequence of the fact that a small value is required for life to exist. Many prominent theorists and critics have disagreed with Susskind&#x27;s conclusions. According to Woit, &quot;in this case [anthropic reasoning] is nothing more than an excuse for failure. Speculative scientific ideas fail not just when they make incorrect predictions, but also when they turn out to be vacuous and incapable of predicting anything.&quot;

=== Compatibility with dark energy ===
It remains unknown whether string theory is compatible with a metastable, positive cosmological constant.
Some putative examples of such solutions do exist, such as the model described by Kachru &quot;et al&quot;. in 2003. In 2018, a group of four physicists advanced a controversial conjecture which would imply that no such universe exists. This is contrary to some popular models of dark energy such as Λ-CDM, which requires a positive vacuum energy. However, string theory is likely compatible with certain types of quintessence, where dark energy is caused by a new field with exotic properties.

=== Background independence ===
One of the fundamental properties of Einstein&#x27;s general theory of relativity is that it is background independent, meaning that the formulation of the theory does not in any way privilege a particular spacetime geometry.

One of the main criticisms of string theory from early on is that it is not manifestly background-independent. In string theory, one must typically specify a fixed reference geometry for spacetime, and all other possible geometries are described as perturbations of this fixed one. In his book &quot;The Trouble With Physics&quot;, physicist Lee Smolin of the Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics claims that this is the principal weakness of string theory as a theory of quantum gravity, saying that string theory has failed to incorporate this important insight from general relativity.

Others have disagreed with Smolin&#x27;s characterization of string theory. In a review of Smolin&#x27;s book, string theorist Joseph Polchinski writes

Polchinski notes that an important open problem in quantum gravity is to develop holographic descriptions of gravity which do not require the gravitational field to be asymptotically anti-de Sitter. Smolin has responded by saying that the AdS/CFT correspondence, as it is currently understood, may not be strong enough to resolve all concerns about background independence.

=== Sociology of science ===

Since the superstring revolutions of the 1980s and 1990s, string theory has been one of the dominant paradigms of high energy theoretical physics. Some string theorists have expressed the view that there does not exist an equally successful alternative theory addressing the deep questions of fundamental physics. In an interview from 1987, Nobel laureate David Gross made the following controversial comments about the reasons for the popularity of string theory:

Several other high-profile theorists and commentators have expressed similar views, suggesting that there are no viable alternatives to string theory.

Many critics of string theory have commented on this state of affairs. In his book criticizing string theory, Peter Woit views the status of string theory research as unhealthy and detrimental to the future of fundamental physics. He argues that the extreme popularity of string theory among theoretical physicists is partly a consequence of the financial structure of academia and the fierce competition for scarce resources. In his book &quot;The Road to Reality&quot;, mathematical physicist Roger Penrose expresses similar views, stating &quot;The often frantic competitiveness that this ease of communication engenders leads to bandwagon effects, where researchers fear to be left behind if they do not join in.&quot; Penrose also claims that the technical difficulty of modern physics forces young scientists to rely on the preferences of established researchers, rather than forging new paths of their own. Lee Smolin expresses a slightly different position in his critique, claiming that string theory grew out of a tradition of particle physics which discourages speculation about the foundations of physics, while his preferred approach, loop quantum gravity, encourages more radical thinking. According to Smolin,

Smolin goes on to offer a number of prescriptions for how scientists might encourage a greater diversity of approaches to quantum gravity research.

== Notes ==
== References ==
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== Further reading ==
=== Popular science ===
* 
* 
* 

=== Textbooks ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* bbc-horizon: parallel-uni—2002 feature documentary by &quot;BBC Horizon&quot;, episode &quot;Parallel Universes&quot;, focuses on history and emergence of M-theory, and scientists involved.
* pbs.org-nova: elegant-uni—2003 Emmy Award–winning, three-hour miniseries by &quot;Nova&quot; with Brian Greene, adapted from his &quot;The Elegant Universe&quot; (original PBS broadcast dates: October 28, 8–10 p.m. and November 4, 8–9 p.m., 2003).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3" end="10" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q33198" start="12" end="25" title="String theory" label="string theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17737" start="31" end="52" title="Mathematical theory" label="theoretical framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068091" start="66" end="86" title="Point particle" label="point-like particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="90" end="106" title="particle physics" label="particle physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440864" start="123" end="138" title="Dimension (mathematics and physics)" label="one-dimensional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376436" start="154" end="161" title="String (physics)" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="348" end="352" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q73792" start="354" end="360" title="charge (physics)" label="charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695508" start="401" end="410" title="vibration" label="vibration"/>
<link wikidata="Q103585" start="520" end="528" title="graviton" label="graviton"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="532" end="550" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="577" end="596" title="gravity" label="gravitational force"/>
<link wikidata="Q234181" start="633" end="648" title="quantum gravity" label="quantum gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q104934" start="750" end="769" title="fundamental physics" label="fundamental physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q156495" start="825" end="845" title="mathematical physics" label="mathematical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="899" end="909" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="934" end="943" title="Physical cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="945" end="960" title="nuclear physics" label="nuclear physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q214781" start="966" end="990" title="condensed matter physics" label="condensed matter physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q837863" start="1048" end="1064" title="pure mathematics" label="pure mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18359" start="1188" end="1208" title="theory of everything" label="theory of everything"/>
<link wikidata="Q486902" start="1227" end="1245" title="mathematical model" label="mathematical model"/>
<link wikidata="Q104934" start="1265" end="1282" title="Fundamental interaction" label="fundamental force"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="1297" end="1303" title="matter" label="matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11415" start="1550" end="1570" title="strong nuclear force" label="strong nuclear force"/>
<link wikidata="Q238170" start="1607" end="1629" title="quantum chromodynamics" label="quantum chromodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202882" start="1854" end="1875" title="bosonic string theory" label="bosonic string theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621273" start="1908" end="1916" title="particle" label="particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q43101" start="1927" end="1932" title="boson" label="boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437042" start="1959" end="1977" title="superstring theory" label="superstring theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q193442" start="2012" end="2025" title="supersymmetry" label="supersymmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q44363" start="2075" end="2082" title="fermion" label="fermion"/>
<link wikidata="Q232184" start="2283" end="2291" title="M-theory" label="M-theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q543413" start="2365" end="2417" title="anti-de Sitter/conformal field theory correspondence" label="anti-de Sitter/conformal field theory correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q54505" start="2516" end="2536" title="quantum field theory" label="quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4253887" start="2732" end="2741" title="String theory landscape" label="landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="2754" end="2762" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="3166" end="3181" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="3189" end="3217" title="general theory of relativity" label="general theory of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="3255" end="3262" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="3284" end="3293" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="3327" end="3344" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="3399" end="3410" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="3589" end="3597" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q43116" start="3604" end="3623" title="elementary particle" label="elementary particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="3628" end="3632" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q234181" start="3839" end="3854" title="quantum gravity" label="quantum gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q81745" start="3927" end="3944" title="classical physics" label="classical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q104934" start="3964" end="3982" title="fundamental interaction" label="fundamental forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q17737" start="4298" end="4319" title="mathematical theory" label="theoretical framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068091" start="4422" end="4442" title="point particle" label="point-like particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="4446" end="4462" title="particle physics" label="particle physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376436" start="4517" end="4524" title="string (physics)" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695508" start="4762" end="4769" title="vibration" label="vibrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="4956" end="4960" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q73792" start="4962" end="4968" title="charge (physics)" label="charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q103585" start="5153" end="5161" title="graviton" label="graviton"/>
<link wikidata="Q232184" start="5695" end="5703" title="M-theory" label="M-theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q543413" start="6071" end="6123" title="anti-de Sitter/conformal field theory correspondence" label="anti-de Sitter/conformal field theory correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="6409" end="6416" title="nuclear physics" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q214781" start="6421" end="6445" title="condensed matter physics" label="condensed matter physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18359" start="6659" end="6679" title="theory of everything" label="theory of everything"/>
<link wikidata="Q59151" start="6847" end="6868" title="cosmological constant" label="cosmological constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="6881" end="6892" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q273508" start="6923" end="6939" title="cosmic inflation" label="cosmic inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q911364" start="7335" end="7354" title="perturbation theory (quantum mechanics)" label="perturbation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000068" start="7415" end="7432" title="Non-perturbative" label="nonperturbatively"/>
<link wikidata="Q766202" start="7521" end="7533" title="vacuum state" label="vacuum state"/>
<link wikidata="Q177625" start="7860" end="7881" title="electromagnetic field" label="electromagnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q54505" start="7933" end="7953" title="quantum field theory" label="quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q911364" start="8239" end="8258" title="Perturbation theory (quantum mechanics)" label="perturbation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q39246" start="8273" end="8288" title="Richard Feynman" label="Richard Feynman"/>
<link wikidata="Q386272" start="8407" end="8422" title="Feynman diagram" label="Feynman diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q468999" start="9379" end="9392" title="Planck length" label="Planck length"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202882" start="9912" end="9933" title="bosonic string theory" label="bosonic string theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q43101" start="9967" end="9973" title="bosons" label="bosons"/>
<link wikidata="Q44363" start="10050" end="10058" title="fermions" label="fermions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437042" start="10127" end="10147" title="superstring theory" label="superstring theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q193442" start="10246" end="10259" title="supersymmetry" label="supersymmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276860" start="10409" end="10415" title="type I string" label="type I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556395" start="10417" end="10425" title="type IIA string" label="type IIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556395" start="10427" end="10435" title="type IIB string" label="type IIB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140761" start="10456" end="10472" title="heterotic string" label="heterotic string"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455736" start="10609" end="10619" title="symmetry (physics)" label="symmetries"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="11187" end="11196" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q22811512" start="11959" end="11975" title="extra dimensions" label="extra dimensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q232184" start="12137" end="12145" title="M-theory" label="M-theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187705" start="12342" end="12358" title="Compactification (physics)" label="Compactification"/>
<link wikidata="Q549959" start="13393" end="13412" title="Calabi–Yau manifold" label="Calabi–Yau manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="13449" end="13454" title="topological space" label="space"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922" start="13569" end="13583" title="Eugenio Calabi" label="Eugenio Calabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q334760" start="13588" end="13602" title="Shing-Tung Yau" label="Shing-Tung Yau"/>
<link wikidata="Q12986210" start="13676" end="13687" title="brane cosmology" label="brane-world"/>
<link wikidata="Q21263958" start="14512" end="14521" title="S-duality" label="S-duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366191" start="15137" end="15146" title="T-duality" label="T-duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q41273" start="15500" end="15508" title="momentum" label="momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q576728" start="15668" end="15682" title="winding number" label="winding number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454986" start="16078" end="16093" title="physical system" label="physical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906125" start="16218" end="16240" title="Montonen–Olive duality" label="Montonen–Olive duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q385601" start="16835" end="16840" title="brane" label="brane"/>
<link wikidata="Q185674" start="17606" end="17612" title="field (physics)" label="fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q137880" start="17713" end="17720" title="D-brane" label="D-brane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193699" start="18001" end="18029" title="Dirichlet boundary condition" label="Dirichlet boundary condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q719395" start="18316" end="18326" title="category (mathematics)" label="categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262626" start="18340" end="18356" title="derived category" label="derived category"/>
<link wikidata="Q906907" start="18360" end="18376" title="coherent sheaf" label="coherent sheaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q16910911" start="18382" end="18407" title="complex algebraic variety" label="complex algebraic variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507585" start="18416" end="18431" title="Fukaya category" label="Fukaya category"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064500" start="18437" end="18456" title="symplectic manifold" label="symplectic manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="18614" end="18623" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2190991" start="18628" end="18647" title="symplectic geometry" label="symplectic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220368" start="18652" end="18673" title="representation theory" label="representation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q201513" start="18903" end="18916" title="Edward Witten" label="Edward Witten"/>
<link wikidata="Q726244" start="19122" end="19132" title="Ashoke Sen" label="Ashoke Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q45947" start="19134" end="19144" title="Chris Hull" label="Chris Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727256" start="19146" end="19159" title="Paul Townsend" label="Paul Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665193" start="19165" end="19177" title="Michael Duff (physicist)" label="Michael Duff"/>
<link wikidata="Q608321" start="19250" end="19279" title="second superstring revolution" label="second superstring revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q958871" start="19378" end="19390" title="supergravity" label="supergravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515185" start="19603" end="19614" title="Werner Nahm" label="Werner Nahm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373462" start="19750" end="19764" title="Eugene Cremmer" label="Eugene Cremmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q822505" start="19766" end="19779" title="Bernard Julia" label="Bernard Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710260" start="19785" end="19796" title="Joël Scherk" label="Joël Scherk"/>
<link wikidata="Q83259" start="19804" end="19828" title="École Normale Supérieure" label="École Normale Supérieure"/>
<link wikidata="Q128602199" start="20017" end="20048" title="eleven-dimensional supergravity" label="eleven-dimensional supergravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11415" start="20262" end="20268" title="strong nuclear force" label="strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11418" start="20273" end="20291" title="weak nuclear force" label="weak nuclear force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305173" start="20544" end="20553" title="chirality (physics)" label="chirality"/>
<link wikidata="Q608321" start="20688" end="20716" title="first superstring revolution" label="first superstring revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q505735" start="21266" end="21276" title="Lagrangian (field theory)" label="Lagrangian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665193" start="22738" end="22750" title="Michael Duff (physicist)" label="Michael Duff"/>
<link wikidata="Q44337" start="24701" end="24707" title="matrix (mathematics)" label="matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q21175464" start="24771" end="24783" title="matrix theory (physics)" label="matrix model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383863" start="25088" end="25097" title="Tom Banks (physicist)" label="Tom Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169476" start="25099" end="25113" title="Willy Fischler" label="Willy Fischler"/>
<link wikidata="Q787109" start="25115" end="25130" title="Stephen Shenker" label="Stephen Shenker"/>
<link wikidata="Q203243" start="25136" end="25152" title="Leonard Susskind" label="Leonard Susskind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746792" start="25848" end="25871" title="noncommutative geometry" label="noncommutative geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049224" start="25997" end="26019" title="noncommutative algebra" label="noncommutative algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q313590" start="26043" end="26055" title="Alain Connes" label="Alain Connes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755564" start="26057" end="26075" title="Michael R. Douglas" label="Michael R. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638692" start="26081" end="26095" title="Albert Schwarz" label="Albert Schwarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049223" start="26170" end="26205" title="noncommutative quantum field theory" label="noncommutative quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q329273" start="26857" end="26879" title="gravitational collapse" label="gravitational collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="26890" end="26898" title="galaxies" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q40392" start="26922" end="26945" title="supermassive black hole" label="supermassive black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q911284" start="27304" end="27318" title="black hole thermodynamics" label="thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="27389" end="27410" title="statistical mechanics" label="statistical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="27412" end="27419" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q84296" start="27549" end="27565" title="Ludwig Boltzmann" label="Ludwig Boltzmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="27587" end="27600" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="27617" end="27620" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="27691" end="27699" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q204037" start="27962" end="27979" title="natural logarithm" label="natural logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q504448" start="28300" end="28316" title="Jacob Bekenstein" label="Jacob Bekenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q181741" start="28423" end="28436" title="event horizon" label="event horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17714" start="28568" end="28583" title="Stephen Hawking" label="Stephen Hawking"/>
<link wikidata="Q911284" start="28671" end="28697" title="Bekenstein–Hawking formula" label="Bekenstein–Hawking formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="28749" end="28763" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962" start="28772" end="28790" title="Boltzmann constant" label="Boltzmann constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q122894" start="28799" end="28822" title="reduced Planck constant" label="reduced Planck constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q18373" start="28827" end="28849" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s constant" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q507732" start="29487" end="29504" title="Andrew Strominger" label="Andrew Strominger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143841" start="29509" end="29520" title="Cumrun Vafa" label="Cumrun Vafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601295" start="30659" end="30678" title="extremal black hole" label="extremal black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q560811" start="32151" end="32165" title="Juan Maldacena" label="Juan Maldacena"/>
<link wikidata="Q373924" start="32251" end="32264" title="Steven Gubser" label="Steven Gubser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239168" start="32266" end="32279" title="Igor Klebanov" label="Igor Klebanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q277221" start="32285" end="32313" title="Alexander Markovich Polyakov" label="Alexander Markovich Polyakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="32451" end="32470" title="high energy physics" label="high energy physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908077" start="32605" end="32620" title="vacuum solution" label="vacuum solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q273711" start="32624" end="32648" title="Einstein&amp;#x27;s equation" label="Einstein&amp;#x27;s equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q574780" start="32656" end="32676" title="anti-de Sitter space" label="anti-de Sitter space"/>
<link wikidata="Q757269" start="32814" end="32820" title="metric tensor" label="metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q162886" start="32875" end="32893" title="Euclidean geometry" label="Euclidean geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878538" start="32920" end="32936" title="hyperbolic space" label="hyperbolic space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617832" start="32963" end="32967" title="Poincaré disk model" label="disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q214856" start="33015" end="33027" title="tessellation" label="tessellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34132" start="33480" end="33488" title="cylinder (geometry)" label="cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q845080" start="33502" end="33515" title="cross section (geometry)" label="cross section"/>
<link wikidata="Q214881" start="33744" end="33750" title="curvature" label="curved"/>
<link wikidata="Q464794" start="34457" end="34472" title="Minkowski space" label="Minkowski space"/>
<link wikidata="Q181741" start="36201" end="36214" title="event horizon" label="event horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q606855" start="36421" end="36452" title="postulates of quantum mechanics" label="postulates of quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q165498" start="36521" end="36541" title="Schrödinger equation" label="Schrödinger equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550684" start="36583" end="36592" title="Unitarity (physics)" label="unitarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471710" start="36747" end="36777" title="black hole information paradox" label="black hole information paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q733096" start="37899" end="37917" title="quark–gluon plasma" label="quark–gluon plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q11430" start="37929" end="37944" title="state of matter" label="state of matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q130825" start="37957" end="37977" title="particle accelerator" label="particle accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="38038" end="38042" title="ions" label="ions"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="38051" end="38055" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="38059" end="38063" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718" start="38128" end="38134" title="quarks" label="quarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q613812" start="38165" end="38174" title="deconfinement" label="deconfine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191085" start="38212" end="38220" title="1,000,000,000,000" label="trillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="38221" end="38227" title="kelvin" label="kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="38293" end="38301" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q238170" start="38373" end="38395" title="quantum chromodynamics" label="quantum chromodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018533" start="38522" end="38535" title="Đàm Thanh Sơn" label="Đàm Thanh Sơn"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="38981" end="38996" title="shear viscosity" label="shear viscosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q188248" start="39081" end="39089" title="constant (mathematics)" label="constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076995" start="39182" end="39213" title="Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider" label="Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider"/>
<link wikidata="Q585777" start="39217" end="39247" title="Brookhaven National Laboratory" label="Brookhaven National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18366" start="39409" end="39421" title="experimental physics" label="experimental"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="39513" end="39528" title="superconductors" label="superconductors"/>
<link wikidata="Q106667" start="39533" end="39544" title="superfluids" label="superfluids"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631351" start="39747" end="39760" title="Subir Sachdev" label="Subir Sachdev"/>
<link wikidata="Q178150" start="40035" end="40044" title="insulator (electricity)" label="insulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111" start="40074" end="40094" title="electrically neutral" label="electrically neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="40095" end="40100" title="atoms" label="atoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q82580" start="40124" end="40132" title="friction" label="friction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203476" start="40190" end="40203" title="liquid helium" label="liquid helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="40363" end="40369" title="lasers" label="lasers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="40683" end="40694" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q122894" start="40706" end="40721" title="Planck constant" label="Planck constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q104837" start="40826" end="40832" title="phase (matter)" label="phases"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993342" start="41223" end="41236" title="Phenomenology (particle physics)" label="Phenomenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q15427360" start="41369" end="41389" title="String phenomenology" label="String phenomenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q18338" start="42080" end="42114" title="standard model of particle physics" label="standard model of particle physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q601556" start="42520" end="42537" title="hierarchy problem" label="hierarchy problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="43612" end="43624" title="physical cosmology" label="cosmological"/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="43818" end="43826" title="redshift" label="redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="43878" end="43886" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="43891" end="43897" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="43922" end="43949" title="cosmic microwave background" label="cosmic microwave background"/>
<link wikidata="Q219708" start="44217" end="44235" title="magnetic monopoles" label="magnetic monopoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q323316" start="44390" end="44399" title="Alan Guth" label="Alan Guth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576923" start="45046" end="45054" title="inflaton" label="inflaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18362" start="45664" end="45683" title="theoretical physics" label="theoretical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q837863" start="45748" end="45764" title="pure mathematics" label="pure mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890076" start="45858" end="45881" title="mathematical rigor" label="mathematically rigorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914418" start="46973" end="46988" title="mirror symmetry (string theory)" label="mirror symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429676" start="47360" end="47380" title="enumerative geometry" label="enumerative geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q648995" start="47545" end="47564" title="algebraic varieties" label="algebraic varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="47603" end="47613" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131020" start="47633" end="47646" title="Clebsch cubic" label="Clebsch cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473607" start="47734" end="47740" title="degree of a polynomial" label="degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q159430" start="47823" end="47836" title="Arthur Cayley" label="Arthur Cayley"/>
<link wikidata="Q983374" start="47841" end="47854" title="George Salmon" label="George Salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q68670" start="48197" end="48213" title="Hermann Schubert" label="Hermann Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086091" start="48644" end="48659" title="Philip Candelas" label="Philip Candelas"/>
<link wikidata="Q53673448" start="48661" end="48677" title="Xenia de la Ossa" label="Xenia de la Ossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11338004" start="49837" end="49864" title="homological mirror symmetry" label="homological mirror symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q369588" start="49876" end="49892" title="Maxim Kontsevich" label="Maxim Kontsevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395295" start="49901" end="49915" title="SYZ conjecture" label="SYZ conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939375" start="49958" end="49969" title="Eric Zaslow" label="Eric Zaslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q874429" start="50002" end="50014" title="Group theory" label="Group theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12485" start="50072" end="50080" title="symmetry" label="symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="50554" end="50559" title="group (mathematics)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q558339" start="50615" end="50629" title="dihedral group" label="dihedral group"/>
<link wikidata="Q589491" start="50633" end="50638" title="order (group theory)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057968" start="50803" end="50815" title="finite group" label="finite group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128418" start="50852" end="50866" title="classification theorems" label="classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="51235" end="51247" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="51284" end="51296" title="Integer" label="whole number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340623" start="51384" end="51422" title="classification of finite simple groups" label="classification of finite simple groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q392663" start="51830" end="51843" title="monster group" label="monster group"/>
<link wikidata="Q287419" start="51968" end="51977" title="j-invariant" label="-function"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="51981" end="51994" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q870797" start="52055" end="52071" title="modular function" label="modular function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701035" start="52333" end="52343" title="John McKay (mathematician)" label="John McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q313168" start="52348" end="52361" title="John G. Thompson" label="John Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13690522" start="52467" end="52493" title="irreducible representation" label="irreducible representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179467" start="52595" end="52609" title="Fourier series" label="Fourier series"/>
<link wikidata="Q268961" start="52655" end="52673" title="John Horton Conway" label="John Horton Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q381359" start="52678" end="52690" title="Simon P. Norton" label="Simon Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q392440" start="52705" end="52724" title="monstrous moonshine" label="monstrous moonshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q334010" start="52769" end="52786" title="Richard Borcherds" label="Richard Borcherds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657690" start="53038" end="53050" title="Igor Frenkel" label="Igor Frenkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680608" start="53052" end="53066" title="James Lepowsky" label="James Lepowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q177202" start="53072" end="53084" title="Arne Meurman" label="Arne Meurman"/>
<link wikidata="Q28835" start="53216" end="53228" title="Fields medal" label="Fields medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465343" start="53387" end="53399" title="Tohru Eguchi" label="Tohru Eguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620293" start="53401" end="53414" title="Hirosi Ooguri" label="Hirosi Ooguri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787240" start="53498" end="53511" title="Mathieu group M24" label="Mathieu group"/>
<link wikidata="Q26703285" start="53553" end="53566" title="Miranda Cheng" label="Miranda Cheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175805" start="53585" end="53602" title="Jeffrey A. Harvey" label="Jeffrey A. Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881385" start="53665" end="53681" title="umbral moonshine" label="umbral moonshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738659" start="53762" end="53769" title="Ken Ono" label="Ken Ono"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="54142" end="54157" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142276" start="54185" end="54200" title="Five-dimensional space" label="fifth dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q726175" start="54228" end="54244" title="Gunnar Nordström" label="Gunnar Nordström"/>
<link wikidata="Q4455094" start="54400" end="54425" title="Nordström&amp;#x27;s theory of gravitation" label="his theory of gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q65346" start="54536" end="54550" title="Theodor Kaluza" label="Theodor Kaluza"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="54585" end="54603" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q251524" start="54687" end="54698" title="Oskar Klein" label="Oskar Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q944095" start="54704" end="54729" title="Kaluza–Klein theory" label="a physical interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325769" start="54823" end="54836" title="Antisymmetric tensor" label="non-symmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q757269" start="54837" end="54850" title="metric tensor" label="metric tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q101667" start="55145" end="55151" title="hadron" label="hadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q177013" start="55158" end="55176" title="subatomic particle" label="subatomic particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="55187" end="55193" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="55198" end="55205" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11415" start="55220" end="55238" title="strong interaction" label="strong interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q376617" start="55254" end="55267" title="Geoffrey Chew" label="Geoffrey Chew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347546" start="55272" end="55288" title="Steven Frautschi" label="Steven Frautschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q102742" start="55309" end="55314" title="meson" label="meson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4455095" start="55337" end="55355" title="Regge trajectories" label="Regge trajectories"/>
<link wikidata="Q188120" start="55423" end="55437" title="Yoichiro Nambu" label="Yoichiro Nambu"/>
<link wikidata="Q916911" start="55439" end="55458" title="Holger Bech Nielsen" label="Holger Bech Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q203243" start="55463" end="55479" title="Leonard Susskind" label="Leonard Susskind"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944080" start="55728" end="55755" title="bootstrap model" label="self-consistency conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q581505" start="55763" end="55771" title="S-matrix" label="S-matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q649466" start="55777" end="55794" title="S-matrix theory" label="S-matrix approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q40904" start="55810" end="55827" title="Werner Heisenberg" label="Werner Heisenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q182717" start="56254" end="56266" title="antiparticle" label="antiparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q172840" start="56997" end="57013" title="Murray Gell-Mann" label="Murray Gell-Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q441993" start="57023" end="57041" title="Gabriele Veneziano" label="Gabriele Veneziano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614673" start="57057" end="57077" title="Veneziano scattering amplitude" label="scattering amplitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q190573" start="57352" end="57366" title="gamma function" label="gamma function"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944080" start="57887" end="57904" title="Bootstrap model" label="bootstrap program"/>
<link wikidata="Q41995" start="58145" end="58152" title="tachyon" label="tachyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q201145" start="58154" end="58169" title="Miguel Ángel Virasoro (physicist)" label="Miguel Virasoro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58266" end="58275" title="Ziro Koba" label="Ziro Koba"/>
<link wikidata="Q916911" start="58280" end="58294" title="Holger Bech Nielsen" label="Holger Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244732" start="58391" end="58404" title="Sergio Fubini" label="Sergio Fubini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58503" end="58531" title="world-sheet conformal theory" label="world-sheet conformal theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q16019452" start="58642" end="58656" title="Claud Lovelace" label="Claud Lovelace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082931" start="58769" end="58782" title="Charles Thorn" label="Charles Thorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q575072" start="58784" end="58797" title="Peter Goddard (physicist)" label="Peter Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58802" end="58816" title="Richard Brower" label="Richard Brower"/>
<link wikidata="Q188120" start="58937" end="58951" title="Yoichiro Nambu" label="Yoichiro Nambu"/>
<link wikidata="Q916911" start="58953" end="58972" title="Holger Bech Nielsen" label="Holger Bech Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q203243" start="58978" end="58994" title="Leonard Susskind" label="Leonard Susskind"/>
<link wikidata="Q575072" start="59173" end="59186" title="Peter Goddard (physicist)" label="Peter Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q346895" start="59188" end="59205" title="Jeffrey Goldstone" label="Jeffrey Goldstone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59207" end="59220" title="Claudio Rebbi" label="Claudio Rebbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082931" start="59226" end="59239" title="Charles Thorn" label="Charles Thorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366201" start="59368" end="59387" title="Virasoro algebra" label="Virasoro conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q40047" start="59399" end="59412" title="Pierre Ramond" label="Pierre Ramond"/>
<link wikidata="Q710213" start="59534" end="59546" title="John Henry Schwarz" label="John Schwarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q325967" start="59551" end="59562" title="André Neveu" label="André Neveu"/>
<link wikidata="Q348152" start="59680" end="59698" title="Stanley Mandelstam" label="Stanley Mandelstam"/>
<link wikidata="Q486882" start="59866" end="59877" title="Michio Kaku" label="Michio Kaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635244" start="59882" end="59895" title="Keiji Kikkawa" label="Keiji Kikkawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051921" start="59953" end="59972" title="string field theory" label="string field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681216" start="60090" end="60104" title="Tamiaki Yoneya" label="Tamiaki Yoneya"/>
<link wikidata="Q353202" start="60213" end="60228" title="Ward identities" label="Ward identities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710260" start="60264" end="60275" title="Joël Scherk" label="Joël Scherk"/>
<link wikidata="Q944095" start="60425" end="60444" title="Kaluza–Klein theory" label="Kaluza–Klein theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q238170" start="60513" end="60535" title="quantum chromodynamics" label="quantum chromodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847771" start="60674" end="60692" title="dustbin of history" label="dustbin of history"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304753" start="60926" end="60944" title="Ferdinando Gliozzi" label="Ferdinando Gliozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q382810" start="60963" end="60974" title="David Olive" label="David Olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345424" start="61211" end="61224" title="Michael Green (physicist)" label="Michael Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q277221" start="61249" end="61267" title="Alexander Markovich Polyakov" label="Alexander Polyakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q547346" start="61388" end="61402" title="Daniel Friedan" label="Daniel Friedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q273711" start="61491" end="61509" title="Einstein equations" label="Einstein equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="61513" end="61531" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203669" start="61549" end="61570" title="renormalization group" label="renormalization group"/>
<link wikidata="Q201513" start="61968" end="61981" title="Edward Witten" label="Edward Witten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305173" start="62053" end="62059" title="chirality (physics)" label="chiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876558" start="62124" end="62142" title="Luis Álvarez-Gaumé" label="Luis Álvarez-Gaumé"/>
<link wikidata="Q867441" start="62214" end="62223" title="Gravitational anomaly" label="anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q608321" start="62772" end="62800" title="first superstring revolution" label="first superstring revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q40262" start="62823" end="62834" title="David Gross" label="David Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175805" start="62836" end="62850" title="Jeffrey A. Harvey" label="Jeffrey Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371365" start="62852" end="62865" title="Emil Martinec" label="Emil Martinec"/>
<link wikidata="Q15455400" start="62871" end="62880" title="Ryan Rohm" label="Ryan Rohm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140761" start="62892" end="62909" title="heterotic strings" label="heterotic strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200244" start="62969" end="62971" title="E8 (mathematics)" label="E8"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086091" start="63044" end="63059" title="Philip Candelas" label="Philip Candelas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258679" start="63061" end="63074" title="Gary Horowitz" label="Gary Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q507732" start="63076" end="63093" title="Andrew Strominger" label="Andrew Strominger"/>
<link wikidata="Q15825085" start="63231" end="63242" title="Lance Dixon" label="Lance Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40460" start="63292" end="63301" title="orbifolds" label="orbifolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143841" start="63367" end="63378" title="Cumrun Vafa" label="Cumrun Vafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914418" start="63473" end="63488" title="mirror symmetry (string theory)" label="mirror symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q547346" start="63490" end="63504" title="Daniel Friedan" label="Daniel Friedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371365" start="63506" end="63519" title="Emil Martinec" label="Emil Martinec"/>
<link wikidata="Q787109" start="63524" end="63539" title="Stephen Shenker" label="Stephen Shenker"/>
<link wikidata="Q40262" start="63645" end="63656" title="David Gross" label="David Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q787109" start="63733" end="63748" title="Stephen Shenker" label="Stephen Shenker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156878" start="63875" end="63892" title="Joseph Polchinski" label="Joseph Polchinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q137880" start="63964" end="63971" title="D-brane" label="D-brane"/>
<link wikidata="Q203243" start="64421" end="64437" title="Leonard Susskind" label="Leonard Susskind"/>
<link wikidata="Q911473" start="64459" end="64480" title="holographic principle" label="holographic principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q184592" start="64484" end="64506" title="Gerardus &amp;#x27;t Hooft" label="Gerardus &amp;#x27;t Hooft"/>
<link wikidata="Q201513" start="64964" end="64977" title="Edward Witten" label="Edward Witten"/>
<link wikidata="Q232184" start="65138" end="65146" title="M-theory" label="M-theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727256" start="65194" end="65207" title="Paul Townsend" label="Paul Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q608321" start="65311" end="65340" title="second superstring revolution" label="second superstring revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383863" start="65363" end="65372" title="Tom Banks (physicist)" label="Tom Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169476" start="65374" end="65388" title="Willy Fischler" label="Willy Fischler"/>
<link wikidata="Q787109" start="65390" end="65405" title="Stephen Shenker" label="Stephen Shenker"/>
<link wikidata="Q203243" start="65410" end="65426" title="Leonard Susskind" label="Leonard Susskind"/>
<link wikidata="Q911473" start="65643" end="65664" title="holographic principle" label="holographic principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q543413" start="65760" end="65782" title="AdS/CFT correspondence" label="AdS/CFT correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q507732" start="65784" end="65801" title="Andrew Strominger" label="Andrew Strominger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143841" start="65806" end="65817" title="Cumrun Vafa" label="Cumrun Vafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q349121" start="65963" end="65974" title="Petr Hořava (theorist)" label="Petr Hořava"/>
<link wikidata="Q706652" start="66330" end="66344" title="Nathan Seiberg" label="Nathan Seiberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q560811" start="66418" end="66432" title="Juan Maldacena" label="Juan Maldacena"/>
<link wikidata="Q574780" start="66594" end="66614" title="anti-de Sitter space" label="anti-de Sitter space"/>
<link wikidata="Q214850" start="66907" end="66919" title="gauge theory" label="gauge theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q14942749" start="66925" end="66963" title="N = 4 supersymmetric Yang–Mills theory" label="N = 4 supersymmetric Yang–Mills theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q543413" start="67002" end="67024" title="AdS/CFT correspondence" label="AdS/CFT correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q373924" start="67051" end="67064" title="Steven Gubser" label="Steven Gubser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239168" start="67066" end="67079" title="Igor Klebanov" label="Igor Klebanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q277221" start="67084" end="67102" title="Alexander Markovich Polyakov" label="Alexander Polyakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q911473" start="67191" end="67212" title="holographic principle" label="holographic principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="67254" end="67264" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q629202" start="67267" end="67275" title="Principle of locality" label="locality"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028" start="67280" end="67291" title="information" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="Q238170" start="67453" end="67475" title="quantum chromodynamics" label="quantum chromodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q101667" start="67549" end="67555" title="hadron" label="hadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710099" start="68362" end="68372" title="Peter Woit" label="Peter Woit"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="68418" end="68437" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q173227" start="68769" end="68786" title="physical constant" label="physical constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q240581" start="68853" end="68872" title="anthropic principle" label="anthropic principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q179282" start="69058" end="69073" title="Steven Weinberg" label="Steven Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="69184" end="69192" title="galaxy" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327819" start="69859" end="69869" title="multiverse" label="multiverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q59151" start="70518" end="70539" title="cosmological constant" label="cosmological constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653378" start="70753" end="70776" title="Swampland (physics)" label="no such universe exists"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343" start="70821" end="70832" title="dark energy" label="dark energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q692197" start="70841" end="70846" title="Lambda-CDM model" label="Λ-CDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777391" start="70955" end="70967" title="quintessence (physics)" label="quintessence"/>
<link wikidata="Q429258" start="71165" end="71187" title="background independence" label="background independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819944" start="71596" end="71620" title="The Trouble With Physics" label="The Trouble With Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q437263" start="71638" end="71648" title="Lee Smolin" label="Lee Smolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004561" start="71656" end="71699" title="Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics" label="Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q339619" start="72792" end="72806" title="Nobel laureate" label="Nobel laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q40262" start="72807" end="72818" title="David Gross" label="David Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263729" start="73514" end="73533" title="The Road to Reality" label="The Road to Reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q193803" start="73564" end="73577" title="Roger Penrose" label="Roger Penrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q955199" start="73702" end="73718" title="bandwagon effect" label="bandwagon effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q739962" start="74217" end="74237" title="loop quantum gravity" label="loop quantum gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112475" start="74682" end="74693" title="Horizon (British TV series)" label="BBC Horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134982" start="74715" end="74733" title="Parallel Universes (film)" label="Parallel Universes"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="74845" end="74855" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071768" start="74896" end="74900" title="Nova (American TV program)" label="Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q60815" start="74912" end="74924" title="Brian Greene" label="Brian Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q785107" start="74949" end="74969" title="The Elegant Universe" label="The Elegant Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="74986" end="74989" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28307" wikidata="Q60227" url="?curid=28307" title="Sin">
<text>In religious context, sin is a transgression against divine law or a law of the deities. Each culture has its own interpretation of what it means to commit a sin. While sins are generally considered actions, any thought, word, or act considered immoral, selfish, shameful, harmful, or alienating might be termed &quot;sinful&quot;.

==Etymology==
From Middle English , , , , from Old English (&quot;sin&quot;), from Proto-West Germanic *sunnju, from Proto-Germanic *sunjō (&#x27;truth&#x27;, &#x27;excuse&#x27;) and *sundī, *sundijō (&quot;sin&quot;), from Proto-Indo-European *h₁s-ónt-ih₂, from *h₁sónts (&quot;being, true&quot;, implying a verdict of &quot;truly guilty&quot; against an accusation or charge), from *h₁es- (&quot;to be&quot;); compare Old English (&quot;true&quot;; see sooth). Doublet of suttee.

==Bahá&#x27;í==

Baháʼís consider humans to be naturally good, fundamentally spiritual beings. Human beings were created because of God&#x27;s immeasurable love for us. However, the Baháʼí teachings compare the human heart to a mirror, which, if turned away from the light of the sun (i.e. God), is incapable of receiving God&#x27;s love. It is only by turning unto God that spiritual advancement can be made. In this sense, &quot;sinning&quot; is to follow the inclinations of one&#x27;s own lower nature, to turn the mirror of one&#x27;s heart away from God. One of the main hindrances to spiritual development is the Baháʼí concept of the &quot;insistent self&quot; which is a self-serving inclination within all people. Baháʼís interpret this to be the true meaning of Satan, often referred to in the Baháʼí Writings as &quot;the Evil One&quot;.Watch over yourselves, for the Evil One is lying in wait, ready to entrap you. Gird yourselves against his wicked devices, and, led by the light of the name of the All-Seeing God, make your escape from the darkness that surroundeth you. — Baháʼu&#x27;lláhThis lower nature in humans is symbolized as Satan—the evil ego within us, not an evil personality outside.—ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá

==Buddhism==

There are a few differing Buddhist views on sin. American Zen author Brad Warner states that in Buddhism there is no concept of sin at all. The Buddha Dharma Education Association also expressly states &quot;The idea of sin or original sin has no place in Buddhism.&quot;

Ethnologist Christoph von Fürer-Haimendorf explained, &quot;In Buddhist thinking the whole universe, men as well as gods, are subject to a reign of law. Every action, good or bad, has an inevitable and automatic effect in a long chain of causes, an effect that is independent of the will of any deity. Even though this may leave no room for the concept of &#x27;sin&#x27; in the sense of an act of defiance against the authority of a personal god, Buddhists speak of &#x27;sin&#x27; when referring to transgressions against the universal moral code.&quot;

However, there are five heinous crimes in Buddhism that bring immediate disaster through karmic process. These five crimes are collectively referred to as Anantarika-karma in Theravada Buddhism and &quot;pañcānantarya&quot; (Pāli) in the Mahayana &quot;Sutra Preached by the Buddha on the Total Extinction of the Dharma&quot;, The five crimes or sins are:
# Injuring a Buddha
# Killing an Arhat
# Creating schism in the society of Sangha
# Matricide
# Patricide

==Christianity==
===Hamartiology===

The doctrine of sin is central to Christianity, since its basic message is about redemption in Christ. Christian hamartiology describes sin as an act of offense against God by despising his persons and Christian biblical law, and by injuring others. In Christian views it is an evil human act, which violates the rational nature of man as well as God&#x27;s nature and his eternal law. According to the classical definition of St. Augustine of Hippo sin is &quot;a word, deed, or desire in opposition to the eternal law of God.&quot; Thus, sin requires redemption, a metaphor alluding to atonement, in which the death of Jesus is the price that is paid to release the faithful from the bondage of sin. In some forms of Christianity, it also requires reparation (see penance).

Among some scholars, sin is understood mostly as a legal infraction or contract violation of non-binding philosophical frameworks and perspectives of Christian ethics, and so salvation tends to be viewed in legal terms. Other Christian scholars understand sin to be fundamentally relational—a loss of love for the Christian God and an elevation of self-love (&quot;concupiscence&quot;, in this sense), as was later propounded by Augustine in his debate with the Pelagians. As with the legal definition of sin, this definition also affects the understanding of Christian grace and salvation, which are thus viewed in relational terms.

===Original sin===
This condition has been characterized in many ways, from the desire to commit wrongful action, referred to as a &quot;sin nature&quot;, to total depravity and &quot;utter helplessness even to exercise a good will toward God apart from God&#x27;s supernatural, assisting grace&quot;.

The concept of original sin was first alluded to in the 2nd century by Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyon in his controversy with certain dualist Gnostics. Other church fathers such as Augustine also shaped and developed the doctrine, seeing it as based on the New Testament teaching of Paul the Apostle (Romans 5:12–21 and 1 Corinthians 15:21–22) and the Old Testament verse of Psalms 51:5. Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose and Ambrosiaster considered that humanity shares in Adam&#x27;s sin, transmitted by human generation. Augustine&#x27;s formulation of original sin after 412 CE was popular among Protestant reformers, such as Martin Luther and John Calvin, who equated original sin with concupiscence (or &quot;hurtful desire&quot;), affirming that it persisted even after baptism and completely destroyed freedom to do good. Before 412 CE, Augustine said that free will was weakened but not destroyed by original sin. But after 412 CE this changed to a loss of free will except to sin. Calvinism holds the later Augustinian soteriology view. The Jansenist movement, which the Catholic Church declared to be heretical, also maintained that original sin destroyed freedom of will. Instead the Catholic Church declares that Baptism erases original sin. Methodist theology teaches that original sin is eradicted through entire sanctification.

==Islam==

Sin (khiṭʾ) is an important concept in Islamic ethics. Muslims see sin as anything that goes against the commands of God (Allah), a breach of the laws and norms laid down by religion. Islam teaches that sin is an act and not a state of being. It is believed that God weighs an individual&#x27;s good deeds against his or her sins on the Day of Judgement and punishes those individuals whose evil deeds outweigh their good deeds. These individuals are thought to be sentenced to an afterlife in the fires of &quot;jahannam&quot; (Hell).

Islamic terms for sin include &quot;dhanb&quot; and &quot;khaṭīʾa&quot;, which are synonymous and refer to intentional sins; &quot;khiṭʾ&quot;, which means simply a sin; and &quot;ithm&quot;, which is used for grave sins.

==Judaism==

Judaism regards the violation of any of the 613 commandments as a sin. Judaism teaches that sin is a part of life, since there is no perfect man and everyone has an inclination to do evil. Sin has many classifications and degrees, but the principal classification is that of &quot;missing the mark&quot; (cheit in Hebrew). Some sins are punishable with death by the court, others with death by heaven, others with lashes, and others without such punishment, but no sins committed with willful intentions go without consequence. Sins committed out of lack of knowledge are not considered sins, since sin cannot be a sin if the one who committed it did not know it was wrong. Unintentional sins are considered less severe sins.

Sins between people are considered much more serious in Judaism than sins between man and God. Yom Kippur, the main day of repentance in Judaism, can atone for sins between man and God, but not for sins between man and his fellow, that is until he has appeased his friend. Eleazar ben Azariah derived [this from the verse]: &quot;From all your sins before God you shall be cleansed&quot; (Book of Leviticus, 16:30) – for sins between man and God Yom Kippur atones, but for sins between man and his fellow Yom Kippur does not atone until he appeases his fellow.

When the Temple yet stood in Jerusalem, people would offer Korbanot (sacrifices) for their misdeeds. The atoning aspect of &quot;korbanot&quot; is carefully circumscribed. For the most part, &quot;korbanot&quot; only expiates unintentional sins, that is, sins committed because a person forgot that this thing was a sin or by mistake. No atonement is needed for violations committed under duress or through lack of knowledge, and for the most part, &quot;korbanot&quot; cannot atone for a malicious, deliberate sin. In addition, &quot;korbanot&quot; have no expiating effect unless the person making the offering sincerely repents of his or her actions before making the offering, and makes restitution to any person who was harmed by the violation.

Judaism teaches that all willful sin has consequences. The completely righteous suffer for their sins (by humiliation, poverty, and suffering that God sends them) in this world and receive their reward in the world to come. The in-between (not completely righteous or completely wicked), suffer for and repent their sins after death and thereafter join the righteous. The very evil do not repent even at the gates of hell. Such people prosper in this world to receive their reward for any good deed, but cannot be cleansed by and hence cannot leave &quot;gehinnom&quot;, because they do not or cannot repent. This world can therefore seem unjust where the righteous suffer, while the wicked prosper. Many great thinkers have contemplated this.

==Shinto==
The Shinto concept of sin is inexorably linked to concepts of purity and pollution. Shinto does not have a concept of original sin and instead believes that all human beings are born pure. Sin, also called Tsumi, is anything that makes people impure (i.e. anything that separates them from the &quot;kami&quot;). However, Shinto does not believe this impurity is the result of human actions, but rather the result of evil spirits or other external factors.

Sin can have a variety of consequences in Japan, including disaster and disease. Therefore, purification rituals, or Harae, are viewed as important not just to the spiritual and physical health of the individual but also to the well-being of the nation.

==See also==

* Actual sin
* Devil
* Ethics in religion
* Haram
* Internal sin
* Crime
* Karma
* Morality
* Religious law
* Sin offering
* Taboo
* Vice
* Wickedness
==Notes and references==
==Further reading==
*
* Fredriksen, Paula. &quot;Sin: The Early History of an Idea.&quot; Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2012. .
* Granoff; P E; Shinohara, Koichi; eds. (2012), Sins and Sinners: Perspectives from Asian Religions. Brill. .
* Hein, David. &quot;Regrets Only: A Theology of Remorse.&quot; &quot;The Anglican&quot; 33, no. 4 (October 2004): 5–6.
* Lewis, C.S. &quot;&quot;Miserable Offenders&quot;: An Interpretation of [sinfulness and] Prayer Book Language [about it],&quot; in series, &quot;The Advent Papers&quot;. Cincinnati, Ohio: Forward Movement Publications, [196-].
*
* Pieper, Josef. &quot;The Concept of Sin&quot;. Edward T. Oakes SJ (translation from German). South Bend, Indiana: St. Augustine&#x27;s Press, 2001. 
* Schumacher, Meinolf. &quot;Sündenschmutz und Herzensreinheit: Studien zur Metaphorik der Sünde in lateinischer und deutscher Literatur des Mittelalters&quot;. Munich: Fink, 1996. 
*

==External links==

* The Different Kinds of Sins (Catholic)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="3" end="12" title="religion" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q60227" start="22" end="25" title="Sin" label="sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559849" start="53" end="63" title="divine law" label="divine law"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="80" end="87" title="deities" label="deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="94" end="101" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q101054" start="1904" end="1920" title="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh" label="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh"/>
<link wikidata="Q216954" start="2028" end="2045" title="ʻAbdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá" label="ʻAbdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="2119" end="2122" title="Zen" label="Zen"/>
<link wikidata="Q329026" start="2130" end="2141" title="Brad Warner" label="Brad Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q43455" start="2334" end="2345" title="ethnology" label="Ethnologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q113407" start="2346" end="2376" title="Christoph von Fürer-Haimendorf" label="Christoph von Fürer-Haimendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q132196" start="2980" end="2994" title="karma" label="karmic process"/>
<link wikidata="Q784046" start="3046" end="3062" title="Anantarika-karma" label="Anantarika-karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="3066" end="3084" title="Theravada Buddhism" label="Theravada Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="3129" end="3137" title="Mahayana" label="Mahayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q56247062" start="3260" end="3266" title="Buddhahood" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q225932" start="3280" end="3285" title="Arhat (Buddhism)" label="Arhat"/>
<link wikidata="Q126287984" start="3297" end="3303" title="schism (religion)" label="schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193944" start="3322" end="3328" title="Sangha (Buddhism)" label="Sangha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136456" start="3331" end="3340" title="Matricide" label="Matricide"/>
<link wikidata="Q10345565" start="3343" end="3352" title="Patricide" label="Patricide"/>
<link wikidata="Q492807" start="3449" end="3462" title="The gospel" label="basic message"/>
<link wikidata="Q935362" start="3472" end="3482" title="redemption (theology)" label="redemption"/>
<link wikidata="Q51663" start="3486" end="3492" title="Jesus in Christianity" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790386" start="3504" end="3516" title="hamartiology" label="hamartiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q825" start="3560" end="3563" title="God in Christianity" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="3581" end="3588" title="Trinity" label="persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903283" start="3593" end="3615" title="Biblical law in Christianity" label="Christian biblical law"/>
<link wikidata="Q15292" start="3669" end="3673" title="evil" label="evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="3738" end="3755" title="Trinity" label="God&amp;#x27;s nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="3764" end="3775" title="eternal law" label="eternal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="3818" end="3840" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="St. Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="4110" end="4122" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q10909316" start="4157" end="4164" title="penance" label="penance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665156" start="4318" end="4334" title="Christian ethics" label="Christian ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8451511" start="4343" end="4352" title="Salvation in Christianity" label="salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q825" start="4482" end="4495" title="God in Christianity" label="Christian God"/>
<link wikidata="Q16546994" start="4516" end="4525" title="self-love" label="self-love"/>
<link wikidata="Q122398" start="4630" end="4639" title="Pelagianism" label="Pelagians"/>
<link wikidata="Q205194" start="4728" end="4743" title="Grace in Christianity" label="Christian grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478791" start="4961" end="4976" title="total depravity" label="total depravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="5177" end="5185" title="Irenaeus" label="Irenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364921" start="5187" end="5201" title="Bishop of Lyon" label="Bishop of Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310255" start="5234" end="5241" title="dualistic cosmology" label="dualist"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="5242" end="5250" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnostics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="5281" end="5290" title="Augustine" label="Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="5357" end="5370" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="5383" end="5399" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q48203" start="5401" end="5407" title="Epistle to the Romans" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q80355" start="5420" end="5433" title="First Epistle to the Corinthians" label="1 Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="5452" end="5465" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q41064" start="5475" end="5481" title="Psalms" label="Psalms"/>
<link wikidata="Q174929" start="5488" end="5498" title="Tertullian" label="Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q190240" start="5500" end="5507" title="Cyprian" label="Cyprian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43689" start="5509" end="5516" title="Ambrose" label="Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q689146" start="5521" end="5533" title="Ambrosiaster" label="Ambrosiaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="5619" end="5635" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="5695" end="5715" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant reformers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="5725" end="5738" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q37577" start="5743" end="5754" title="John Calvin" label="John Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781812" start="5786" end="5799" title="concupiscence" label="concupiscence"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="5872" end="5879" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60792396" start="6112" end="6135" title="Augustinian soteriology" label="Augustinian soteriology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287" start="6146" end="6155" title="Jansenism" label="Jansenist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="6262" end="6277" title="Free will" label="freedom of will"/>
<link wikidata="Q15633792" start="6350" end="6368" title="Methodist theology" label="Methodist theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384645" start="6416" end="6437" title="entire sanctification" label="entire sanctification"/>
<link wikidata="Q6032505" start="6490" end="6504" title="Islamic ethics" label="Islamic ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="6506" end="6512" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095353" start="6568" end="6571" title="God in Islam" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q234801" start="6573" end="6578" title="Allah" label="Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="6635" end="6640" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821239" start="6788" end="6804" title="Last Judgment" label="Day of Judgement"/>
<link wikidata="Q58418" start="6964" end="6972" title="jahannam" label="jahannam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="7224" end="7231" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q132994" start="8046" end="8056" title="Yom Kippur" label="Yom Kippur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325787" start="8224" end="8243" title="Eleazar ben Azariah" label="Eleazar ben Azariah"/>
<link wikidata="Q41490" start="8340" end="8357" title="Book of Leviticus" label="Book of Leviticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906600" start="8522" end="8528" title="Temple in Jerusalem" label="Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q928023" start="8572" end="8580" title="Korbanot" label="Korbanot"/>
<link wikidata="Q151618" start="9136" end="9143" title="Repentance in Judaism" label="repents"/>
<link wikidata="Q558093" start="9819" end="9827" title="Gehenna" label="gehinnom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541665" start="10226" end="10231" title="Tsumi" label="Tsumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127244" start="10595" end="10600" title="Harae" label="Harae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677831" start="10749" end="10759" title="Actual sin" label="Actual sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674" start="10762" end="10767" title="Devil" label="Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q14254438" start="10770" end="10788" title="Ethics in religion" label="Ethics in religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q223862" start="10791" end="10796" title="Haram" label="Haram"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005745" start="10799" end="10811" title="Internal sin" label="Internal sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="10814" end="10819" title="Crime" label="Crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q132196" start="10822" end="10827" title="Karma" label="Karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="10830" end="10838" title="Morality" label="Morality"/>
<link wikidata="Q670732" start="10841" end="10854" title="Religious law" label="Religious law"/>
<link wikidata="Q986507" start="10857" end="10869" title="Sin offering" label="Sin offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q171180" start="10872" end="10877" title="Taboo" label="Taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411242" start="10880" end="10884" title="Vice" label="Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998316" start="10887" end="10897" title="Wickedness" label="Wickedness"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28309" wikidata="Q188626" url="?curid=28309" title="Sonic Youth">
<text>Sonic Youth were an American rock band formed in New York City in 1981. Founding members Kim Gordon (bass, vocals, guitar), Thurston Moore (guitar, vocals) and Lee Ranaldo (guitar, vocals) remained together for the entire history of the band, while Steve Shelley (drums) followed a series of short-term drummers in 1985, rounding out the core line-up. Jim O&#x27;Rourke (bass, guitar, keyboards) was also a member of the band from 1999 to 2005, and Mark Ibold (bass, guitar) was a member from 2006 to 2011.

Sonic Youth emerged from the experimental no wave art and music scene in New York before evolving into a more conventional rock band and becoming a prominent member of the American noise rock scene. Sonic Youth have been praised for having &quot;redefined what rock guitar could do&quot; using a wide variety of unorthodox guitar tunings while preparing guitars with objects like drum sticks and screwdrivers to alter the instruments&#x27; timbre. The band was a pivotal influence on the alternative and indie rock movements.

After gaining a large underground following and critical praise through releases with SST Records in the late 1980s, the band experienced mainstream success throughout the 1990s and 2000s after signing to major label DGC in 1990 and headlining the 1995 Lollapalooza festival. The band disbanded in 2011 following the separation and subsequent divorce of Gordon and Moore with their final live shows taking place in Brazil. The members have since asserted that the band is finished and will not reunite.

== History ==
=== Formation and early history: 1977–1981 ===
Shortly after guitarist Thurston Moore moved to New York City in early 1977, he formed the group Room Tone with his roommates; they later changed their name to the Coachmen. After the breakup of the Coachmen, Moore began jamming with Stanton Miranda, whose band, CKM, featured Kim Gordon. Moore and Gordon formed a band, appearing under names like Male Bonding, Red Milk, and the Arcadians before settling on Sonic Youth in mid-1981. The name came from combining the nickname of MC5&#x27;s Fred &quot;Sonic&quot; Smith with reggae artist Big Youth. Gordon later recalled that &quot;as soon as Thurston came up with the name Sonic Youth, a certain sound that was more of what we wanted to do came about.&quot; The band played Noise Fest in June 1981 at New York&#x27;s White Columns gallery, where Lee Ranaldo was playing as a member of Glenn Branca&#x27;s electric guitar ensemble. Their performance impressed Moore, who described them as &quot;the most ferocious guitar band that I had ever seen in my life&quot;, and he invited Ranaldo to join Sonic Youth. The new trio played three songs at the festival later in the week without a drummer. Each band member took turns playing the drums, until they met drummer Richard Edson. Anne DeMarinis was in Sonic Youth for a brief period in 1981 as a keyboardist when they performed for the first time at the Noise Fest at the White Columns art space. She contributed vocals, along with Gordon and Moore, on three (known) Sonic Youth songs performed once, and only live on June 18, 1981. The songs are entitled &quot;Noisefest #1&quot;, &quot;Noisefest #2&quot;, and &quot;Noisefest #3&quot;. She also played guitar at that same show on the song entitled &quot;Noisefest #4&quot;. DeMarinis left the band before their self-titled debut EP was recorded in December 1981.

=== Early releases: 1982–1985 ===
Branca signed Sonic Youth as the first act on his record label Neutral Records. In December 1981 the group recorded five songs at New York&#x27;s Radio City Music Hall. The material was released as the EP &quot;Sonic Youth&quot; which&quot;,&quot; while largely ignored, was sent to a few key members of the American music press, who gave it uniformly favorable reviews. The album featured a relatively conventional post-punk style, in contrast to their later releases. Edson then quit the group for an acting career and was replaced by Bob Bert.

During their early days as part of the New York music scene, Sonic Youth formed a friendship with fellow New York noise rock band Swans. The bands shared a rehearsal space, and Sonic Youth embarked on its first tour in November 1982 supporting Swans. During a second tour with Swans the following month, tensions ran high and Moore constantly criticized Bert&#x27;s drumming, which he felt was not &quot;in the pocket&quot;. Bert was fired afterwards and replaced by Jim Sclavunos, who played drums on the band&#x27;s first studio album, 1983&#x27;s &quot;Confusion Is Sex&quot;, which featured a louder and more dissonant sound than their debut EP. Sonic Youth set up a tour of Europe for the summer of 1983. Sclavunos, however, quit the band after only a few months. The group asked Bert to rejoin, and he agreed on the condition that he would not be fired again after the tour&#x27;s conclusion. Bert went on to play on the band&#x27;s &quot;Kill Yr Idols&quot; EP later in 1983.

Sonic Youth were well received in Europe, but the New York press largely ignored the local noise rock scene. Eventually, as the press began to take notice of the genre, Sonic Youth was grouped with bands like Big Black, the Butthole Surfers, and Pussy Galore under the &quot;pigfucker&quot; label by &quot;Village Voice&quot; editor Robert Christgau. Another critic from &quot;The Village Voice&quot; panned a substandard September concert in New York. Gordon wrote a scornful letter to the newspaper, criticizing it for not supporting its local music scene, to which Christgau responded that the paper was not obligated to support them. Moore retaliated by renaming the song &quot;Kill Yr Idols&quot; to &quot;I Killed Christgau with My Big Fucking Dick&quot;, before the two eventually sorted out their differences amicably.

Closing a second European tour in late 1983, Sonic Youth&#x27;s disastrous London debut saw the band&#x27;s equipment malfunction and Moore destroying it onstage in frustration. When they returned to New York they were so popular that they were able to book local gigs regularly. The following year, Moore and Gordon were married, and Sonic Youth recorded &quot;Bad Moon Rising&quot;, a self-described &quot;Americana&quot; album that served as a reaction to the state of the nation at the time. The album, recorded by Martin Bisi, was built around transitional pieces that Moore and Ranaldo had come up with in order to take up time onstage during tuning breaks; as a result, there are almost no gaps between the songs on the records. &quot;Bad Moon Rising&quot; featured an appearance by Lydia Lunch in &quot;Death Valley &#x27;69&quot;, which was inspired by the Charles Manson Family murders.

Due to a falling-out with Branca over disputed royalty payments from their Neutral releases, Sonic Youth signed with Homestead Records in the US and Blast First in the UK (which founder Paul Smith created simply so he could distribute the band&#x27;s records in Europe). While the New York press ignored &quot;Bad Moon Rising&quot; upon its 1985 release, now viewing the band as too arty and pretentious, Sonic Youth gained critical acclaim in the United Kingdom, where the new album sold 5,000 copies.

Claiming he was bored with playing &quot;Bad Moon Rising&quot; live in its entirety for over a year, Bert quit the group and was replaced by Steve Shelley, formerly of the punk group the Crucifucks. Sonic Youth was so impressed with Shelley&#x27;s drumming after seeing him play live that they hired him without an audition. Bert and Shelley both appeared in the music video for &quot;Death Valley &#x27;69&quot;, as Bert had performed the drums on the song, but Shelley was the group&#x27;s drummer when the video was filmed.

=== SST and Enigma: 1986–1989 ===
Sonic Youth had long appreciated SST Records; Ranaldo said, &quot;It was the first record company we were on that we really would have given anything to be on.&quot; Sonic Youth signed with the label in early 1986 and began recording &quot;EVOL&quot; with Martin Bisi. The band gained national attention when signing with SST, making them the first band from the New York underground to gain such notice. The mainstream music press subsequently began to take notice of the band. Robert Palmer of &quot;The New York Times&quot; declared that Sonic Youth was &quot;making the most startlingly original guitar-based music since Jimi Hendrix&quot; and even &quot;People&quot; reviewed &quot;EVOL&quot;, describing the album as the &quot;aural equivalent of a toxic waste dump.&quot; The album was later called &quot;a classic&quot; by Neil Young.

Around the same time, the band collaborated with Mike Watt under the alias Ciccone Youth, which was a play on the names Sonic Youth and Ciccone, the surname of pop singer Madonna. Sonic Youth released a single in 1986 and a studio album in 1988 under the Ciccone Youth name. The 1986 single, &quot;Into the Groove(y)&quot;, was a cover of Madonna&#x27;s &quot;Into the Groove&quot; and was preceded by &quot;Tuff Titty Rap&quot;. The flip side of the record was Watt&#x27;s cover of Madonna&#x27;s &quot;Burning Up&quot; which had the altered title of &quot;Burnin&#x27; Up&quot;. &quot;The Whitey Album&quot; included both Sonic Youth songs from the single plus a demo version of &quot;Burnin&#x27; Up&quot;. The album also contained a cover of Robert Palmer&#x27;s &quot;Addicted to Love&quot; which was recorded in a karaoke booth.

The 1987 Sonic Youth album &quot;Sister&quot; was a loose concept album partly inspired by the life and works of science fiction writer Philip K. Dick. The &quot;sister&quot; of the title was Dick&#x27;s fraternal twin, who died shortly after her birth and whose memory haunted Dick his entire life. &quot;Sister&quot; sold 60,000 copies and received very positive reviews, becoming the first Sonic Youth album to crack the Top 20 of the &quot;Village Voice&quot;&#x27;s Pazz &amp; Jop critics poll.

Despite their critical success, the band became dissatisfied with SST due to concerns about payments and other administrative practices. Sonic Youth decided to release their next record on Enigma Records, which was distributed by Capitol Records and partly owned by EMI. The 1988 double LP &quot;Daydream Nation&quot; was a critical success that earned Sonic Youth substantial acclaim. The album came in second on the &quot;Village Voice&quot; Pazz &amp; Jop poll and topped the year-end album lists at &quot;NME&quot;, &quot;CMJ&quot;, and &quot;Melody Maker&quot;. In 2005, it was one of 50 recordings chosen by the Library of Congress to be added to the National Recording Registry. The lead single from the album, &quot;Teen Age Riot&quot;, was their first song to receive significant airplay on modern rock and college rock stations, reaching number 20 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Modern Rock Tracks chart. A number of prominent music periodicals including &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; hailed &quot;Daydream Nation&quot; as one of the best albums of the decade and named Sonic Youth as the &quot;Hot Band&quot; in its &quot;Hot&quot; issue. Unfortunately, distribution problems arose and &quot;Daydream Nation&quot; was often difficult to find in stores. Moore considered Enigma a &quot;cheap-jack Mafioso outfit&quot; and the band began looking for a major label deal.

=== Major label career and becoming alternative icons: 1990–1999 ===

In 1990, Sonic Youth released &quot;Goo&quot;, their first album for Geffen. The album featured the single &quot;Kool Thing&quot; on which Public Enemy&#x27;s Chuck D made a guest appearance. The record was considered much more accessible than their previous works and became the band&#x27;s best-selling record to date.

In 1992, the band released &quot;Dirty&quot; on the DGC label. Their influence as tastemakers continued with their discovery of acclaimed skateboard video director Spike Jonze, who they recruited for the video for &quot;100%&quot;, which also featured skateboarder turned actor Jason Lee. That song and &quot;JC&quot; discuss the murder of Joe Cole, a friend who worked with Black Flag as a roadie. The album features artwork by Los Angeles–based artist Mike Kelley. &quot;Dirty&quot; features a guest appearance by Ian MacKaye on the track &quot;Youth Against Fascism&quot;. In 1993, the band contributed the track &quot;Burning Spear&quot; to the AIDS benefit album &quot;No Alternative&quot;, produced by the Red Hot Organization.

In 1994, the band released &quot;Experimental Jet Set, Trash and No Star&quot;, their best-charting release in the United States to date at No. 34 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. Moore and Gordon&#x27;s daughter, Coco Hayley Moore, was born later that year, and many of the songs from the album were never played live because there was never a full tour to support the album due to Gordon&#x27;s pregnancy. In 1994, the band released a cover of the Carpenters&#x27; 1971 hit &quot;Superstar&quot; for the tribute album &quot;If I Were a Carpenter&quot;. The band headlined the 1995 Lollapalooza festival with Hole and Pavement. By that time, alternative rock had gained considerable mainstream attention, and the festival was parodied in &quot;The Simpsons&quot; episode &quot;Homerpalooza&quot; in 1996, which featured voiceovers from the band. They also performed the final credits theme for that episode.

The album &quot;Washing Machine&quot; was released in 1995 and represented a shift in Sonic Youth&#x27;s sound, away from their punk rock roots and toward experimental and longer jam-based arrangements. Starting in 1997 they released a series of improvisational albums grouped under the title &quot;SYR&quot; with song titles and liner notes in various languages. &quot;SYR3: Invito al ĉielo,&quot; released in 1998, featured Jim O&#x27;Rourke who later became an official band member. Various songs from the &quot;SYR&quot; series were added to Sonic Youth&#x27;s live performances, and others inspired tracks on the next proper Sonic Youth album, &quot;A Thousand Leaves&quot;, released in 1998.

=== Later DGC period: 2000–2006 ===

On July 4, 1999, Sonic Youth&#x27;s instruments and stage equipment were stolen during a tour in Orange County, California. Almost 30 guitars and basses were stolen; some were recovered over the next 13 years. Forced to start from scratch with new instruments, they released the album &quot;NYC Ghosts &amp; Flowers&quot; in 2000 and opened for Pearl Jam during the east coast leg of that band&#x27;s 2000 tour.

In 2001, Sonic Youth collaborated with French avant-garde singer and poet Brigitte Fontaine on her album &quot;Kékéland&quot;. The following year, Sonic Youth participated in the first outing of the All Tomorrow&#x27;s Parties music festival and curating the ensuing compilation album. The album &quot;Murray Street&quot; was released in 2002 and saw the addition of Jim O&#x27;Rourke as a full-time member on guitar, bass, and keyboards. During this period the band participated in the production of the documentary film &quot;Kill Your Idols&quot;, directed and produced by Scott Crary and covering the history of punk rock in New York City. The film was released in 2004.

In 2003 Sonic Youth released a split 7-inch single with Erase Errata. The next Sonic Youth album, &quot;Sonic Nurse&quot;, was also released in 2004. The band was slated to perform in the 2004 Lollapalooza tour along with acts such as the Pixies and the Flaming Lips, but the tour was canceled due to lackluster ticket sales. O&#x27;Rourke departed in 2006 and was replaced by bassist Mark Ibold for touring purposes, but Ibold later became a full-time member. He had earlier been part of Pavement and worked with Gordon in Free Kitten.
&quot;Rather Ripped&quot; was released in 2006 and was noted as a return to the band&#x27;s earlier sound, due both to the departure of O&#x27;Rourke and the recovery of some of the instruments that had been stolen in 1999. On May 9, 2006, Kim and Thurston made a special guest appearance on WB teen drama show “Gilmore Girls” (season 6, episode 22), performing an acoustic version of their new song, “What a Waste”, alongside their daughter Coco. Sonic Youth played the Bonnaroo Festival later that year. In December 2006 they released &quot;The Destroyed Room: B-Sides and Rarities&quot;. The compilation featured tracks previously available only on vinyl, tracks from limited-release compilations, B-sides to international singles, and some material that had never before been released. This marked the band&#x27;s final Geffen release.

=== Matador period: 2007–2011 ===

In 2007, the band became one of the earliest big-name rock bands to play in China when they were brought in for a tour by the music company Split Works. In 2008 they released a compilation album on Starbucks Music, called &quot;Hits Are for Squares&quot;, with the tracks selected by other celebrities. Later in 2008, Sonic Youth ended their relationship with Geffen, due to dissatisfaction with how the label had promoted their last several albums. They then signed with independent label Matador Records, which released the album &quot;The Eternal&quot; in 2009. During this period they collaborated with John Paul Jones on the soundtrack for a performance at Merce Cunningham Dance Company to honor the company&#x27;s founder. In 2010 the band scored and composed the soundtrack of the French thriller-drama &quot;Simon Werner a Disparu&quot;, which premiered at the Cannes International Film Festival. The soundtrack was released in 2011 as &quot;SYR9: Simon Werner a Disparu&quot;, an entry in experimental &quot;SYR&quot; series.

=== Disbandment: 2011–2013===

On October 14, 2011, Kim Gordon and Thurston Moore announced that they had separated after 27 years of marriage. Sonic Youth&#x27;s label Matador explained that plans for the band remained &quot;uncertain&quot;, despite previously hinting that they would record new material later in the year. Sonic Youth performed their final concert on November 14, 2011, at the SWU Music &amp; Arts Festival in Itu, São Paulo, Brazil. The following week, Lee Ranaldo stated in an interview that Sonic Youth would be &quot;ending for a while&quot;.

===Post-disbandment activities: 2013–present===
In November 2013, Ranaldo said in response to the question of a possible reunion, &quot;I fear not. Everybody is busy with their own projects, besides that Thurston and Kim aren&#x27;t getting along together very well since their split… Let [the band] rest in peace.&quot; Thurston Moore updated and clarified the matter in May 2014: &quot;Sonic Youth is on hiatus. The band is a democracy of sorts, and as long as Kim and I are working out our situation, the band can&#x27;t really function reasonably.&quot; In her 2015 autobiography &quot;Girl in a Band&quot;, Gordon refers several times to the band having &quot;split up&quot; for good.

In 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic, Sonic Youth sold official face masks based on the artwork from the album &quot;Sonic Nurse&quot;, with proceeds going to charities Brooklyn Community Bail Fund, Bed Stuy Strong, and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez&#x27;s COVID-19 Relief Fund. The same year, an extensive archive of live recordings from throughout the band&#x27;s history was released on Bandcamp.&lt;br&gt;

In January 2022, a new single &quot;In &amp; Out&quot; was released ahead of the March release of the rarities EP &quot;In/out/In&quot;. The five-track EP featured previously unissued outtakes recorded between 2000 and 2010.

In October 2023, &quot;Sonic Life: A Memoir&quot;, a memoir written by Thurston Moore, was published by Doubleday.

== Musical style and influences ==
Sonic Youth is considered a pioneering band in the noise rock and alternative rock genres. Their music has also been labelled experimental rock, indie rock, post-punk and art rock. The band&#x27;s releases have been described as &quot;genre-defying.&quot; Andrew Daly of &quot;Guitar World&quot; wrote, &quot;Lee Ranaldo and Thurston Moore sought to tear down the idea of guitar-driven music completely. [...] The pair&#x27;s viewpoint on their instruments was fresh, vivid and untethered to all established norms.&quot;

=== Alternative tunings ===

Sonic Youth&#x27;s sound relied heavily on the use of alternative tunings. Guitarist Thruston Moore is quoted saying, &quot;when you&#x27;re playing in standard tuning all the time, you&#x27;re sounding pretty...standard.&quot; Scordatura on stringed instruments has been used for centuries and alternative guitar tunings had been used for decades in blues music, and to a limited degree in rock music (such as with Lou Reed&#x27;s Ostrich guitar on &quot;The Velvet Underground &amp; Nico&quot;). Michael Azerrad writes that early in their career, &quot;[Sonic Youth] could only afford cheap guitars, and cheap guitars &quot;sounded&quot; like cheap guitars. But with weird tunings or something jammed under a particular fret, those humble instruments could sound rather amazing – bang a drum stick on a cheap Japanese Stratocaster copy in the right tuning, crank the amplifier to within an inch of its life and it will sound like church bells.&quot;

The tunings were painstakingly developed by Moore and Ranaldo during the band&#x27;s rehearsals; Moore once reported that the odd tunings were an attempt to introduce new sounds: &quot;When you&#x27;re playing in standard tuning all the time [...] things sound pretty standard.&quot; Rather than re-tune for every song, Sonic Youth generally used a particular guitar for one or two songs, and would take dozens of instruments on tour. This would be the source of much trouble for the band, as live performances of many songs relied on specific guitars that have been uniquely prepared or otherwise altered for those exact songs.
=== Influences ===
Sonic Youth was heavily influenced by the Velvet Underground, the Stooges, MC5, Glenn Branca, Rhys Chatham, Ornette Coleman, John Coltrane, La Monte Young, Neil Young, Yoko Ono, French avant-gardist Brigitte Fontaine, Patti Smith, Wire, and Public Image Ltd.

The band was also influenced by 1980s hardcore punk; after seeing Minor Threat perform in May 1982, Moore declared them &quot;the greatest live band I have ever seen&quot;. He also saw the Faith performing in 1981 and had a strong admiration towards their records. While recognizing that their own music was very different from hardcore, Moore and Gordon, especially, were impressed by hardcore&#x27;s speed and intensity, and by the nationwide network of musicians and fans. &quot;It was great&quot;, said Moore, &quot;the whole thing with slam dancing and stage diving, that was far more exciting than pogoing and spitting. [...] I thought hardcore was very musical and very radical.&quot;

Moore and Ranaldo expressed on numerous occasions their admiration for the music of Joni Mitchell, such as this quote by Thurston Moore: &quot;Joni Mitchell! I&#x27;ve used elements of her songwriting and guitar playing, and no one would ever know about it.&quot; Additionally, as with Sonic Youth, Joni Mitchell has always used a number of alternative tunings. The band named a song after her, &quot;Hey Joni&quot;. Members of the band have also maintained relationships with other avant-garde artists from other genres and even other media, drawing influence from the work of John Cage and Henry Cowell.

== Legacy and influence ==
Sonic Youth&#x27;s influence is widespread across the spectrum of alternative and underground music. The staff of &quot;Spin&quot; wrote, &quot;It’s hard to imagine where we would be without Sonic Youth. It’s unlikely another smart post-punk band founded around the same time — Big Black, the Meat Puppets — could have delivered us from hardcore’s fury quite the same way. What would indie rock sound like if Sonic Youth’s sublime din hadn’t enchanted and derailed all the college rock bands of the mid-’80s? We would have only been left with a bunch of sanguine Feelies rip offs, never having the chance to divulge a crush via careful mixtape placement of “Shadow of A Doubt.&quot; Jeff Terich of &quot;Stereogum&quot; wrote, &quot;No artist did more for noise rock’s reputation — or for that matter noise’s reputation — than Sonic Youth. They brought it to a wider audience, made a handful of hit alt-rock singles out of it, crashed grunge as it was happening, and became a beloved institution, despite the fact that the bulk of their catalog features some pretty weird stuff. [...] Their noise wasn’t just unique — no other band could replicate it.&quot; Heather Phares of &quot;AllMusic&quot; wrote, &quot;As they redefined what noise meant within rock &amp; roll -- and what success meant for a band with experimental roots -- Sonic Youth became one of the most influential, and popular, acts to emerge from the American underground. Their inventive use of alternate tunings, dissonance, and feedback, which they combined with the intensity of hardcore punk and the performance art aesthetic of New York&#x27;s avant-garde, created a new sonic landscape with an impact that lasted for decades.&quot;

Stephen Malkmus, frontman of indie rock band Pavement, drew inspiration from Sonic Youth for his guitar technique, and has credited the band with giving him &quot;the idea and courage&quot; to explore alternate tunings. Sleater-Kinney have also cited Sonic Youth as an influence, particularly on their detuned guitar sound. Swervedriver frontman Adam Franklin has stated that he plays Fender Jazzmasters in part because the members of Sonic Youth favored them. Other bands and artists who have cited Sonic Youth as an influence include Mauro Pezzente of Godspeed You! Black Emperor, Shane Embury of Napalm Death, Slowdive, Dinosaur Jr., Teenage Fanclub, Mogwai, Placebo frontman Brian Molko, Quicksand and Rival Schools frontman Walter Schreifels, Ride, Jawbreaker, ...And You Will Know Us by the Trail of Dead, Polvo, Something for Kate, Superchunk, Metz, Jawbox, Pg. 99, and Treepeople.

== Members ==

=== Final lineup ===

* Kim Gordon – vocals, bass, guitar (1981–2011)
* Thurston Moore – vocals, guitar (1981–2011)
* Lee Ranaldo – guitar, vocals (1981–2011)
* Steve Shelley – drums (1985–2011)
* Mark Ibold – bass, guitar (2006–2011)

=== Former members ===

* Richard Edson – drums (1981–1982)
* Bob Bert – drums (1982, 1983–1985)
* Jim Sclavunos – drums (1982–1983)
* Jim O&#x27;Rourke – bass, guitar, synthesizer (1999–2005)

==== Timeline ====

== Discography ==
===Studio albums===
* &quot;Confusion Is Sex&quot; (1983)
* &quot;Bad Moon Rising&quot; (1985)
* &quot;EVOL&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Sister&quot; (1987)
* &quot;Daydream Nation&quot; (1988)
* &quot;The Whitey Album&quot; (1989, as Ciccone Youth)
* &quot;Goo&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Dirty&quot; (1992)
* &quot;Experimental Jet Set, Trash and No Star&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Washing Machine&quot; (1995)
* &quot;A Thousand Leaves&quot; (1998)
* &quot;NYC Ghosts &amp; Flowers&quot; (2000)
* &quot;Murray Street&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Sonic Nurse&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Rather Ripped&quot; (2006)
* &quot;The Eternal&quot; (2009)

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="0" end="11" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="49" end="62" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q240570" start="89" end="99" title="Kim Gordon" label="Kim Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q505677" start="124" end="138" title="Thurston Moore" label="Thurston Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q352087" start="160" end="171" title="Lee Ranaldo" label="Lee Ranaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q540095" start="249" end="262" title="Steve Shelley" label="Steve Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q547373" start="352" end="369" title="Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke (musician)" label="Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233826" start="449" end="459" title="Mark Ibold" label="Mark Ibold"/>
<link wikidata="Q823080" start="550" end="557" title="no wave" label="no wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q181861" start="689" end="699" title="noise rock" label="noise rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053427" start="820" end="845" title="scordatura" label="unorthodox guitar tunings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808766" start="852" end="869" title="prepared guitar" label="preparing guitars"/>
<link wikidata="Q176501" start="948" end="954" title="timbre" label="timbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="996" end="1007" title="alternative rock" label="alternative"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="1012" end="1022" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q639182" start="1121" end="1132" title="SST Records" label="SST Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311775" start="1252" end="1255" title="DGC Records" label="DGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q889643" start="1288" end="1300" title="Lollapalooza" label="Lollapalooza"/>
<link wikidata="Q505677" start="1624" end="1638" title="Thurston Moore" label="Thurston Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600255" start="1834" end="1849" title="Stanton Miranda" label="Stanton Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q240570" start="1877" end="1887" title="Kim Gordon" label="Kim Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q830316" start="2079" end="2082" title="MC5" label="MC5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615615" start="2090" end="2118" title="Fred &amp;quot;Sonic&amp;quot; Smith" label="Fred &amp;quot;Sonic&amp;quot; Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="2124" end="2130" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q794747" start="2138" end="2147" title="Big Youth" label="Big Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016523" start="2325" end="2335" title="Noise Fest" label="Noise Fest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12072840" start="2368" end="2381" title="White Columns" label="White Columns"/>
<link wikidata="Q352087" start="2397" end="2408" title="Lee Ranaldo" label="Lee Ranaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q433661" start="2436" end="2448" title="Glenn Branca" label="Glenn Branca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377218" start="2814" end="2827" title="Richard Edson" label="Richard Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016523" start="2953" end="2963" title="Noise Fest" label="Noise Fest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12072840" start="2971" end="2984" title="White Columns" label="White Columns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343791" start="3362" end="3382" title="Sonic Youth (album)" label="self-titled debut EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394853" start="3512" end="3527" title="Neutral Records" label="Neutral Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q753437" start="3595" end="3616" title="Radio City Music Hall" label="Radio City Music Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343791" start="3660" end="3671" title="Sonic Youth (EP)" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517950" start="3986" end="3994" title="Bob Bert" label="Bob Bert"/>
<link wikidata="Q573017" start="4127" end="4132" title="Swans (band)" label="Swans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129816" start="4464" end="4477" title="Jim Sclavunos" label="Jim Sclavunos"/>
<link wikidata="Q240971" start="4553" end="4569" title="Confusion Is Sex" label="Confusion Is Sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630525" start="4942" end="4955" title="Kill Yr Idols" label="Kill Yr Idols"/>
<link wikidata="Q181861" start="5072" end="5082" title="noise rock" label="noise rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q572821" start="5190" end="5199" title="Big Black" label="Big Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018174" start="5205" end="5221" title="Butthole Surfers" label="Butthole Surfers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712704" start="5227" end="5239" title="Pussy Galore (band)" label="Pussy Galore"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="5287" end="5300" title="Village Voice" label="Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q314382" start="5314" end="5330" title="Robert Christgau" label="Robert Christgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630525" start="5663" end="5676" title="Kill Yr Idols" label="Kill Yr Idols"/>
<link wikidata="Q926653" start="6171" end="6186" title="Bad Moon Rising (album)" label="Bad Moon Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407862" start="6217" end="6226" title="Americana (music)" label="Americana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775009" start="6328" end="6339" title="Martin Bisi" label="Martin Bisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q261990" start="6599" end="6610" title="Lydia Lunch" label="Lydia Lunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656245" start="6620" end="6641" title="Death Valley &amp;#x27;69" label="Death Valley &amp;#x27;69"/>
<link wikidata="Q485508" start="6675" end="6689" title="Charles Manson" label="Charles Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626081" start="6824" end="6841" title="Homestead Records" label="Homestead Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906225" start="6856" end="6867" title="Blast First" label="Blast First"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153676" start="6893" end="6903" title="Paul Smith (music industry)" label="Paul Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q540095" start="7352" end="7365" title="Steve Shelley" label="Steve Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="7383" end="7387" title="punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728264" start="7394" end="7408" title="the Crucifucks" label="the Crucifucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q639182" start="7806" end="7817" title="SST Records" label="SST Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q993982" start="8013" end="8017" title="Evol (Sonic Youth album)" label="EVOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775009" start="8029" end="8040" title="Martin Bisi" label="Martin Bisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="8275" end="8293" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="8398" end="8410" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="8432" end="8438" title="People (American magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042630" start="8528" end="8539" title="toxic waste" label="toxic waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q633" start="8604" end="8614" title="Neil Young" label="Neil Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q924668" start="8666" end="8675" title="Mike Watt" label="Mike Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="8788" end="8795" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8818" end="8826" title="The Whitey Album#1986 Ciccone Youth single" label="a single"/>
<link wikidata="Q787444" start="8839" end="8853" title="The Whitey Album" label="a studio album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458640" start="8977" end="8992" title="Into the Groove" label="Into the Groove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034649" start="9121" end="9131" title="Burning Up (Madonna song)" label="Burning Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q787444" start="9204" end="9220" title="The Whitey Album" label="The Whitey Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q325412" start="9363" end="9376" title="Robert Palmer" label="Robert Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q352920" start="9390" end="9406" title="Addicted to Love (song)" label="Addicted to Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q229345" start="9437" end="9444" title="karaoke" label="karaoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q941771" start="9486" end="9492" title="Sister (Sonic Youth album)" label="Sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q171091" start="9589" end="9603" title="Philip K. Dick" label="Philip K. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q159979" start="9657" end="9671" title="fraternal twin" label="fraternal twin"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="9897" end="9910" title="Village Voice" label="Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123266" start="10143" end="10157" title="Enigma Records" label="Enigma Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="10184" end="10199" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="10220" end="10223" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q902833" start="10250" end="10265" title="Daydream Nation" label="Daydream Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012897" start="10480" end="10483" title="CMJ" label="CMJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="10501" end="10513" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="10572" end="10591" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q253299" start="10611" end="10638" title="National Recording Registry" label="National Recording Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656254" start="10678" end="10691" title="Teen Age Riot" label="Teen Age Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="10841" end="10859" title="Modern Rock Tracks" label="Modern Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="10923" end="10936" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011916" start="11434" end="11437" title="Goo (album)" label="Goo"/>
<link wikidata="Q212699" start="11467" end="11473" title="Geffen Records" label="Geffen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468101" start="11511" end="11521" title="Kool Thing" label="Kool Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q209182" start="11537" end="11556" title="Public Enemy (band)" label="Public Enemy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q733373" start="11557" end="11564" title="Chuck D" label="Chuck D"/>
<link wikidata="Q531154" start="11753" end="11758" title="Dirty (Sonic Youth album)" label="Dirty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311775" start="11772" end="11775" title="DGC Records" label="DGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15783" start="11858" end="11868" title="skateboard" label="skateboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="11869" end="11874" title="music video" label="video"/>
<link wikidata="Q259913" start="11884" end="11895" title="Spike Jonze" label="Spike Jonze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806620" start="11940" end="11944" title="100% (Sonic Youth song)" label="100%"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960" start="11998" end="12007" title="Jason Lee (actor)" label="Jason Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q30826393" start="12050" end="12068" title="murder of Joe Cole" label="murder of Joe Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q543294" start="12174" end="12185" title="Mike Kelley (artist)" label="Mike Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q455545" start="12236" end="12247" title="Ian MacKaye" label="Ian MacKaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043962" start="12394" end="12408" title="No Alternative" label="No Alternative"/>
<link wikidata="Q748704" start="12432" end="12452" title="Red Hot Organization" label="Red Hot Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301964" start="12488" end="12527" title="Experimental Jet Set, Trash and No Star" label="Experimental Jet Set, Trash and No Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="12609" end="12634" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q223495" start="12902" end="12916" title="the Carpenters" label="the Carpenters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122411" start="12938" end="12947" title="Superstar (Carpenters song)" label="Superstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q262600" start="12982" end="13003" title="If I Were a Carpenter (tribute album)" label="If I Were a Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q889643" start="13039" end="13051" title="Lollapalooza" label="Lollapalooza"/>
<link wikidata="Q624790" start="13066" end="13070" title="Hole (band)" label="Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q922445" start="13075" end="13083" title="Pavement (band)" label="Pavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="13201" end="13213" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q602839" start="13234" end="13246" title="Homerpalooza" label="Homerpalooza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931691" start="13382" end="13397" title="Washing Machine (album)" label="Washing Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095173" start="13545" end="13554" title="Jam band" label="jam-based"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13736" end="13757" title="SYR3: Invito al ĉielo" label="SYR3: Invito al ĉielo"/>
<link wikidata="Q547373" start="13792" end="13809" title="Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke (musician)" label="Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931785" start="14021" end="14038" title="A Thousand Leaves" label="A Thousand Leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925" start="14199" end="14212" title="Orange County, California" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931631" start="14393" end="14417" title="NYC Ghosts &amp;amp; Flowers" label="NYC Ghosts &amp;amp; Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="14447" end="14456" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q563" start="14589" end="14606" title="Brigitte Fontaine" label="Brigitte Fontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3201097" start="14626" end="14634" title="Kékéland" label="Kékéland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941020" start="14714" end="14741" title="All Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s Parties (music festival)" label="All Tomorrow&amp;#x27;s Parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931751" start="14817" end="14830" title="Murray Street (album)" label="Murray Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252237" start="15043" end="15058" title="Kill Your Idols (film)" label="Kill Your Idols"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436189" start="15091" end="15102" title="Scott Crary" label="Scott Crary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384901" start="15247" end="15259" title="Erase Errata" label="Erase Errata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931774" start="15295" end="15306" title="Sonic Nurse" label="Sonic Nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q889643" start="15384" end="15396" title="Lollapalooza" label="Lollapalooza"/>
<link wikidata="Q188464" start="15426" end="15436" title="Pixies (band)" label="the Pixies"/>
<link wikidata="Q523184" start="15441" end="15457" title="the Flaming Lips" label="the Flaming Lips"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233826" start="15576" end="15586" title="Mark Ibold" label="Mark Ibold"/>
<link wikidata="Q922445" start="15680" end="15688" title="Pavement (band)" label="Pavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405560" start="15715" end="15726" title="Free Kitten" label="Free Kitten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931679" start="15734" end="15747" title="Rather Ripped" label="Rather Ripped"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984221" start="16199" end="16216" title="Bonnaroo Festival" label="Bonnaroo Festival"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16271" end="16311" title="The Destroyed Room: B-Sides and Rarities" label="The Destroyed Room: B-Sides and Rarities"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="16380" end="16385" title="gramophone record" label="vinyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="16429" end="16436" title="A-side and B-side" label="B-sides"/>
<link wikidata="Q17239823" start="16744" end="16755" title="Split Works" label="Split Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q37158" start="16802" end="16817" title="Starbucks" label="Starbucks Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421346" start="16832" end="16852" title="Hits Are for Squares" label="Hits Are for Squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q212699" start="16964" end="16970" title="Geffen Records" label="Geffen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327994" start="17094" end="17109" title="Matador Records" label="Matador Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931611" start="17142" end="17153" title="The Eternal (album)" label="The Eternal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190243" start="17211" end="17226" title="John Paul Jones (musician)" label="John Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q318364" start="17266" end="17296" title="Merce Cunningham Dance Company" label="Merce Cunningham Dance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471731" start="17421" end="17443" title="Lights Out (2010 film)" label="Simon Werner a Disparu"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="17474" end="17508" title="Cannes International Film Festival" label="Cannes International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17555" end="17583" title="SYR9: Simon Werner a Disparu" label="SYR9: Simon Werner a Disparu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395214" start="18037" end="18057" title="SWU Music &amp;amp; Arts" label="SWU Music &amp;amp; Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q957653" start="18070" end="18084" title="Itu, São Paulo" label="Itu, São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19902665" start="18798" end="18812" title="Girl in a Band" label="Girl in a Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="18918" end="18935" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q55223040" start="19119" end="19143" title="Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez" label="Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19554" end="19574" title="Sonic Life: A Memoir" label="Sonic Life: A Memoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251563" start="19635" end="19644" title="Doubleday (publisher)" label="Doubleday"/>
<link wikidata="Q181861" start="19733" end="19743" title="noise rock" label="noise rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="19748" end="19764" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641839" start="19808" end="19825" title="experimental rock" label="experimental rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="19827" end="19837" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q598929" start="19839" end="19848" title="post-punk" label="post-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q217467" start="19853" end="19861" title="art rock" label="art rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q930471" start="19959" end="19971" title="Guitar World" label="Guitar World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818058" start="20287" end="20306" title="Alternate tunings" label="alternative tunings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053427" start="20461" end="20471" title="Scordatura" label="Scordatura"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="20584" end="20589" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q189080" start="20649" end="20657" title="Lou Reed" label="Lou Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q643627" start="20665" end="20679" title="Ostrich guitar" label="Ostrich guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q259667" start="20689" end="20722" title="The Velvet Underground &amp;amp; Nico" label="The Velvet Underground &amp;amp; Nico"/>
<link wikidata="Q636309" start="20955" end="20959" title="fret" label="fret"/>
<link wikidata="Q208173" start="21053" end="21065" title="Stratocaster" label="Stratocaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808766" start="21762" end="21770" title="prepared guitar" label="prepared"/>
<link wikidata="Q103550" start="21876" end="21894" title="Velvet Underground" label="Velvet Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q208767" start="21896" end="21907" title="the Stooges" label="the Stooges"/>
<link wikidata="Q830316" start="21909" end="21912" title="MC5" label="MC5"/>
<link wikidata="Q433661" start="21914" end="21926" title="Glenn Branca" label="Glenn Branca"/>
<link wikidata="Q554780" start="21928" end="21940" title="Rhys Chatham" label="Rhys Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q208797" start="21942" end="21957" title="Ornette Coleman" label="Ornette Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346" start="21959" end="21972" title="John Coltrane" label="John Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q432822" start="21974" end="21988" title="La Monte Young" label="La Monte Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q633" start="21990" end="22000" title="Neil Young" label="Neil Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q117012" start="22002" end="22010" title="Yoko Ono" label="Yoko Ono"/>
<link wikidata="Q563" start="22033" end="22050" title="Brigitte Fontaine" label="Brigitte Fontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q557" start="22052" end="22063" title="Patti Smith" label="Patti Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135620" start="22065" end="22069" title="Wire (band)" label="Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q845265" start="22075" end="22091" title="Public Image Ltd" label="Public Image Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="22132" end="22145" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q81509" start="22160" end="22172" title="Minor Threat" label="Minor Threat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291238" start="22279" end="22288" title="The Faith (American band)" label="the Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463560" start="22635" end="22647" title="moshing" label="slam dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069643" start="22652" end="22664" title="stage diving" label="stage diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q840880" start="22698" end="22705" title="pogoing" label="pogoing"/>
<link wikidata="Q205721" start="22871" end="22884" title="Joni Mitchell" label="Joni Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q180727" start="23365" end="23374" title="John Cage" label="John Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q434610" start="23379" end="23391" title="Henry Cowell" label="Henry Cowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="23535" end="23551" title="Spin (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Spin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532689" start="24125" end="24134" title="Stereogum" label="Stereogum"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="24603" end="24611" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q282877" start="25127" end="25142" title="Stephen Malkmus" label="Stephen Malkmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="25156" end="25166" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q922445" start="25172" end="25180" title="Pavement (band)" label="Pavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891322" start="25347" end="25361" title="Sleater-Kinney" label="Sleater-Kinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q924292" start="25451" end="25463" title="Swervedriver" label="Swervedriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679070" start="25473" end="25486" title="Adam Franklin" label="Adam Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162697" start="25512" end="25530" title="Fender Jazzmaster" label="Fender Jazzmasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793918" start="25663" end="25677" title="Mauro Pezzente" label="Mauro Pezzente"/>
<link wikidata="Q181341" start="25681" end="25708" title="Godspeed You! Black Emperor" label="Godspeed You! Black Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q981856" start="25710" end="25722" title="Shane Embury" label="Shane Embury"/>
<link wikidata="Q321762" start="25726" end="25738" title="Napalm Death" label="Napalm Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502037" start="25740" end="25748" title="Slowdive" label="Slowdive"/>
<link wikidata="Q622944" start="25750" end="25762" title="Dinosaur Jr." label="Dinosaur Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1515611" start="25764" end="25779" title="Teenage Fanclub" label="Teenage Fanclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q645980" start="25781" end="25787" title="Mogwai" label="Mogwai"/>
<link wikidata="Q484839" start="25789" end="25796" title="Placebo (band)" label="Placebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q223741" start="25806" end="25817" title="Brian Molko" label="Brian Molko"/>
<link wikidata="Q728559" start="25819" end="25828" title="Quicksand (American band)" label="Quicksand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155395" start="25833" end="25846" title="Rival Schools (band)" label="Rival Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546219" start="25856" end="25873" title="Walter Schreifels" label="Walter Schreifels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4371" start="25875" end="25879" title="Ride (band)" label="Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q624538" start="25881" end="25891" title="Jawbreaker (band)" label="Jawbreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q426068" start="25893" end="25937" title="...And You Will Know Us by the Trail of Dead" label="...And You Will Know Us by the Trail of Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807586" start="25939" end="25944" title="Polvo" label="Polvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489831" start="25946" end="25964" title="Something for Kate" label="Something for Kate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576798" start="25966" end="25976" title="Superchunk" label="Superchunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11343770" start="25978" end="25982" title="Metz (band)" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549376" start="25984" end="25990" title="Jawbox" label="Jawbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q709143" start="25992" end="25998" title="Pg. 99" label="Pg. 99"/>
<link wikidata="Q9287647" start="26004" end="26014" title="Treepeople" label="Treepeople"/>
<link wikidata="Q240570" start="26056" end="26066" title="Kim Gordon" label="Kim Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q505677" start="26104" end="26118" title="Thurston Moore" label="Thurston Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q352087" start="26150" end="26161" title="Lee Ranaldo" label="Lee Ranaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q540095" start="26193" end="26206" title="Steve Shelley" label="Steve Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233826" start="26229" end="26239" title="Mark Ibold" label="Mark Ibold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377218" start="26294" end="26307" title="Richard Edson" label="Richard Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517950" start="26330" end="26338" title="Bob Bert" label="Bob Bert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129816" start="26367" end="26380" title="Jim Sclavunos" label="Jim Sclavunos"/>
<link wikidata="Q547373" start="26403" end="26420" title="Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke (musician)" label="Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q240971" start="26528" end="26544" title="Confusion Is Sex" label="Confusion Is Sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q926653" start="26566" end="26581" title="Bad Moon Rising (album)" label="Bad Moon Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q993982" start="26603" end="26607" title="Evol (Sonic Youth album)" label="EVOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q941771" start="26629" end="26635" title="Sister (Sonic Youth album)" label="Sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q902833" start="26657" end="26672" title="Daydream Nation" label="Daydream Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q787444" start="26694" end="26710" title="The Whitey Album" label="The Whitey Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011916" start="26750" end="26753" title="Goo (album)" label="Goo"/>
<link wikidata="Q531154" start="26775" end="26780" title="Dirty (Sonic Youth album)" label="Dirty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301964" start="26802" end="26841" title="Experimental Jet Set, Trash and No Star" label="Experimental Jet Set, Trash and No Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931691" start="26863" end="26878" title="Washing Machine (album)" label="Washing Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931785" start="26900" end="26917" title="A Thousand Leaves" label="A Thousand Leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931631" start="26939" end="26963" title="NYC Ghosts &amp;amp; Flowers" label="NYC Ghosts &amp;amp; Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931751" start="26985" end="26998" title="Murray Street (album)" label="Murray Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931774" start="27020" end="27031" title="Sonic Nurse" label="Sonic Nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931679" start="27053" end="27066" title="Rather Ripped" label="Rather Ripped"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931611" start="27088" end="27099" title="The Eternal (album)" label="The Eternal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28313" wikidata="Q220868" url="?curid=28313" title="SCSI">
<text>Small Computer System Interface (SCSI, ) is a set of standards for physically connecting and transferring data between computers and peripheral devices, best known for its use with storage devices such as hard disk drives. SCSI was introduced in the 1980s and has seen widespread use on servers and high-end workstations, with new SCSI standards being published as recently as SAS-4 in 2017.

The SCSI standards define commands, protocols, electrical, optical and logical interfaces. The SCSI standard defines command sets for specific peripheral device types; the presence of &quot;unknown&quot; as one of these types means that in theory it can be used as an interface to almost any device, but the standard is highly pragmatic and addressed toward commercial requirements. The initial Parallel SCSI was most commonly used for hard disk drives and tape drives, but it can connect a wide range of other devices, including scanners and CD drives, although not all controllers can handle all devices.

The ancestral SCSI standard, X3.131-1986, generally referred to as SCSI-1, was published by the X3T9 technical committee of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) in 1986. SCSI-2 was published in August 1990 as X3.T9.2/86-109, with further revisions in 1994 and subsequent adoption of a multitude of interfaces. Further refinements have resulted in improvements in performance and support for ever-increasing data storage capacity.

==History==

===Parallel interface===

SCSI is derived from the Shugart Associates System Interface (SASI), developed beginning 1979 and publicly disclosed in 1981. Larry Boucher is considered to be the &quot;father&quot; of SASI and ultimately SCSI due to his pioneering work first at Shugart Associates and then at Adaptec, which he founded in 1981.

A SASI controller provided a bridge between a hard disk drive&#x27;s low-level interface and a host computer, which needed to read blocks of data. SASI controller boards were typically the size of a hard disk drive and were usually physically mounted to the drive&#x27;s chassis. SASI, which was used in mini- and early microcomputers, defined the interface as using a 50-pin flat ribbon connector which was adopted as the SCSI-1 connector. SASI is a fully compliant subset of SCSI-1 so that many, if not all, of the then-existing SASI controllers were SCSI-1 compatible.

In around 1980, NCR Corporation had been developing a competing interface standard by the name of BYSE. In the summer of 1981, NCR abandoned their in-house efforts in favor of pursuing SASI and improving on its design for their own computer systems. Fearing that their extension of the SASI standard would induce market confusion, however, NCR briefly cancelled their contract with Shugart. NCR&#x27;s proposed improvements to the design of SCSI piqued the interest of Optimem, a subsidiary of Shugart, who requested that NCR and Shugart collaborate on a unified standard. In October 1981, the two companies agreed to co-develop SASI and present their standard jointly with ANSI.

Until at least February 1982, ANSI developed the specification as &quot;SASI&quot; and &quot;Shugart Associates System Interface&quot;. However, the committee documenting the standard would not allow it to be named after a company. Almost a full day was devoted to agreeing to name the standard &quot;Small Computer System Interface&quot;, which Boucher intended to be pronounced &quot;sexy&quot;, but ENDL&#x27;s Dal Allan pronounced the new acronym as &quot;scuzzy&quot; and that stuck.

The NCR facility in Wichita, Kansas developed the industry&#x27;s first SCSI controller chip, the NCR 5385, released in 1983. According to its developers, the chip worked the first time it was tested. A number of companies, such as Adaptec and Optimem, were early supporters of SCSI. By late 1990 at least 45 manufactures offered 251 models of parallel SCSI host adapters Today, such host adapters have largely been displaced by the faster serial SCSI (SAS) host adapters.

The &quot;small&quot; reference in &quot;small computer system interface&quot; is historical; since the mid-1990s, SCSI has been available on even the largest of computer systems.

Since its standardization in 1986, SCSI has been commonly used in the Amiga, Atari, Apple Macintosh and Sun Microsystems computer lines and PC server systems. Apple started using the less-expensive parallel ATA (PATA, also known as &quot;IDE&quot;) for its low-end machines with the Macintosh Quadra 630 in 1994, and added it to its high-end desktops starting with the Power Macintosh G3 in 1997. Apple dropped on-board SCSI completely in favor of IDE and FireWire with the (Blue &amp; White) Power Mac G3 in 1999, while still offering a PCI SCSI host adapter as an option on up to the Power Macintosh G4 (AGP Graphics) models. Sun switched its lower-end range to Parallel ATA (PATA) with introduction of their Ultra 5 and 10 low end workstations using CMD640 IDE controller and continued this trend with the later Blade 100 and 150 entry level systems and did not switch to contemporary SATA interface even with the introduction of the Blade 1500 in 2003 while the higher end Blade 2500 released at the same time used Ultra320 Parallel SCSI-3. Sun moved to SATA and SAS interfaces with their last UltraSPARC-III based workstations in 2006 with the entry level Ultra 25 and mid-range Ultra 45. Commodore included SCSI on the Amiga 3000/3000T systems and it was an add-on to previous Amiga 500/2000 models. Starting with the Amiga 600/1200/4000 systems Commodore switched to the IDE interface. Atari included SCSI as standard in its Atari MEGA STE, Atari TT and Atari Falcon computer models. SCSI has never been popular in the low-priced IBM PC world, owing to the lower cost and adequate performance of ATA hard disk standard. However, SCSI drives and even SCSI RAIDs became common in PC workstations for video or audio production.

===Modern SCSI===
Recent physical versions of SCSISerial Attached SCSI (SAS), SCSI-over-Fibre Channel Protocol (FCP), and USB Attached SCSI (UAS)break from the traditional parallel SCSI bus and perform data transfer via serial communications using point-to-point links. Although much of the SCSI documentation talks about the parallel interface, all modern development efforts use serial interfaces. Serial interfaces have a number of advantages over parallel SCSI, including higher data rates, simplified cabling, longer reach, improved fault isolation and full-duplex capability. The primary reason for the shift to serial interfaces is the clock skew issue of high-speed parallel interfaces, which makes the faster variants of parallel SCSI susceptible to problems caused by cabling and termination.

The non-physical iSCSI preserves the basic SCSI paradigm, especially the command set, almost unchanged, through embedding of SCSI-3 over TCP/IP. Therefore, iSCSI uses &quot;logical connections&quot; instead of physical links and can run on top of any network supporting IP. The actual physical links are realized on lower network layers, independently from iSCSI. Predominantly, Ethernet is used which is also of serial nature.

SCSI is popular on high-performance workstations, servers, and storage appliances. Almost all RAID subsystems on servers have used some kind of SCSI hard disk drives for decades (initially Parallel SCSI, interim Fibre Channel, recently SAS), though a number of manufacturers offer SATA-based RAID subsystems as a cheaper option. Moreover, SAS offers compatibility with SATA devices, creating a much broader range of options for RAID subsystems together with the existence of nearline SAS (NL-SAS) drives. Instead of SCSI, modern desktop computers and notebooks typically use SATA interfaces for internal hard disk drives, with NVMe over PCIe gaining popularity as SATA can bottleneck modern solid-state drives.

==Interfaces==

SCSI is available in a variety of interfaces. The first was parallel SCSI (also called SCSI Parallel Interface or SPI), which uses a parallel bus design. Since 2005, SPI was gradually replaced by Serial Attached SCSI (SAS), which uses a serial design but retains other aspects of the technology. Many other interfaces which do not rely on complete SCSI standards still implement the SCSI command protocol; others drop physical implementation entirely while retaining the SCSI architectural model. iSCSI, for example, uses TCP/IP as a transport mechanism, which is most often transported over Gigabit Ethernet or faster network links.

SCSI interfaces have often been included on computers from various manufacturers for use under Microsoft Windows, classic Mac OS, Unix, Amiga and Linux operating systems, either implemented on the motherboard or by the means of plug-in adaptors. With the advent of SAS and SATA drives, provision for parallel SCSI on motherboards was discontinued.

===Parallel SCSI===


Initially, the &quot;SCSI Parallel Interface&quot; (SPI) was the only interface using the SCSI protocol. Its standardization started as a single-ended 8-bit bus in 1986, transferring up to 5 MB/s, and evolved into a low-voltage differential 16-bit bus capable of up to 320 MB/s. The last SPI-5 standard from 2003 also defined a 640 MB/s speed which failed to be realized.

Parallel SCSI specifications include several synchronous transfer modes for the parallel cable, and an asynchronous mode. The asynchronous mode is a classic request/acknowledge protocol, which allows systems with a slow bus or simple systems to also use SCSI devices. Faster synchronous modes are used more frequently.

===SCSI interfaces===
==Cabling==
===SCSI Parallel Interface===
Internal parallel SCSI cables are usually ribbons, with two or more 50–, 68–, or 80–pin connectors attached. External cables are typically shielded (but may not be), with 50– or 68–pin connectors at each end, depending upon the specific SCSI bus width supported. The 80–pin Single Connector Attachment (SCA) is typically used for hot-pluggable devices

===Fibre Channel===
Fibre Channel can be used to transport SCSI information units, as defined by the Fibre Channel Protocol for SCSI (FCP). These connections are hot-pluggable and are usually implemented with optical fiber.

===Serial attached SCSI===
Serial attached SCSI (SAS) uses a modified Serial ATA data and power cable.

===iSCSI===
iSCSI (Internet Small Computer System Interface) usually uses Ethernet connectors and cables as its physical transport, but can run over any physical transport capable of transporting IP.

===SRP===
The SCSI RDMA Protocol (SRP) is a protocol that specifies how to transport SCSI commands over a reliable RDMA connection. This protocol can run over any RDMA-capable physical transport, e.g. InfiniBand or Ethernet when using RoCE or iWARP.

===USB Attached SCSI===
USB Attached SCSI allows SCSI devices to use the Universal Serial Bus.

===Automation/Drive Interface===
The Automation/Drive Interface − Transport Protocol (ADT) is used to connect removable media devices, such as tape drives, with the controllers of the libraries (automation devices) in which they are installed. The ADI standard specifies the use of RS-422 for the physical connections. The second-generation ADT-2 standard defines iADT, use of the ADT protocol over IP (Internet Protocol) connections, such as over Ethernet. The Automation/Drive Interface − Commands standards (ADC, ADC-2, and ADC-3) define SCSI commands for these installations.

==SCSI command protocol==
In addition to many different hardware implementations, the SCSI standards also include an extensive set of command definitions. The SCSI command architecture was originally defined for parallel SCSI buses but has been carried forward with minimal change for use with iSCSI and serial SCSI. Other technologies which use the SCSI command set include the ATA Packet Interface, USB Mass Storage class and FireWire SBP-2.

In SCSI terminology, communication takes place between an initiator and a target. The initiator sends a command to the target, which then responds. SCSI commands are sent in a Command Descriptor Block (CDB). The CDB consists of a one byte operation code followed by five or more bytes containing command-specific parameters.

At the end of the command sequence, the target returns a status code byte, such as 00h for success, 02h for an error (called a Check Condition), or 08h for busy. When the target returns a Check Condition in response to a command, the initiator usually then issues a SCSI Request Sense command in order to obtain a key code qualifier (KCQ) from the target. The Check Condition and Request Sense sequence involves a special SCSI protocol called a Contingent Allegiance Condition.

There are four categories of SCSI commands: N (non-data), W (writing data from initiator to target), R (reading data), and B (bidirectional). There are about 60 different SCSI commands in total, with the most commonly used being:

*Test unit ready: Queries device to see if it is ready for data transfers (disk spun up, media loaded, etc.).
*Inquiry: Returns basic device information.
*Request sense: Returns any error codes from the previous command that returned an error status.
*Send diagnostic and Receive diagnostic results: runs a simple self-test, or a specialised test defined in a diagnostic page.
*Start/Stop unit: Spins disks up and down, or loads/unloads media (CD, tape, etc.).
*Read capacity: Returns storage capacity.
*Format unit: Prepares a storage medium for use. In a disk, a low level format will occur. Some tape drives will erase the tape in response to this command.
*Read: (four variants): Reads data from a device.
*Write: (four variants): Writes data to a device.
*Log sense: Returns current information from log pages.
*Mode sense: Returns current device parameters from mode pages.
*Mode select: Sets device parameters in a mode page.

Each device on the SCSI bus is assigned a unique SCSI identification number or ID. Devices may encompass multiple logical units, which are addressed by logical unit number (LUN). Simple devices have just one LUN, more complex devices may have multiple LUNs.

A &quot;direct access&quot; (i.e. disk type) storage device consists of a number of logical blocks, addressed by Logical Block Address (LBA). A typical LBA equates to 512 bytes of storage. The usage of LBAs has evolved over time and so four different command variants are provided for reading and writing data. The Read(6) and Write(6) commands contain a 21-bit LBA address. The Read(10), Read(12), Read Long, Write(10), Write(12), and Write Long commands all contain a 32-bit LBA address plus various other parameter options.

The capacity of a &quot;sequential access&quot; (i.e. tape-type) device is not specified because it depends, amongst other things, on the length of the tape, which is not identified in a machine-readable way. Read and write operations on a sequential access device begin at the current tape position, not at a specific LBA. The block size on sequential access devices can either be fixed or variable, depending on the specific device. Tape devices such as half-inch 9-track tape, DDS (4 mm tapes physically similar to DAT), Exabyte, etc., support variable block sizes.

==Device identification==

===Parallel interface===
On a parallel SCSI bus, a device (e.g. host adapter, disk drive) is identified by a &quot;SCSI ID&quot;, which is a number in the range 0–7 on a narrow bus and in the range 0–15 on a wide bus. On earlier models a physical jumper or switch controls the SCSI ID of the initiator (host adapter). On modern host adapters (since about 1997), doing I/O to the adapter sets the SCSI ID; for example, the adapter often contains an Option ROM (SCSI BIOS) program that runs when the computer boots up and that program has menus that let the operator choose the SCSI ID of the host adapter. Alternatively, the host adapter may come with software that must be installed on the host computer to configure the SCSI ID. The traditional SCSI ID for a host adapter is 7, as that ID has the highest priority during bus arbitration (even on a 16-bit bus).

The SCSI ID of a device in a drive enclosure that has a back plane is set either by jumpers or by the slot in the enclosure the device is installed into, depending on the model of the enclosure. In the latter case, each slot on the enclosure&#x27;s back plane delivers control signals to the drive to select a unique SCSI ID. A SCSI enclosure without a back plane often has a switch for each drive to choose the drive&#x27;s SCSI ID. The enclosure is packaged with connectors that must be plugged into the drive where the jumpers are typically located; the switch emulates the necessary jumpers. While there is no standard that makes this work, drive designers typically set up their jumper headers in a consistent format that matches the way that these switches implement.

Setting the bootable (or first) hard disk to SCSI ID 0 is an accepted IT community recommendation. SCSI ID 2 is usually set aside for the floppy disk drive while SCSI ID 3 is typically for a CD-ROM drive.

===General===
Note that a SCSI target device (which can be called a &quot;physical unit&quot;) is sometimes divided into smaller &quot;logical units&quot;. For example, a high-end disk subsystem may be a single SCSI device but contain dozens of individual disk drives, each of which is a logical unit. Further, a RAID array may be a single SCSI device, but may contain many logical units, each of which is a &quot;virtual&quot; disk—a stripe set or mirror set constructed from portions of real disk drives. The SCSI ID, WWN, etc. in this case identifies the whole subsystem, and a second number, the logical unit number (LUN) identifies a disk device (real or virtual) within the subsystem.

It is quite common, though incorrect, to refer to the logical unit itself as a &quot;LUN&quot;. Sometimes, redundantly, the actual LUN may be called a &quot;LUN number&quot; or &quot;LUN id&quot;.

In modern SCSI transport protocols, there is an automated process for the &quot;discovery&quot; of the IDs. The SSA initiator (normally the host computer through the &#x27;host adaptor&#x27;) &quot;walk the loop&quot; to determine what devices are connected and then assigns each one a 7-bit &quot;hop-count&quot; value. Fibre Channel – Arbitrated Loop (FC-AL) initiators use the LIP (Loop Initialization Protocol) to interrogate each device port for its WWN (World Wide Name). For iSCSI, because of the unlimited scope of the (IP) network, the process is quite complicated. These discovery processes occur at power-on/initialization time and also if the bus topology changes later, for example if an extra device is added.

SCSI has the CTL (Channel, Target or Physical Unit Number, Logical Unit Number) identification mechanism per host bus adapter, or the HCTL (HBA, Channel, PUN, LUN) identification mechanism, one host adapter may have more than one channels.

==Device Type==

While all SCSI controllers can work with read/write storage devices, i.e. disk and tape, some will not work with some other device types; older controllers are likely to be more limited, sometimes by their driver software, and more Device Types were added as SCSI evolved. Even CD-ROMs are not handled by all controllers. Device Type is a 5-bit field reported by a SCSI Inquiry Command; defined SCSI Peripheral Device Types include, in addition to many varieties of storage device, printer, scanner, communications device, and a catch-all &quot;processor&quot; type for devices not otherwise listed.

==SCSI enclosure services==
In larger SCSI servers, the disk-drive devices are housed in an intelligent enclosure that supports SCSI Enclosure Services (SES). The initiator can communicate with the enclosure using a specialized set of SCSI commands to access power, cooling, and other non-data characteristics.

==See also==
*Fibre Channel
*List of device bandwidths
*Parallel SCSI
*Serial Attached SCSI
*Intelligent Peripheral Interface

== Notes ==
== References ==
==Bibliography==


==External links==


* InterNational Committee for Information Technology Standards: T10 Technical Committee on SCSI Storage Interfaces (SCSI standards committee)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q220868" start="0" end="31" title="SCSI" label="Small Computer System Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q220868" start="33" end="37" title="SCSI" label="SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q178648" start="133" end="151" title="peripheral devices" label="peripheral devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="205" end="220" title="hard disk drive" label="hard disk drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135301" start="377" end="382" title="Serial Attached SCSI" label="SAS-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q220868" start="419" end="427" title="SCSI command" label="commands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808" start="472" end="482" title="Interface (computing)" label="interfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134973" start="788" end="801" title="Parallel SCSI" label="Parallel SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="829" end="844" title="hard disk drive" label="hard disk drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q751913" start="850" end="860" title="tape drive" label="tape drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="936" end="938" title="CD-ROM" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492" start="939" end="945" title="Optical disc drive" label="drives"/>
<link wikidata="Q180003" start="1129" end="1166" title="American National Standards Institute" label="American National Standards Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344715" start="1508" end="1526" title="Shugart Associates" label="Shugart Associates"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1609" end="1622" title="Larry Boucher" label="Larry Boucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q352390" start="1761" end="1768" title="Adaptec" label="Adaptec"/>
<link wikidata="Q524989" start="2386" end="2401" title="NCR Corporation" label="NCR Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49266" start="3561" end="3576" title="Wichita, Kansas" label="Wichita, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="4266" end="4271" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627870" start="4273" end="4278" title="Atari Corporation" label="Atari"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="4280" end="4295" title="Apple Macintosh" label="Apple Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="4300" end="4316" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun Microsystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q230360" start="4394" end="4406" title="parallel ATA" label="parallel ATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882844" start="4479" end="4495" title="Macintosh Quadra" label="Macintosh Quadra"/>
<link wikidata="Q181693" start="4652" end="4660" title="FireWire" label="FireWire"/>
<link wikidata="Q191012" start="4734" end="4737" title="Conventional PCI" label="PCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q230360" start="4860" end="4872" title="Parallel ATA" label="Parallel ATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062664" start="4907" end="4921" title="Ultra 5/10" label="Ultra 5 and 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012869" start="4949" end="4955" title="CMD640" label="CMD640"/>
<link wikidata="Q931822" start="5011" end="5028" title="Sun Blade (workstation)" label="Blade 100 and 150"/>
<link wikidata="Q188639" start="5084" end="5088" title="SATA" label="SATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q188639" start="5254" end="5258" title="SATA" label="SATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135301" start="5263" end="5266" title="Serial Attached SCSI" label="SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q753665" start="5628" end="5642" title="Atari MEGA STE" label="Atari MEGA STE"/>
<link wikidata="Q740626" start="5644" end="5652" title="Atari TT" label="Atari TT"/>
<link wikidata="Q753619" start="5657" end="5669" title="Atari Falcon" label="Atari Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179299" start="5858" end="5862" title="RAID" label="RAID"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135301" start="5979" end="5999" title="Serial Attached SCSI" label="Serial Attached SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113044" start="6017" end="6039" title="Fibre Channel Protocol" label="Fibre Channel Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547335" start="6051" end="6068" title="USB Attached SCSI" label="USB Attached SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134973" start="6101" end="6114" title="parallel SCSI" label="parallel SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="6115" end="6118" title="bus (computing)" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q681349" start="6177" end="6191" title="point-to-point (telecommunications)" label="point-to-point"/>
<link wikidata="Q625306" start="6487" end="6498" title="full-duplex" label="full-duplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382014" start="6572" end="6582" title="clock skew" label="clock skew"/>
<link wikidata="Q306152" start="6750" end="6755" title="iSCSI" label="iSCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q28643" start="6781" end="6789" title="paradigm" label="paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="6870" end="6876" title="TCP/IP" label="TCP/IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q93312" start="7055" end="7069" title="OSI model" label="network layers"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="7112" end="7120" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q188639" start="7443" end="7447" title="SATA" label="SATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135301" start="7637" end="7649" title="nearline SAS" label="nearline SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157198" start="7789" end="7793" title="NVMe" label="NVMe"/>
<link wikidata="Q487343" start="7853" end="7870" title="solid-state drive" label="solid-state drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134973" start="7950" end="7963" title="parallel SCSI" label="parallel SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q763575" start="8023" end="8031" title="parallel communications" label="parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="8032" end="8035" title="Bus (computing)" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135301" start="8086" end="8106" title="Serial Attached SCSI" label="Serial Attached SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q518280" start="8127" end="8133" title="Serial communications" label="serial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8273" end="8294" title="#SCSI command protocol" label="SCSI command protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389314" start="8361" end="8385" title="SCSI architectural model" label="SCSI architectural model"/>
<link wikidata="Q306152" start="8387" end="8392" title="iSCSI" label="iSCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="8412" end="8418" title="TCP/IP" label="TCP/IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069084" start="8482" end="8498" title="Gigabit Ethernet" label="Gigabit Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="8509" end="8516" title="computer network" label="network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="8620" end="8637" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="8639" end="8653" title="classic Mac OS" label="classic Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="8655" end="8659" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="8661" end="8666" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="8671" end="8676" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321" start="8722" end="8733" title="motherboard" label="motherboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135301" start="8790" end="8793" title="Serial Attached SCSI" label="SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q188639" start="8798" end="8802" title="SATA" label="SATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556493" start="9034" end="9046" title="single-ended signaling" label="single-ended"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377054" start="9053" end="9056" title="system bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928527" start="9124" end="9136" title="differential signaling" label="differential"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187223" start="9695" end="9702" title="ribbon cables" label="ribbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389317" start="9927" end="9954" title="Single Connector Attachment" label="Single Connector Attachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q376827" start="10026" end="10039" title="Fibre Channel" label="Fibre Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113044" start="10107" end="10129" title="Fibre Channel Protocol" label="Fibre Channel Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135301" start="10258" end="10278" title="Serial attached SCSI" label="Serial attached SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10292" end="10300" title="Serial Attached SCSI#Connectors" label="modified"/>
<link wikidata="Q188639" start="10301" end="10311" title="Serial ATA" label="Serial ATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q306152" start="10347" end="10352" title="iSCSI" label="iSCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="10409" end="10417" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8795" start="10531" end="10533" title="Internet Protocol" label="IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389302" start="10550" end="10568" title="SCSI RDMA Protocol" label="SCSI RDMA Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q922437" start="10737" end="10747" title="InfiniBand" label="InfiniBand"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="10751" end="10759" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276238" start="10771" end="10775" title="RDMA over Converged Ethernet" label="RoCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975571" start="10779" end="10784" title="iWARP" label="iWARP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547335" start="10811" end="10828" title="USB Attached SCSI" label="USB Attached SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="10860" end="10880" title="Universal Serial Bus" label="Universal Serial Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q608019" start="11165" end="11171" title="RS-422" label="RS-422"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="11331" end="11339" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134973" start="11676" end="11689" title="parallel SCSI" label="parallel SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9137452" start="11843" end="11863" title="ATA Packet Interface" label="ATA Packet Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155870" start="11865" end="11887" title="USB mass storage device class" label="USB Mass Storage class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7454655" start="11892" end="11906" title="Serial Bus Protocol 2" label="FireWire SBP-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389323" start="11967" end="11976" title="SCSI initiator" label="initiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389323" start="11983" end="11989" title="SCSI target" label="target"/>
<link wikidata="Q220868" start="12013" end="12020" title="SCSI command" label="command"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12501" end="12527" title="SCSI Request Sense Command" label="SCSI Request Sense command"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398033" start="12569" end="12572" title="KCQ" label="KCQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q690117" start="13510" end="13526" title="low level format" label="low level format"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13813" end="13823" title="SCSI mode pages" label="mode pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q263225" start="14031" end="14050" title="logical unit number" label="logical unit number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162337" start="14274" end="14277" title="SCSI LBA" label="LBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4032660" start="15132" end="15144" title="9-track tape" label="9-track tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224723" start="15146" end="15149" title="Digital Data Storage" label="DDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q597615" start="15184" end="15187" title="digital audio tape" label="DAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419209" start="15190" end="15197" title="Exabyte (company)" label="Exabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134973" start="15540" end="15547" title="SCSI ID" label="SCSI ID"/>
<link wikidata="Q585585" start="15566" end="15578" title="host adapter" label="host adapter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099005" start="15711" end="15721" title="Option ROM" label="Option ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q263225" start="17707" end="17726" title="logical unit number" label="logical unit number"/>
<link wikidata="Q376827" start="18318" end="18331" title="Fibre Channel" label="Fibre Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575931" start="18457" end="18472" title="World Wide Name" label="World Wide Name"/>
<link wikidata="Q585585" start="18831" end="18847" title="host bus adapter" label="host bus adapter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19345" end="19365" title="SCSI Inquiry Command" label="SCSI Inquiry Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389293" start="19709" end="19738" title="SCSI Enclosure Services" label="SCSI Enclosure Services (SES)"/>
<link wikidata="Q376827" start="19907" end="19920" title="Fibre Channel" label="Fibre Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149752" start="19922" end="19947" title="List of device bandwidths" label="List of device bandwidths"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134973" start="19949" end="19962" title="Parallel SCSI" label="Parallel SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135301" start="19964" end="19984" title="Serial Attached SCSI" label="Serial Attached SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044049" start="19986" end="20018" title="Intelligent Peripheral Interface" label="Intelligent Peripheral Interface"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28314" wikidata="Q183259" url="?curid=28314" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System">
<text>The Super Nintendo Entertainment System, commonly shortened to Super Nintendo, Super NES or SNES, is a 16-bit home video game console developed by Nintendo that was released in 1990 in Japan and South Korea, 1991 in North America, 1992 in Europe and Oceania and 1993 in South America. In Japan, it is called the In South Korea, it is called the Super Comboy and was distributed by Hyundai Electronics. The system was released in Brazil on August 30, 1993, by Playtronic. In Russia and CIS, the system was distributed by Steepler from 1994 until 1996. Although each version is essentially the same, several forms of regional lockout prevent cartridges for one version from being used in other versions.

The Super NES is Nintendo&#x27;s second programmable home console, following the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES). The console introduced advanced graphics and sound capabilities compared with other systems at the time, like the Sega Genesis. It was designed to accommodate the ongoing development of a variety of enhancement chips integrated into game cartridges to be more competitive into the next generation.

The Super NES received largely positive reviews and was a global success, becoming the best-selling console of the 16-bit era after launching relatively late and facing intense competition from Sega&#x27;s Genesis console in North America and Europe. Overlapping the NES&#x27;s 61.9 million unit sales, the Super NES remained popular well into the 32-bit era, with 49.1 million units sold worldwide by the time it was discontinued in 2003. It continues to be popular among collectors and retro gamers, with new homebrew games and Nintendo&#x27;s emulated rereleases, such as on the Virtual Console, the Super NES Classic Edition, Nintendo Switch Online; as well as several non-console emulators which operate on a desktop computer or mobile device, such as Snes9x.

== History ==

To compete with the popular Family Computer in Japan, NEC Home Electronics launched the PC Engine in 1987, and Sega followed suit with the Mega Drive in 1988. The two platforms were later launched in North America in 1989 as the TurboGrafx-16 and the Sega Genesis respectively. Both systems were built on 16-bit architectures and offered improved graphics and sound over the 8-bit NES. It took several years for Sega&#x27;s system to become successful. Bill Mensch, the co-creator of the 8-bit MOS Technology 6502 microprocessor and founder of the Western Design Center (WDC), gave Ricoh the exclusive right to supply 8-bit and 16-bit WDC microprocessors for the new system. Meanwhile, Sony engineer Ken Kutaragi reached an agreement with Nintendo to design the console&#x27;s sound chip without notifying his supervisors, who were enraged when they discovered the project; though Kutaragi was nearly fired, then-CEO Norio Ohga intervened in support of the project and gave him permission to complete it.

On September 9, 1987, then-Nintendo president Hiroshi Yamauchi revealed the development of the Super Famicom in the newspaper &quot;Kyoto Shimbun&quot;. On August 30, 1988, in an interview with &quot;TOUCH Magazine&quot;, Yamauchi announced the development of &quot;Super Mario Bros. 4&quot;, &quot;Dragon Quest V&quot;, three original games, and he projected sales of 3 million units of the upcoming console. &quot;Famicom Hissyoubon&quot; magazine speculated that Yamauchi&#x27;s early announcement was probably made to forestall Christmas shopping for the PC Engine, and relayed Enix&#x27;s clarification that it was waiting on sales figures to select either PC Engine or Super Famicom for its next &quot;Dragon Quest&quot; game. The magazine and Enix both expressed a strong interest in networking as a standard platform feature. The console was demonstrated to the Japanese press on November 21, 1988, and again on July 28, 1989.

===Launch===

Designed by Masayuki Uemura, the designer of the original Famicom, the Super Famicom was released in Japan on Wednesday, November 21, 1990, for . It was an instant success. Nintendo&#x27;s initial shipment of 300,000 units sold out within hours, and the resulting social disturbance led the Japanese government to ask video game manufacturers to schedule future console releases on weekends. This gained the attention of the yakuza criminal organizations, so the devices were shipped at night to avoid robbery.

With the Super Famicom quickly outselling its rivals, Nintendo reasserted itself as the leader of the Japanese console market. Nintendo&#x27;s success was partially due to the retention of most of its key third-party developers, including Capcom, Konami, Tecmo, Square, Koei, and Enix.

Nintendo released the Super Nintendo Entertainment System, a redesigned version of the Super Famicom, in North America for . It began shipping in limited quantities on August 23, 1991, with an official nationwide release date of September 9, 1991. The Super NES was released in the United Kingdom and Ireland in April 1992 for .

Most of the PAL region versions of the console use the Japanese Super Famicom design, except for labeling and the length of the joypad leads. The Playtronic Super NES in Brazil, although PAL-M, uses the North American design. Both the NES and Super NES were released in Brazil in 1993 by Playtronic, a joint venture between the toy company Estrela and consumer electronics company Gradiente.

The Super NES and Super Famicom launched with few games, but these games were well received. In Japan, only two games were initially available: &quot;Super Mario World&quot; and &quot;F-Zero&quot;. &quot;Bombuzal&quot; was released during the launch week. In North America, &quot;Super Mario World&quot; was launched as a bundle with the console; other launch games include &quot;F-Zero&quot;, &quot;Pilotwings&quot; (both of which demonstrate the console&#x27;s Mode 7 pseudo-3D rendering), &quot;SimCity&quot;, and &quot;Gradius III&quot;.

===Console wars===
The rivalry between Nintendo and Sega was described as one of the most notable console wars in video game history, in which Sega positioned the Genesis as the &quot;cool&quot; console, with games aimed at older audiences, and aggressive advertisements that occasionally attacked the competition. Nintendo scored an early public-relations advantage by securing the first console conversion of Capcom&#x27;s arcade hit &quot;Street Fighter II&quot; for Super NES, which took more than a year to make the transition to the Genesis. Though the Genesis had a two-year lead to launch time, a much larger library of games, and a lower price point, it only represented an estimated 60% of the American 16-bit console market in June 1992, and neither console could maintain a definitive lead for several years. &quot;Donkey Kong Country&quot; is said to have helped establish the Super NES&#x27;s market prominence in the latter years of the 16-bit generation, and for a time, maintain against the PlayStation and Saturn. According to Nintendo, the company had sold more than 20 million Super NES units in the U.S. According to a 2014 Wedbush Securities report based on NPD sales data, the Super NES outsold the Genesis in the U.S. market by units.

===Changes in policy===
During the NES era, Nintendo maintained exclusive control over games released for the system – the company had to approve every game, each third-party developer could only release up to five games per year (but some third parties got around this by using different names, such as Konami&#x27;s &quot;Ultra Games&quot; brand), those games could not be released on another console within two years, and Nintendo was the exclusive manufacturer and supplier of NES cartridges. Competition from Sega&#x27;s console brought an end to this practice; in 1991, Acclaim Entertainment began releasing games for both platforms, with most of Nintendo&#x27;s other licensees following suit over the next several years; Capcom (which licensed some games to Sega instead of producing them directly) and Square were the most notable holdouts.

Nintendo continued to carefully review submitted games, scoring them on a 40-point scale and allocating marketing resources accordingly. Each region performed separate evaluations. Nintendo of America also maintained a policy that, among other things, limited the amount of violence in the games on its systems. The surprise arcade hit &quot;Mortal Kombat&quot; (1992), a gory fighting game with huge splashes of blood and graphically violent fatality moves, was heavily censored by Nintendo. Because the Genesis version allowed for an uncensored version via cheat code, it outsold the censored Super NES version by a ratio of nearly three to one.

U.S. Senators Herb Kohl and Joe Lieberman convened a Congressional hearing on December 9, 1993, to investigate the marketing of violent video games to children. Though Nintendo took the high ground with moderate success, the hearings led to the creation of the Interactive Digital Software Association and the Entertainment Software Rating Board and the inclusion of ratings on all video games. With these ratings in place, Nintendo decided its censorship policies were no longer needed.

===32-bit era and beyond===
While other companies were moving on to 32-bit systems, Rare and Nintendo proved that the Super NES was still a strong contender in the market. In November 1994, Rare released &quot;Donkey Kong Country&quot;, a platform game featuring 3D models and textures pre-rendered on Silicon Graphics workstations. With its detailed graphics, fluid animation, and high-quality music, &quot;Donkey Kong Country&quot; rivals the aesthetic quality of games that were being released on newer 32-bit CD-based consoles. In the last 45 days of 1994, 6.1 million copies were sold, making it the fastest-selling video game in history to that date. This game conveyed that early 32-bit systems had little to offer over the Super NES, and proved the market for the more advanced consoles of the near future. According to TRSTS reports, two of the top five bestselling games in the U.S. for December 1996 are Super NES games.

In October 1997, Nintendo released a redesigned model of the Super NES (the SNS-101 model referred to as &quot;New-Style Super NES&quot;) in North America for , with some units including the pack-in game &quot;Super Mario World 2: Yoshi&#x27;s Island&quot;. Like the earlier New-Style NES (model NES-101), this is slimmer and lighter than its predecessor, but it lacks S-Video and RGB output, and it is among the last major Super NES-related releases in the region. A similarly redesigned Super Famicom Jr. was released in Japan at around the same time. The redesign stayed out of Europe.

Nintendo ceased production of the Super NES in North America in 1999, about two years after releasing &quot;Kirby&#x27;s Dream Land 3&quot; (its final second-party game in the US) on November 27, 1997, and one year after releasing &quot;Frogger&quot; (its final third-party game in the US) in 1998. In Japan, Nintendo continued production of both the Family Computer and the Super Famicom until September 25, 2003, and new games were produced until the year 2000, ending with the release of &quot;Metal Slader Glory Director&#x27;s Cut&quot; on November 29, 2000.

Many popular Super NES games were ported to the Game Boy Advance, which has similar video capabilities. In 2005, Nintendo announced that Super NES games would be made available for download via the Wii&#x27;s Virtual Console service. On October 31, 2007, Nintendo Co., Ltd. announced that it would no longer repair Family Computer or Super Famicom systems due to an increasing shortage of the necessary parts. On March 3, 2016, Nintendo Co., Ltd. announced that it would bring Super NES games to the New Nintendo 3DS and New Nintendo 3DS XL (and later the New Nintendo 2DS XL) via its eShop download service. At the Nintendo Direct event on September 4, 2019, Nintendo announced that it would be bringing select Super NES games to the Nintendo Switch Online platform.

==Hardware==
=== Technical specifications===
The 16-bit design of the Super NES incorporates graphics and sound co-processors that perform tiling and simulated 3D effects, a palette of 32,768 colors, and 8-channel ADPCM audio. These base platform features, plus the ability to dramatically extend them all through substantial chip upgrades inside of each cartridge, represent a leap over the 8-bit NES generation and some significant advantages over 16-bit competitors such as the Genesis.

====CPU and RAM====

The CPU is a Ricoh 5A22, a derivative of the 16-bit WDC 65C816 microprocessor. In NTSC regions, its nominal clock speed is 3.58 MHz will slow to either 2.68 MHz or 1.79 MHz when accessing some slower peripherals.

This CPU has an 8-bit data bus and two address buses. The 24-bit &quot;Bus A&quot; is designated for general accesses, and the 8-bit &quot;Bus B&quot; can access support chip registers such as the video and audio co-processors.

The WDC 65C816 supports an 8-channel DMA unit, an 8-bit parallel I/O port a controller port interface circuits allowing serial and parallel access to controller data, a 16-bit multiplication and division unit, and circuitry for generating non-maskable interrupts on V-blank and IRQ interrupts on calculated screen positions.

Early revisions of the 5A22 used in SHVC boards are prone to spontaneous failure which can produce a variety of symptoms including graphics glitches in Mode 7, a black screen on power-on, or improperly reading the controllers. The first revision 5A22 has a fatal bug in the DMA controller that can crash games; this was corrected in subsequent revisions.

The console contains 128KB of general-purpose &quot;work&quot; RAM, which is separate from the 64KB dedicated to the video subsystem and the 64KB dedicated to the audio subsystem.

====Video====

The Picture Processing Unit (PPU) consists of two closely tied IC packages. It contains 64KB of SRAM for video data, 544 bytes of object attribute memory (OAM) for sprite data, and 256 × 15 bits of color generator RAM (CGRAM) for palette data. This CGRAM provisions up to 256 colors, chosen from the 15-bit RGB color space, from a palette of 32,768 colors. The PPU is clocked by the same signal as the CPU and generates a pixel every two or four cycles.

====Audio====

The S-SMP audio subsystem consisted of a 16-bit digital signal processor (DSP) to sequence the mix samples, an 8-bit SPC700 CPU to drive the DSP and 64KB of dedicated PSRAM. It was designed by Ken Kutaragi and produced by Sony and is completely independent from the rest of the system. It is clocked at a nominal 24.576 MHz in both NTSC and PAL systems. It is capable of stereo sound, composed from eight voices generated using 16-bit audio samples compressed using BRR and capable of applying effects such as echo. On early revisions of the motherboard the S-SMP audio system was spread across four chips: the DSP, the CPU, and two RAM modules. On later revisions, the sound hardware consolidated to a single chip, the S-APU.

===Regional lockout===

Nintendo employed several types of regional lockout, including both physical and hardware incompatibilities.

Physically, the cartridges are shaped differently for different regions. North American cartridges have a rectangular bottom with inset grooves matching protruding tabs in the console, and other regions&#x27; cartridges are narrower with a smooth curve on the front and no grooves. The physical incompatibility can be overcome with the use of various adapters, or through modification of the console.

Internally, a regional lockout chip (CIC) within the console and in each cartridge prevents the PAL region games from being played on Japanese or North American consoles and vice versa. The Japanese and North American machines have the same region chip. This can be overcome through the use of adapters, typically by inserting the imported cartridge in one slot and a cartridge with the correct region chip in a second slot. Alternatively, disconnecting one pin of the console&#x27;s lockout chip will prevent it from locking the console; hardware in later games can detect this situation, so it became common to install a switch to reconnect the lockout chip as needed.

PAL consoles face another incompatibility when playing out-of-region cartridges: the NTSC video standard specifies video at 60 Hz but PAL operates at 50 Hz, resulting in an approximately 16.7% slower framerate. PAL&#x27;s higher resolution results in letterboxing of the output image. Some commercial PAL region releases exhibit this same problem and, therefore, can be played in NTSC systems without issue, but other games will face a 20% speedup if played in an NTSC console. To mostly correct this issue, a switch can be added to place the Super NES PPU into a 60 Hz mode supported by most newer PAL televisions. Later games will detect this setting and refuse to run, requiring the switch to be thrown only after the check completes.

===Casing===
All models of the Super NES control deck are predominantly gray, of slightly different shades. The original North American version, designed by Nintendo of America industrial designer Lance Barr (who previously redesigned the Famicom to become the NES), has a boxy design with purple sliding switches and a dark gray eject lever. The loading bay surface is curved, both to invite interaction and to prevent food or drinks from being placed on the console and spilling as with the flat-surfaced NES. The Japanese and European versions are more rounded, with darker gray accents and buttons.

All versions incorporate a top-loading slot for game cartridges, although the shape of the slot differs between regions to match the different shapes of the cartridges. The MULTI OUT connector (later used on the Nintendo 64 and GameCube) can output composite video, S-Video and RGB signals, as well as RF with an external RF modulator. Original versions additionally include a 28-pin expansion port under a small cover on the bottom of the unit and a standard RF output with channel selection switch on the back; the redesigned models output composite video only, requiring an external modulator for RF.

The Nintendo Super System (NSS) is an arcade system for retail preview of 11 particular Super NES games in the United States, similar to the PlayChoice-10 for NES games. It consists of slightly modified Super NES hardware with a menu interface and 25-inch monitor, that allows gameplay for a certain amount of time depending on game credits. Manufacturing of this model was discontinued in 1992.

====Redesigned model====
A cost-reduced version of the console, referred to as the New-Style Super NES (model SNS-101) in North America and as the in Japan, was released late in the platform&#x27;s lifespan; designed by Barr, it incorporates design elements from both the original North American and Japanese/European console models but in a smaller form factor. Unlike the original console models, the redesigned model is virtually identical across both regions save for the color palette (the North American model receiving purple buttons and the Japanese model receiving grey buttons). The redesign did not receive a release in Europe.

Externally, the power and reset buttons were moved to the left-hand side of the console while the cartridge eject button and power LED indicator were omitted. Internally, the redesigned model consolidates the console&#x27;s hardware into a system-on-chip (SoC) design. The redesigned console lacks the bottom expansion slot, rendering it incompatible with the Japan-exclusive Satellaview add-on.

For AV output, the redesigned console features the same multi-out port used on the original models. Unlike the latter models, the former&#x27;s AV port only supports composite video output natively as support for RGB video and S-Video was disabled internally; however, they can be restored via a &quot;relatively simple&quot; modification. The internal RF modulator was also removed, requiring an external one for such output if needed. Due to the SoC design, it is highly sought after by Super NES/Famicom enthusiasts since its RGB video quality (if restored) is improved over earlier internal revisions of the console.

The redesigned console first released in October 1997 in North America, where it originally retailed for US$99.95 in a bundle with &quot;Super Mario World 2: Yoshi&#x27;s Island&quot;;
it was subsequently released in Japan on March 27, 1998, where it retailed for ¥7,800. Nintendo marketed it as an entry-level gamer&#x27;s system for consumers who were apprehensive about the higher price of newer systems such as the Nintendo 64. Nintendo also introduced a slightly altered controller for it, with the console&#x27;s logo replaced by an embossed Nintendo logo.

====Yellowing====

The ABS plastic used in the casing of some older Super NES and Super Famicom consoles is particularly susceptible to oxidation with exposure to air. This, along with the particularly light color of the original plastic, causes affected consoles to quickly become yellow; if the sections of the casing came from different batches of plastic, a &quot;two-tone&quot; effect results. This issue may be reversed with a method called Retrobrighting, where a mixture of chemicals is applied to the case and exposed to UV light.

===Game cartridge===

Super NES games are distributed on ROM cartridges, officially referred to as Game Pak in most Western regions, and as in Japan and parts of Latin America. Though the Super NES can address 128 Mbit, only 117.75 Mbit are actually available for cartridge use. A fairly normal mapping could easily address up to 95 Mbit of ROM data (48 Mbit at FastROM speed) with 8 Mbit of battery-backed RAM. Most available memory access controllers only support mappings of up to 32 Mbit. The largest games released (&quot;Tales of Phantasia&quot; and &quot;Star Ocean&quot;) contain 48 Mbit of ROM data, and the smallest games contain only 2 Mbit.

Cartridges may also contain battery-backed SRAM to save the game state, extra working RAM, custom coprocessors, or any other hardware that will not exceed the maximum current rating of the console.

==Games==
1757 Super NES games were officially released: 717 in North America (plus 4 championship cartridges), 521 in Europe, 1,448 in Japan, 231 on Satellaview, and 13 on Sufami Turbo. Many Super NES games have been called some of the greatest video games of all time, such as &quot;Super Mario World&quot; (1990), &quot;The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past&quot; (1991), &quot;Final Fantasy VI&quot; (1994), &quot;Donkey Kong Country&quot; (1994), &quot;EarthBound&quot; (1994), &quot;Super Metroid&quot; (1994), &quot;Chrono Trigger&quot; (1995) and &quot;Yoshi&#x27;s Island&quot; (1995). Many Super NES games have been rereleased several times, including on the Virtual Console, Super NES Classic Edition, and the classic games service on Nintendo Switch Online. All Game Boy games are playable with the Super Game Boy add-on.

== Peripherals ==
The Super NES controller design expands on that of the NES, with A, B, X, and Y face buttons in a diamond arrangement, and two shoulder buttons. Lance Barr created its ergonomic design, and he later adapted it in 1993 for the NES-039 &quot;dogbone&quot; controller. The Japanese and PAL region versions incorporated the four colors of the face buttons into the system&#x27;s logo. The North American version&#x27;s buttons were colored to match the redesigned console; the X and Y buttons are lavender with concave faces, and the A and B buttons are purple with convex faces. Several later controller designs have elements from the Super NES controller, including the PlayStation, Dreamcast, Xbox, and Wii Classic Controller. This face button layout is on future Nintendo systems since the Nintendo DS.

Several peripherals add to the functionality of the Super NES. Some are required by certain games, such as the Super Scope light gun, and the Super NES Mouse for a point and click interface. Various third-parties, under license from Nintendo, released multitap adapters connecting up to five controllers into a single console, starting with the Super Multitap by Hudson Soft in conjunction with the &quot;Super Bomberman&quot; series. Specialized third-party controllers, such as the AsciiPad and Super Advantage (the successor to the NES Advantage) by Asciiware, and the Capcom Fighter Power Stick, an arcade-like joystick controller by Capcom designed specifically for &quot;Street Fighter II&quot;. Unusual controllers include the BatterUP baseball bat, the Life Fitness Entertainment System (an exercise bike controller with built-in monitoring software), the TeeV Golf golf club, and the Justifier (a revolver-shaped light gun made by Konami for &quot;Lethal Enforcers&quot;).

Though Nintendo never released an adapter for playing NES games on the Super NES, the Super Game Boy adapter cartridge allows games designed for Nintendo&#x27;s portable Game Boy system to be played on the Super NES. The Super Game Boy touts several feature enhancements over the Game Boy, including palette substitution, custom screen borders, and access to the Super NES console&#x27;s features by specially enhanced Game Boy games. Japan also saw the release of the Super Game Boy 2, which adds a communication port to enable a second Game Boy to connect for multiplayer games.

Like the NES before it, the Super NES has unlicensed third-party peripherals, including a new version of the Game Genie cheat cartridge designed for use with Super NES games.

Soon after the release of the Super NES, companies began marketing backup devices such as the Super Wildcard, Super Pro Fighter Q, and Game Doctor. These devices create a backup of a cartridge, and can be used to play illicit ROM images or to copy games, violating copyright laws in many jurisdictions.
The Japan-only Satellaview is a satellite modem attached to the Super Famicom&#x27;s expansion port and connected to the St.GIGA satellite radio station from April 23, 1995, to June 30, 2000. Satellaview subscribers could download gaming news and specially designed games, which were frequently either remakes of or sequels to older Famicom games, and released in installments. In the United States, the relatively short-lived XBAND allowed users to connect to a network via a dial-up modem to compete against other players around the country.

Nintendo attempted partnerships with Sony and then Philips, to develop CD-ROM-based peripheral prototypes for the console to compete with the TurboGrafx-CD and Sega CD. Sony produced the PlayStation (a brand name the company would use for their later independently produced console), a Super NES console with a built-in CD-ROM drive that never made it past the prototype phase. The Philips project was canceled without a prototype but Philips retained the contractual right to develop games based on Nintendo franchises, which it published for its CD-i multimedia console.

==Enhancement chips==
As part of the overall plan for the Super NES, rather than include an expensive CPU that would still become obsolete in a few years, the hardware designers made it easy to interface special coprocessor chips to the console, just like the MMC chips used for most NES games. This is most often characterized by 16 additional pins on the cartridge card edge.

The Super FX is a RISC CPU designed to perform functions that the main CPU can not feasibly do. The chip is primarily used to create 3D game worlds made with polygons, texture mapping and light source shading. The chip can also be used to enhance 2D games.

The Nintendo fixed-point digital signal processor (DSP) chip allowed for fast vector-based calculations, bitmap conversions, both 2D and 3D coordinate transformations, and other functions. Four revisions of the chip exist, each physically identical but with different microcode. The DSP-1 version, including the later 1A and 1B bug fix revisions, is used most often; the DSP-2, DSP-3, and DSP-4 are used in only one game each.

Similar to the 5A22 CPU in the console, the SA-1 chip contains a 65C816 processor core clocked at 10.7 MHz, a memory mapper, DMA, decompression and bitplane conversion circuitry, several programmable timers, and CIC region lockout functionality.

In Japan, games could be downloaded cheaper than standard cartridges, from Nintendo Power kiosks onto special cartridges containing flash memory and a MegaChips MX15001TFC chip. The chip manages communication with the kiosks to download ROM images and has an initial menu to select a game. Some were published both in cartridge and download form, and others were download only. The service closed on February 8, 2007.

Many cartridges contain other enhancement chips, most of which were created for use by a single company in a few games.

==Reception and legacy==

Approximately 49.1 million Super NES consoles were sold worldwide, with 23.35 million of those units sold in the Americas and 17.17 million in Japan. Although it could not quite repeat the success of the NES, which sold 61.91 million units worldwide, the Super NES was the best-selling console of its era.

In a 1997 year-end review, a team of five &quot;Electronic Gaming Monthly&quot; editors gave the Super NES scores of 5.5, 8.0, 7.0, 7.0, and 8.0. Though they criticized how few new games were coming out for the system and how dated its graphics were compared to current generation consoles, they regarded its selection of must-have games to be still unsurpassed. Additionally noting that used Super NES games were readily available in bargain bins, most of them still recommended buying a Super NES. In 2007, &quot;GameTrailers&quot; named the Super NES as the second-best console of all time (only behind the PlayStation 2) in their list of top ten consoles that &quot;left their mark on the history of gaming&quot;, citing its graphics, sound, and library of top-quality games. In 2015, they also named it the best Nintendo console of all time, saying, &quot;The list of games we love from this console completely annihilates any other roster from the Big N.&quot; Technology columnist Don Reisinger proclaimed &quot;The SNES is the greatest console of all time&quot; in January 2008, citing the quality of the games and the console&#x27;s dramatic improvement over its predecessor; fellow technology columnist Will Greenwald replied with a more nuanced view, giving the Super NES top marks with his heart, the NES with his head, and the PlayStation (for its controller) with his hands. GamingExcellence also gave the Super NES first place in 2008, declaring it &quot;simply the most timeless system ever created&quot; with many games that stand the test of time and citing its innovation in controller design, graphics capabilities, and game storytelling. At the same time, GameDaily rated it fifth of the ten greatest consoles for its graphics, audio, controllers, and games. In 2009, &quot;IGN&quot; named the Super NES the fourth-best video game console, complimenting its audio and number of AAA games.

===Emulation===

SNES emulation began with VSMC in 1994, and Super Pasofami became the first working emulator in 1996. During that time, two competing emulation projects, Snes96 and Snes97, merged to form Snes9x. In 1997, ZSNES development began. In 2004, Bsnes development began with the goal of preservation through maximal accuracy and compatibility, and was later renamed to Higan.

Nintendo of America maintained its stance against the distribution of SNES ROM image files and the use of emulators, as it had with the NES before, saying they represent copyright infringement. Emulation proponents assert that the discontinued hardware production constitutes abandonware status, the owners&#x27; right to make a personal backup, space shifting for private use, the development of homebrew games, the frailty of ROM cartridges and consoles, and the lack of certain foreign imports. Nintendo designed a hobbyist development system for the SNES, but never released it.

Unofficial SNES emulation is available on virtually all platforms, including Android, iOS, game consoles, and PDAs. Individual games have been bundled with official dedicated emulators on some GameCube discs, and Nintendo&#x27;s Virtual Console service for the Wii introduced diverse and officially licensed SNES emulation.

The Super NES Classic Edition was released in September 2017 following the NES Classic Edition. This emulation-based mini-console, which is physically modeled after the North American and European versions of the SNES, is bundled with two SNES-style controllers and 21 games, including the unreleased &quot;Star Fox 2&quot;.

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="4" end="39" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Super Nintendo Entertainment System"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="63" end="77" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Super Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="79" end="88" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Super NES"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="92" end="96" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="SNES"/>
<link wikidata="Q129585" start="103" end="109" title="Fourth generation of video game consoles" label="16-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q17589470" start="110" end="133" title="home video game console" label="home video game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="147" end="155" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="345" end="357" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Super Comboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q370719" start="381" end="400" title="SK Hynix" label="Hyundai Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q10350481" start="459" end="469" title="Playtronic" label="Playtronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="485" end="488" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="CIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351306" start="615" end="631" title="regional lockout" label="regional lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="784" end="813" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Nintendo Entertainment System"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="935" end="947" title="Sega Genesis" label="Sega Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048658" start="1007" end="1037" title="List of Super NES enhancement chips" label="a variety of enhancement chips"/>
<link wikidata="Q633454" start="1054" end="1069" title="ROM cartridge" label="game cartridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q129585" start="1235" end="1245" title="Fourth generation of video game consoles" label="16-bit era"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="1314" end="1318" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q129728" start="1468" end="1478" title="Fifth generation of video game consoles" label="32-bit era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125949" start="1608" end="1620" title="Retrogaming" label="retro gamers"/>
<link wikidata="Q598205" start="1631" end="1639" title="Homebrew (video games)" label="homebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q821067" start="1702" end="1717" title="Virtual Console" label="Virtual Console"/>
<link wikidata="Q30827691" start="1723" end="1748" title="Super NES Classic Edition" label="Super NES Classic Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q30943865" start="1750" end="1772" title="Nintendo Switch Online" label="Nintendo Switch Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309521" start="1877" end="1883" title="Snes9x" label="Snes9x"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="1929" end="1944" title="Family Computer" label="Family Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q219203" start="1955" end="1975" title="NEC Corporation" label="NEC Home Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057377" start="1989" end="1998" title="PC Engine" label="PC Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="2012" end="2016" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="2040" end="2050" title="Mega Drive" label="Mega Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q129758" start="2276" end="2281" title="Third generation of video game consoles" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q163370" start="2354" end="2365" title="Bill Mensch" label="Bill Mensch"/>
<link wikidata="Q255528" start="2395" end="2414" title="MOS Technology 6502" label="MOS Technology 6502"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505987" start="2449" end="2470" title="Western Design Center" label="Western Design Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q178778" start="2483" end="2488" title="Ricoh" label="Ricoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="2587" end="2591" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q557018" start="2601" end="2613" title="Ken Kutaragi" label="Ken Kutaragi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418253" start="2678" end="2688" title="sound chip" label="sound chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q455603" start="2818" end="2828" title="Norio Ohga" label="Norio Ohga"/>
<link wikidata="Q354768" start="2953" end="2969" title="Hiroshi Yamauchi" label="Hiroshi Yamauchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452210" start="3039" end="3052" title="Kyoto Shimbun" label="Kyoto Shimbun"/>
<link wikidata="Q853143" start="3173" end="3192" title="Super Mario World" label="Super Mario Bros. 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309271" start="3206" end="3220" title="Dragon Quest V" label="Dragon Quest V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517772" start="3439" end="3457" title="Christmas shopping season" label="Christmas shopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343212" start="3489" end="3493" title="Enix" label="Enix"/>
<link wikidata="Q587416" start="3869" end="3884" title="Masayuki Uemura" label="Masayuki Uemura"/>
<link wikidata="Q183287" start="4282" end="4288" title="yakuza" label="yakuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q14428" start="4608" end="4614" title="Capcom" label="Capcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q45700" start="4616" end="4622" title="Konami" label="Konami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423789" start="4624" end="4629" title="Tecmo" label="Tecmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q739552" start="4631" end="4637" title="Square (video game company)" label="Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q845047" start="4639" end="4643" title="Koei" label="Koei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343212" start="4649" end="4653" title="Enix" label="Enix"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973" start="4998" end="5008" title="PAL region" label="PAL region"/>
<link wikidata="Q10342903" start="5173" end="5178" title="PAL-M" label="PAL-M"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="5288" end="5301" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401788" start="5326" end="5333" title="Estrela (company)" label="Estrela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530796" start="5367" end="5376" title="Gradiente" label="Gradiente"/>
<link wikidata="Q853143" start="5529" end="5546" title="Super Mario World" label="Super Mario World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198491" start="5563" end="5569" title="F-Zero (video game)" label="F-Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909761" start="5583" end="5591" title="Bombuzal" label="Bombuzal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023663" start="5732" end="5744" title="launch games" label="launch games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305295" start="5779" end="5789" title="Pilotwings (video game)" label="Pilotwings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351825" start="5842" end="5848" title="Mode 7" label="Mode 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798922" start="5877" end="5884" title="SimCity (1989 video game)" label="SimCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194133" start="5902" end="5913" title="Gradius III" label="Gradius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133204" start="6364" end="6381" title="Street Fighter II" label="Street Fighter II"/>
<link wikidata="Q518987" start="6749" end="6768" title="Donkey Kong Country" label="Donkey Kong Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="6930" end="6941" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q200912" start="6946" end="6952" title="Sega Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979028" start="7067" end="7085" title="Wedbush Securities" label="Wedbush Securities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807739" start="7102" end="7116" title="NPD Group" label="NPD sales data"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492131" start="7506" end="7517" title="Ultra Games" label="Ultra Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q339228" start="7758" end="7779" title="Acclaim Entertainment" label="Acclaim Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q14428" start="7911" end="7917" title="Capcom" label="Capcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q207784" start="7993" end="7999" title="Square Enix" label="Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q150294" start="8375" end="8388" title="Mortal Kombat (1992 video game)" label="Mortal Kombat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658401" start="8476" end="8490" title="Fatality (Mortal Kombat)" label="fatality moves"/>
<link wikidata="Q560447" start="8696" end="8705" title="Herb Kohl" label="Herb Kohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q160157" start="8710" end="8723" title="Joe Lieberman" label="Joe Lieberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210800" start="8943" end="8983" title="Entertainment Software Association" label="Interactive Digital Software Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q191458" start="8992" end="9027" title="Entertainment Software Rating Board" label="Entertainment Software Rating Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q129728" start="9239" end="9253" title="Fifth generation of video game consoles" label="32-bit systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q642707" start="9255" end="9259" title="Rare (company)" label="Rare"/>
<link wikidata="Q518987" start="9381" end="9400" title="Donkey Kong Country" label="Donkey Kong Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q623459" start="9473" end="9489" title="Silicon Graphics" label="Silicon Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="10215" end="10234" title="New-Style Super NES" label="New-Style Super NES"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10314" end="10354" title="Super Mario World 2: Yoshi&amp;#x27;s Island" label="Super Mario World 2: Yoshi&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q113485247" start="10379" end="10392" title="New-Style NES" label="New-Style NES"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202713" start="10802" end="10827" title="Kirby&amp;#x27;s Dream Land 3" label="Kirby&amp;#x27;s Dream Land 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q524267" start="10931" end="10938" title="Frogger" label="Frogger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11191" end="11229" title="Metal Slader Glory#Director&amp;#x27;s Cut" label="Metal Slader Glory Director&amp;#x27;s Cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q188642" start="11307" end="11323" title="Game Boy Advance" label="Game Boy Advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="11457" end="11460" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q821067" start="11468" end="11483" title="Virtual Console" label="Virtual Console"/>
<link wikidata="Q17679679" start="11759" end="11775" title="New Nintendo 3DS" label="New Nintendo 3DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q29583519" start="11815" end="11834" title="New Nintendo 2DS XL" label="New Nintendo 2DS XL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190246" start="11875" end="11890" title="Nintendo Direct" label="Nintendo Direct"/>
<link wikidata="Q30943865" start="11994" end="12016" title="Nintendo Switch Online" label="Nintendo Switch Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869" start="12242" end="12247" title="ADPCM" label="ADPCM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12354" end="12367" title="#Enhancement chips" label="chip upgrades"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="12544" end="12547" title="Central processing unit" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192691" start="12553" end="12563" title="Ricoh 5A22" label="Ricoh 5A22"/>
<link wikidata="Q512020" start="12592" end="12602" title="WDC 65C816" label="WDC 65C816"/>
<link wikidata="Q185796" start="12622" end="12626" title="NTSC" label="NTSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="12668" end="12671" title="MHz" label="MHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q210813" start="13020" end="13023" title="Direct memory access" label="DMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q518280" start="13103" end="13109" title="Serial communication" label="serial"/>
<link wikidata="Q763575" start="13114" end="13122" title="Parallel communication" label="parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585234" start="13222" end="13244" title="non-maskable interrupt" label="non-maskable interrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q626978" start="13249" end="13256" title="Vertical blanking interval" label="V-blank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144586" start="13261" end="13264" title="Interrupt request" label="IRQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="13924" end="13926" title="Integrated circuit" label="IC"/>
<link wikidata="Q267416" start="13957" end="13961" title="Static random-access memory" label="SRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333015" start="14025" end="14031" title="Sprite (computer graphics)" label="sprite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357944" start="14091" end="14098" title="Palette (computing)" label="palette"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14161" end="14183" title="List of monochrome and RGB color formats#15-bit RGB" label="15-bit RGB color space"/>
<link wikidata="Q106370" start="14379" end="14403" title="digital signal processor" label="digital signal processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q189396" start="14498" end="14503" title="PSRAM" label="PSRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q557018" start="14524" end="14536" title="Ken Kutaragi" label="Ken Kutaragi"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="14553" end="14557" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918704" start="14797" end="14800" title="Bit Rate Reduction" label="BRR"/>
<link wikidata="Q182767" start="14841" end="14845" title="echo" label="echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351306" start="15118" end="15134" title="regional lockout" label="regional lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087043" start="15565" end="15577" title="modding" label="modification"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665725" start="15618" end="15630" title="lockout chip" label="lockout chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631357" start="15632" end="15635" title="CIC (Nintendo)" label="CIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q185796" start="16352" end="16356" title="NTSC" label="NTSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973" start="16401" end="16404" title="PAL" label="PAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539855" start="16518" end="16530" title="letterboxing (filming)" label="letterboxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q531136" start="17392" end="17410" title="Affordance" label="invite interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q184839" start="17822" end="17833" title="Nintendo 64" label="Nintendo 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q182172" start="17838" end="17846" title="GameCube" label="GameCube"/>
<link wikidata="Q185644" start="17859" end="17874" title="composite video" label="composite video"/>
<link wikidata="Q727477" start="17876" end="17883" title="S-Video" label="S-Video"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17888" end="17891" title="RGB#Video electronics" label="RGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164724" start="17912" end="17914" title="RF connector" label="RF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563565" start="17932" end="17944" title="RF modulator" label="RF modulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q113726751" start="18253" end="18259" title="arcade game" label="arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q113485247" start="18356" end="18369" title="PlayChoice-10" label="PlayChoice-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="18374" end="18377" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="NES"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="18444" end="18458" title="graphical user interface" label="menu interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="19492" end="19506" title="system-on-chip" label="system-on-chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193565" start="19628" end="19639" title="Satellaview" label="Satellaview"/>
<link wikidata="Q185644" start="19815" end="19830" title="composite video" label="composite video"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19862" end="19871" title="RGB color model#Video electronics" label="RGB video"/>
<link wikidata="Q727477" start="19876" end="19883" title="S-Video" label="S-Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563565" start="20002" end="20014" title="RF modulator" label="RF modulator"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20408" end="20448" title="Super Mario World 2: Yoshi&amp;#x27;s Island" label="Super Mario World 2: Yoshi&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q184839" start="20690" end="20701" title="Nintendo 64" label="Nintendo 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q143496" start="20858" end="20869" title="Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene" label="ABS plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11241810" start="21282" end="21296" title="Retr0bright" label="Retrobrighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q633454" start="21433" end="21446" title="ROM cartridge" label="ROM cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q30898679" start="21475" end="21483" title="Game Pak" label="Game Pak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191215" start="21903" end="21921" title="Tales of Phantasia" label="Tales of Phantasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043052" start="21938" end="21948" title="Star Ocean (video game)" label="Star Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977384" start="22197" end="22211" title="current rating" label="current rating"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22315" end="22338" title="Nintendo World Championships#Cartridge" label="championship cartridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193565" start="22379" end="22390" title="Satellaview" label="Satellaview"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200192" start="22402" end="22414" title="Sufami Turbo" label="Sufami Turbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042483" start="22466" end="22498" title="greatest video games of all time" label="greatest video games of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q853143" start="22514" end="22531" title="Super Mario World" label="Super Mario World"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22552" end="22591" title="The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past" label="The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past"/>
<link wikidata="Q535940" start="22612" end="22628" title="Final Fantasy VI" label="Final Fantasy VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q518987" start="22649" end="22668" title="Donkey Kong Country" label="Donkey Kong Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529000" start="22689" end="22699" title="EarthBound" label="EarthBound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194825" start="22720" end="22733" title="Super Metroid" label="Super Metroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q761815" start="22754" end="22768" title="Chrono Trigger" label="Chrono Trigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045765" start="22792" end="22811" title="Yoshi&amp;#x27;s Island" label="Yoshi&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q821067" start="22900" end="22915" title="Virtual Console" label="Virtual Console"/>
<link wikidata="Q30827691" start="22917" end="22942" title="Super NES Classic Edition" label="Super NES Classic Edition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22952" end="22973" title="Nintendo Switch Online#Legacy games service" label="classic games service"/>
<link wikidata="Q30943865" start="22977" end="22999" title="Nintendo Switch Online" label="Nintendo Switch Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706058" start="23005" end="23019" title="List of Game Boy games" label="Game Boy games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190117" start="23042" end="23056" title="Super Game Boy" label="Super Game Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="23752" end="23763" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184198" start="23765" end="23774" title="Dreamcast" label="Dreamcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q132020" start="23776" end="23780" title="Xbox (console)" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573628" start="23786" end="23808" title="Classic Controller" label="Wii Classic Controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="23874" end="23885" title="Nintendo DS" label="Nintendo DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745318" start="23999" end="24010" title="Super Scope" label="Super Scope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055974" start="24011" end="24020" title="light gun" label="light gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296161" start="24030" end="24045" title="Super NES Mouse" label="Super NES Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048387" start="24052" end="24067" title="point and click" label="point and click"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537770" start="24140" end="24148" title="multitap" label="multitap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049502" start="24251" end="24262" title="Hudson Soft" label="Hudson Soft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702756" start="24293" end="24308" title="Super Bomberman" label="Super Bomberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334344" start="24423" end="24436" title="NES Advantage" label="NES Advantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q14428" start="24526" end="24532" title="Capcom" label="Capcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133204" start="24565" end="24582" title="Street Fighter II" label="Street Fighter II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869717" start="24622" end="24630" title="BatterUP" label="BatterUP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544791" start="24649" end="24661" title="Life Fitness" label="Life Fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370818" start="24687" end="24700" title="exercise bike" label="exercise bike"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428758" start="24781" end="24790" title="Konami Justifier" label="Justifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q45700" start="24828" end="24834" title="Konami" label="Konami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736832" start="24845" end="24861" title="Lethal Enforcers" label="Lethal Enforcers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190117" start="24957" end="24971" title="Super Game Boy" label="Super Game Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186437" start="25041" end="25049" title="Game Boy" label="Game Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566257" start="25562" end="25572" title="Game Genie" label="Game Genie"/>
<link wikidata="Q127260993" start="25573" end="25588" title="cheat cartridge" label="cheat cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018746" start="25696" end="25710" title="Game backup device" label="backup devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997589" start="25764" end="25775" title="Bung Enterprises" label="Game Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973327" start="25855" end="25864" title="ROM image" label="ROM image"/>
<link wikidata="Q647578" start="25894" end="25903" title="Copyright infringement" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193565" start="25947" end="25958" title="Satellaview" label="Satellaview"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="25974" end="25979" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081432" start="26053" end="26060" title="St.GIGA" label="St.GIGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090081" start="26061" end="26076" title="satellite radio" label="satellite radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4393107" start="26234" end="26241" title="Video game remake" label="remakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041689" start="26359" end="26364" title="XBAND" label="XBAND"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094073" start="26426" end="26474" title="Online console gaming" label="compete against other players around the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="26514" end="26518" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="26528" end="26535" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="26548" end="26554" title="CD-ROM" label="CD-ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057377" start="26619" end="26632" title="TurboGrafx-16" label="TurboGrafx-CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047516" start="26637" end="26644" title="Sega CD" label="Sega CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391836" start="26664" end="26675" title="Super NES CD-ROM" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="26716" end="26758" title="PlayStation (console)" label="their later independently produced console"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023103" start="27025" end="27029" title="Philips CD-i" label="CD-i"/>
<link wikidata="Q131765" start="27030" end="27040" title="multimedia" label="multimedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q284835" start="27434" end="27442" title="Super FX" label="Super FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="27448" end="27452" title="Reduced instruction set computer" label="RISC"/>
<link wikidata="Q752176" start="27598" end="27613" title="texture mapping" label="texture mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q106370" start="27713" end="27737" title="digital signal processor" label="digital signal processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q175869" start="27956" end="27965" title="microcode" label="microcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q11325069" start="28438" end="28459" title="Nintendo Power (cartridge)" label="Nintendo Power kiosks"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="28495" end="28507" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119235" start="29202" end="29222" title="List of best-selling game consoles" label="best-selling console"/>
<link wikidata="Q793981" start="29284" end="29309" title="Electronic Gaming Monthly" label="Electronic Gaming Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q677385" start="29751" end="29763" title="GameTrailers" label="GameTrailers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="29846" end="29859" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262565" start="30593" end="30607" title="DualShock" label="its controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710110" start="30913" end="30922" title="GameDaily" label="GameDaily"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="31031" end="31034" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q16245021" start="31135" end="31144" title="AAA (video game industry)" label="AAA games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196126" start="31169" end="31178" title="Video game console emulator" label="emulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309521" start="31352" end="31358" title="Snes9x" label="Snes9x"/>
<link wikidata="Q428764" start="31369" end="31374" title="ZSNES" label="ZSNES"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927356" start="31526" end="31531" title="Higan (emulator)" label="Higan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="31534" end="31553" title="Nintendo of America" label="Nintendo of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q647578" start="31704" end="31726" title="copyright infringement" label="copyright infringement"/>
<link wikidata="Q281039" start="31810" end="31821" title="abandonware" label="abandonware"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906127" start="31880" end="31894" title="space shifting" label="space shifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q598205" start="31931" end="31945" title="Homebrew (video games)" label="homebrew games"/>
<link wikidata="Q633454" start="31962" end="31975" title="ROM cartridge" label="ROM cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="32195" end="32202" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="32204" end="32207" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="32228" end="32232" title="Personal digital assistant" label="PDAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q821067" start="32347" end="32362" title="Virtual Console" label="Virtual Console"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="32379" end="32382" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q30827691" start="32447" end="32472" title="Super NES Classic Edition" label="Super NES Classic Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q26706777" start="32518" end="32537" title="NES Classic Edition" label="NES Classic Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496959" start="32750" end="32760" title="Star Fox 2" label="Star Fox 2"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28319" wikidata="Q235086" url="?curid=28319" title="Smalltalk">
<text>Smalltalk is a purely object oriented programming language (OOP) that was originally created in the 1970s for educational use, specifically for constructionist learning, but later found use in business. It was created at Xerox PARC by Learning Research Group (LRG) scientists, including Alan Kay, Dan Ingalls, Adele Goldberg, Ted Kaehler, Diana Merry, and Scott Wallace.

In Smalltalk, executing programs are built of opaque, atomic, so-called objects, which are instances of template code stored in classes. These objects intercommunicate by passing of messages, via an intermediary virtual machine environment (VM). A relatively small number of objects, called primitives, are not amenable to live redefinition, sometimes being defined independently of the Smalltalk programming environment.

Having undergone significant industry development toward other uses, including business and database functions, Smalltalk is still in use today. When first publicly released, Smalltalk-80 presented numerous foundational ideas for the nascent field of object-oriented programming (OOP).

Since inception, the language provided interactive programming via an integrated development environment. This requires reflection and late binding in the language execution of code. Later development has led to at least one instance of Smalltalk execution environment which lacks such an integrated graphical user interface or front-end.

Smalltalk-like languages are in active development and have gathered communities of users around them. American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Smalltalk was ratified in 1998 and represents the standard version of Smalltalk.

Smalltalk took second place for &quot;most loved programming language&quot; in the Stack Overflow Developer Survey in 2017, but it was not among the 26 most loved programming languages of the 2018 survey.

== History ==
There are a large number of Smalltalk variants. The unqualified word &quot;Smalltalk&quot; is often used to indicate the Smalltalk-80 language and compatible VM, the first version to be made publicly available and created in 1980. The first hardware-environments which ran the Smalltalk VMs were Xerox Alto computers.

Smalltalk was the product of research led by Alan Kay at Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (PARC); Alan Kay designed most of the early Smalltalk versions, Adele Goldberg wrote most of the documentation, and Dan Ingalls implemented most of the early versions. The first version, termed Smalltalk-71, was created by Kay in a few mornings on a bet that a programming language based on the idea of message passing inspired by Simula could be implemented in &quot;a page of code&quot;. A later variant used for research work is now termed Smalltalk-72 and influenced the development of the Actor model. Its syntax and execution model were very different from modern Smalltalk variants.

The first Smalltalk interpreter actually implemented was for Smalltalk-72, and was written by Dan Ingalls in about 700 lines of BASIC in October 1972 for the Data General Nova. This version was demonstrated at the MIT AI Lab by Alan Kay in November that year. The first bitmap line drawing routines were implemented by Ted Kaehler in late December 1972. Smalltalk-72 was ported to the Xerox Alto in April 1973, the same month the first units began operation.

After significant revisions which froze some aspects of execution semantics to gain performance (by adopting a Simula-like class inheritance model of execution), Smalltalk-76 was created. This system had a development environment featuring most of the now familiar tools, including a class library code browser/editor. Smalltalk-80 added metaclasses, to help maintain the &quot;everything is an object&quot; (except variables) paradigm by associating properties and behavior with individual classes, and even primitives such as integer and Boolean values (for example, to support different ways to create instances).

Smalltalk-80 was the first language variant made available outside of PARC. In 1981, it was shared with Tektronix, Hewlett-Packard, Apple Computer, and DEC for review and debugging on their platforms.
 The August 1981 issue of Byte Magazine was devoted to Smalltalk-80 and brought its ideas to a large audience. Several books on Smalltalk-80 were also published. Smalltalk-80 became the basis for all future commercial versions of Smalltalk. The final release of Smalltalk-80 Version 1 was in November 1981. Xerox only distributed Version 1 to Apple, DEC, HP, and Tektronix, but these companies were allowed unrestricted redistribution via any system they built. This encouraged the wide spread of Smalltalk. Later, in 1983, Xerox released Smalltalk-80 Version 2. This version was generally available to the public, although under a restrictive license. Versions 1 and 2 were fairly similar, although Version 2 did have some added features such as a spelling corrector. Each release consisted of a virtual image (platform-independent file with object definitions) and a virtual machine specification.

ANSI Smalltalk has been the standard language reference since 1998. Two currently popular Smalltalk implementation variants are descendants of those original Smalltalk-80 images. Squeak is an open source implementation derived from Smalltalk-80 Version 1 by way of Apple Smalltalk. VisualWorks is derived from Smalltalk-80 version 2 by way of Smalltalk-80 2.5 and ObjectWorks (both products of ParcPlace Systems, a Xerox PARC spin-off company formed to bring Smalltalk to the market). As an interesting link between generations, in 2001, Vassili Bykov implemented Hobbes, a virtual machine running Smalltalk-80 inside VisualWorks. (Dan Ingalls later ported Hobbes to Squeak.)

During the late 1980s to mid-1990s, Smalltalk environments, including support, training and add-ons, were sold by two competing organizations: ParcPlace Systems and Digitalk, both California based. ParcPlace Systems tended to focus on the Unix/Sun microsystems market, while Digitalk focused on Intel-based PCs running Microsoft Windows or IBM&#x27;s OS/2. Both firms struggled to take Smalltalk mainstream due to Smalltalk&#x27;s substantial memory needs, limited run-time performance, and initial lack of supported connectivity to SQL-based relational database servers. While the high price of ParcPlace Smalltalk limited its market penetration to mid-sized and large commercial organizations, the Digitalk products initially tried to reach a wider audience with a lower price. IBM initially supported the Digitalk product, but then entered the market with a Smalltalk product in 1995 named VisualAge/Smalltalk. Easel introduced Enfin at this time on Windows and OS/2. Enfin became far more popular in Europe, as IBM introduced it into IT shops before their development of IBM Smalltalk (later VisualAge). Enfin was later acquired by Cincom Systems, and is now sold under the name ObjectStudio, and is part of the Cincom Smalltalk product suite.

In 1995, ParcPlace and Digitalk merged into ParcPlace-Digitalk and then rebranded in 1997 as ObjectShare, located in Irvine, CA. ObjectShare (NASDAQ: OBJS) was traded publicly until 1999, when it was delisted and dissolved. The merged firm never managed to find an effective response to Java as to market positioning, and by 1997 its owners were looking to sell the business. In 1999, Seagull Software acquired the ObjectShare Java development lab (including the original Smalltalk/V and Visual Smalltalk development team), and still owns VisualSmalltalk, although worldwide distribution rights for the Smalltalk product remained with ObjectShare who then sold them to Cincom. VisualWorks was sold to Cincom and is now part of Cincom Smalltalk. Cincom has backed Smalltalk strongly, releasing multiple new versions of VisualWorks and ObjectStudio each year since 1999.

Cincom, GemTalk, and Instantiations, continue to sell Smalltalk environments. IBM ended VisualAge Smalltalk, having in the late 1990s decided to back Java instead and, , is supported by Instantiations, Inc. Instantiations renamed the product VA Smalltalk (VAST Platform) and continue to release new versions yearly. The open Squeak implementation has an active community of developers, including many of the original Smalltalk community, and was used to provide the Etoys environment on the One Laptop per Child (OLPC) project, a toolkit for developing collaborative applications Croquet Project, and the Open Cobalt virtual world application. GNU Smalltalk is a free software implementation of a derivative of Smalltalk-80 from the GNU project. Pharo Smalltalk is a fork of Squeak oriented toward research and use in commercial environments.

As of 2016, a significant development that has spread across all Smalltalk environments is the increasing usage of two web frameworks, Seaside and AIDA/Web, to simplify the building of complex web applications. Seaside has seen considerable market interest with Cincom, Gemstone, and Instantiations incorporating and extending it.

==Influences==
Smalltalk was one of many object-oriented programming languages based on Simula. Smalltalk is also one of the most influential programming languages. Virtually all of the object-oriented languages that came after—Flavors, CLOS, Objective-C, Java, Python, Ruby, and many others—were influenced by Smalltalk. Smalltalk was also one of the most popular languages for agile software development methods, rapid application development (RAD) or prototyping, and software design patterns. The highly productive environment provided by Smalltalk platforms made them ideal for rapid, iterative development.

Smalltalk emerged from a larger program of Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) funded research that in many ways defined the modern world of computing. In addition to Smalltalk, working prototypes of things such as hypertext, GUIs, multimedia, the mouse, telepresence, and the Internet were developed by ARPA researchers in the 1960s. Alan Kay (one of the inventors of Smalltalk) also described a tablet computer he named the Dynabook which resembles modern tablet computers like the iPad.

Smalltalk environments were often the first to develop what are now common object-oriented software design patterns. One of the most popular is the model–view–controller (MVC) pattern for user interface design. The MVC pattern enables developers to have multiple consistent views of the same underlying data. It&#x27;s ideal for software development environments, where there are various views (e.g., entity-relation, dataflow, object model, etc.) of the same underlying specification. Also, for simulations or games where the underlying model may be viewed from various angles and levels of abstraction.

In addition to the MVC pattern, the Smalltalk language and environment were influential in the history of the graphical user interface (GUI) and the &quot;what you see is what you get&quot; (WYSIWYG) user interface, font editors, and desktop metaphors for UI design. The powerful built-in debugging and object inspection tools that came with Smalltalk environments set the standard for all the integrated development environments, starting with Lisp Machine environments, that came after.

Smalltalk uses several collection filter operators that rhyme with the &quot;-ect&quot; suffix, collect:, select:, inject:into:, et al. This was inspired by a line from the 1967 Arlo Guthrie monologue &quot;Alice&#x27;s Restaurant Massacree,&quot; in which Guthrie underwent a battery of being &quot;injected, inspected, detected, infected, neglected and selected.&quot;

== Object-oriented programming ==

As in other object-oriented languages, the central concept in Smalltalk-80 (but not in Smalltalk-72) is that of an &quot;object&quot;. An object is always an &quot;instance&quot; of a &quot;class&quot;. Classes are &quot;blueprints&quot; that describe the properties and behavior of their instances. For example, a GUI&#x27;s window class might declare that windows have properties such as the label, the position and whether the window is visible or not. The class might also declare that instances support operations such as opening, closing, moving and hiding. Each particular window object would have its own values of those properties, and each of them would be able to perform operations defined by its class.

A Smalltalk object can do exactly three things:
# Hold state (references to other objects).
# Receive a message from itself or another object.
# In the course of processing a message, send messages to itself or another object.

The state an object holds is always private to that object. Other objects can query or change that state only by sending requests (messages) to the object to do so. Any message can be sent to any object: when a message is received, the receiver determines whether that message is appropriate. If the message is not understood by the object then the virtual machine sends the doesNotUnderstand: message with the original message as an argument, and the default implementation of doesNotUnderstand: raises an exception that if not caught opens the system&#x27;s debugger. Alan Kay has commented that despite the attention given to objects, messaging is the most important concept in Smalltalk: &quot;The big idea is &#x27;messaging&#x27;—that is what the kernel of Smalltalk/Squeak is all about (and it&#x27;s something that was never quite completed in our Xerox PARC phase).&quot;

Unlike most other languages, Smalltalk code can be modified while the system is running. Live coding and applying fixes &#x27;on-the-fly&#x27; is a dominant programming methodology for Smalltalk and is one of the main reasons for its productivity.

Smalltalk is a &quot;pure&quot; object-oriented programming language, meaning that, unlike C++ and Java, there are no primitive types. All values are represented as objects and computation on integers uses message sending just like any other object. In Smalltalk, types such as integers, Booleans and characters are also objects, in the sense that they are instances of corresponding classes, and operations on them are invoked by sending messages. For efficiency and generality integers are implemented by four classes, Integer, the abstract superclass of all integers, SmallInteger, whose instances fit in a machine word, for example having a 61-bit signed range in a 64-bit implementation, LargePositiveInteger and LargeNegativeInteger, the last two being vectors of bytes. Consequently Smalltalk can evaluate 52 factorial to produce 80658175170943878571660636856403766975289505440883277824000000000000. The transition from small to large integers is transparent to the programmer; variables do not require type declarations. This makes the system both concise and flexible. A programmer can change or extend (through subclassing) the classes that implement what in other languages would be primitive values, so that new behavior can be defined for their instances—for example, to implement new control structures—or even so that their existing behavior will be changed. This fact is summarized in the commonly heard phrase &quot;In Smalltalk everything is an object&quot;, which may be more accurately expressed as &quot;all values are objects&quot;, as variables are not.

Since all values are objects, classes are also objects. Each class is an instance of the &quot;metaclass&quot; of that class. Metaclasses in turn are also objects, and are all instances of a class named Metaclass. Classes contain method dictionaries that map selectors (the equivalent of function procedure names in other languages) to method objects, objects that are executed to evaluate messages. Classes inherit from other classes, with either Object or ProtoObject at the root of the class hierarchy. Sending a message to an object at the most abstract involves fetching the class of the receiver (the object being sent the message) and looking up the message&#x27;s selector in the class&#x27;s method dictionary, followed by the superclass and so on until the method is found or doesNotUnderstand is sent. Smalltalk virtual machines use various techniques to speed up message lookup so the system provides both a simple consistent message binding mechanism and good efficiency. Code blocks—Smalltalk&#x27;s way of expressing anonymous functions—are also objects. They have a very lightweight syntax and are used throughout the system to implement control structures, especially for the Collection hierarchy.

== Reflection ==
Reflection is a feature of having a meta-model as Smalltalk does. The meta-model is the part of the system that implements the programming system itself, and developers can use the meta-model to do things like walk through, examine, and modify code in the running system, or find all the instances of a certain kind of structure (e.g., all instances of the Method class in the meta-model).

Smalltalk-80 is a totally reflective system. Smalltalk-80 provides both structural and computational reflection. Smalltalk is a structurally reflective system which structure is defined by Smalltalk-80 objects. The classes and methods that define the system are also objects and fully part of the system that they help define. The Smalltalk compiler, which is itself written in Smalltalk and exists alongside all the other code in the system, compiles textual source code into method objects, typically instances of codice_1. These get added to classes by storing them in a class&#x27;s method dictionary. The part of the class hierarchy that defines classes can add new classes to the system. The system is extended by running Smalltalk-80 code that creates or defines classes and methods. In this way a Smalltalk-80 system is a &quot;living&quot; system, carrying around the ability to extend itself at run time. One can even extend the compiler at run-time; indeed this is how the Compiler is developed and maintained.

Since the classes are objects, they can be asked questions such as &quot;what methods do you implement?&quot; or &quot;what fields/slots/instance variables do you define?&quot;. So objects can easily be inspected, copied, (de)serialized and so on with generic code that applies to any object in the system.

Smalltalk-80 also provides computational reflection, the ability to observe the computational state of the system. In languages derived from the original Smalltalk-80 the current activation of a method is accessible as an object named via a pseudo-variable (one of the six reserved words), codice_2, which corresponds to a stack frame in conventional language implementations, and is called a &quot;context&quot;. Sending a message is done within some context, and to evaluate the message another context is created, the first being the sender of the former. In this way the stack is a linked list of context objects, and the debugger is essentially an inspector of this &quot;spaghetti stack&quot;. By sending messages to codice_2 a method activation can ask questions like &quot;who sent this message to me&quot;. These facilities make it possible to implement coroutines or Prolog-like back-tracking without modifying the virtual machine. The exception system is implemented using this facility. One of the more interesting uses of this is in the Seaside web framework which relieves the programmer of dealing with the complexity of a Web Browser&#x27;s back button by storing continuations for each edited page and switching between them as the user navigates a web site. Programming the web server using Seaside can then be done using a more conventional programming style. As with message sending Smalltalk-80 virtual machines optimize away the expensive use of contexts internally, providing the illusion and flexibility of a spaghetti stack without most its costs. Essentially context objects are created lazily as required, for example when a message is sent to the thisContext variable.

An example of how Smalltalk can use reflection is the mechanism for handling errors. When an object is sent a message that it does not implement, the virtual machine sends the object the codice_4 message with a reification of the message as an argument. The message (another object, an instance of codice_5) contains the selector of the message and an codice_6 of its arguments. In an interactive Smalltalk system the default implementation of codice_4 is one that opens an error window (a Notifier) reporting the error to the user. Through this and the reflective facilities the user can examine the context in which the error occurred, redefine the offending code, and continue, all within the system, using Smalltalk-80&#x27;s reflective facilities.

By creating a class that understands (implements) only doesNotUnderstand:, one can create an instance that can intercept any message sent to it via its doesNotUnderstand: method. Such instances are called transparent proxies. Such proxies can then be used to implement a number of facilities such as distributed Smalltalk where messages are exchanged between multiple Smalltalk systems, database interfaces where objects are transparently faulted out of a database, promises, etc. The design of distributed Smalltalk influenced such systems as CORBA.

==Syntax==

Smalltalk-80 syntax is rather minimalist, based on only a handful of declarations. In fact, there are only five &quot;keywords&quot; in Smalltalk, names of pseudo-variables with a special meaning: codice_8, codice_9, codice_10, codice_11, and codice_12. These are properly termed &quot;pseudo-variables&quot;, identifiers that follow the rules for variable identifiers but denote bindings that a programmer cannot change. The codice_8, codice_9, and codice_10 pseudo-variables are singleton instances. codice_11 and codice_12 refer to the receiver of a message within a method activated in response to that message, but sends to codice_12 are looked up in the superclass of the method&#x27;s defining class rather than the class of the receiver, which allows methods in subclasses to invoke methods of the same name in superclasses. The only built-in language constructs are message sends, assignment, method return, literal syntax for some objects, including block literals (closures). From its origins as a language for children of all ages, standard Smalltalk syntax uses punctuation in a manner more like English than mainstream coding languages. The remainder of the language, including control structures for conditional evaluation and iteration, is implemented on top of the built-in constructs by the standard Smalltalk class library. (For performance reasons, implementations may recognize and treat as special some of those messages; however, this is only an optimization and is not coded into the language syntax.). The pseudo-variable codice_2 may have been added in some implementations, but is not mentioned in either Smalltalk-80 or ANSI Standard. Pseudo-variables in general realise arguments passed to messages or blocks, content of these variables is read-only and cannot be modified.

The adage that &quot;Smalltalk syntax fits on a postcard&quot; may have originated in Alan Kay&#x27;s original conception of the language, as related by him in practically every of tens or hundreds of public lectures, op. cit., or perhaps it could refer to a code snippet by Ralph Johnson, demonstrating all the basic standard syntactic elements of methods:

exampleWithNumber: x
 | y |
 true &amp; false not &amp; (nil isNil) ifFalse: [self halt].
 y := self size + super size.
 #($a #a &#x27;a&#x27; 1 1.0)
 do: [ :each |
 Transcript show: (each class name);
 show: &#x27; &#x27;].
 ^x &lt; y
===Literals===
The following examples illustrate the most common objects which can be written as literal values in Smalltalk-80 methods.

Numbers. The following list illustrates some of the possibilities.
42
-42
123.45
1.2345e2
2r10010010
16rA000
The last two entries are a binary and a hexadecimal number, respectively. The number before the &#x27;r&#x27; is the radix or base. The base does not have to be a power of two; for example 36rSMALLTALK is a valid number equal to 80738163270632 decimal.

Characters are written by preceding them with a dollar sign:

$A

Strings are sequences of characters enclosed in single quotes:

&#x27;Hello, world!&#x27;

To include a quote in a string, escape it using a second quote:

&#x27;I said, &quot;Hello, world!&quot; to them.&#x27;

Double quotes do not need escaping, since single quotes delimit a string:

&#x27;I said, &quot;Hello, world!&quot; to them.&#x27;

Two equal strings (strings are equal if they contain all the same characters) can be different objects residing in different places in memory. In addition to strings, Smalltalk has a class of character sequence objects named Symbol. Symbols are guaranteed to be unique—there can be no two equal symbols which are different objects. Because of that, symbols are very cheap to compare and are often used for language artifacts such as message selectors (see below).

Symbols are written as # followed by a string literal. For example:

#&#x27;foo&#x27;

If the sequence does not include whitespace or punctuation characters,
this can also be written as:

#foo

Arrays:

#(1 2 3 4)

defines an array of four integers.
#((1 2 3 4) [1 2 3 4] &#x27;four&#x27; 4.0 #four)
defines a seven element array whose first element is a literal array, second element a byte array, third element the string &#x27;four&#x27;, and so on.

Many implementations support the following literal syntax for ByteArrays:

#[1 2 3 4]

defines a ByteArray of four integers.

And last but not least, blocks (anonymous function literals)

[... Some smalltalk code...] The following takes two arguments and compares any two objects which can understand &quot;less than&quot;, for example, numbers, and strings[:a :b| a &lt; b]

Blocks are explained in detail further in the text.

Many Smalltalk dialects implement additional syntaxes for other objects, but the ones above are the essentials supported by all.

===Variable declarations===
The two kinds of variables commonly used in Smalltalk are instance variables and temporary variables. Other variables and related terminology depend on the particular implementation. For example, VisualWorks has class shared variables and namespace shared variables, while Squeak and many other implementations have class variables, pool variables and global variables.

Temporary variable declarations in Smalltalk are variables declared inside a method (see below). They are declared at the top of the method as names separated by spaces and enclosed by vertical bars. For example:

| index |

declares a temporary variable named index which contains initially the value codice_10.

Multiple variables may be declared within one set of bars:

| index vowels |

declares two variables: index and vowels. All variables are initialized. Variables are initialized to nil except the indexed variables of Strings, which are initialized to the null character or ByteArrays which are initialized to 0.

===Assignment===
A variable is assigned a value via the &#x27;codice_21&#x27; syntax. So:

vowels := &#x27;aeiou&#x27;

Assigns the string codice_22 to the formerly declared vowels variable. The string is an object (a sequence of characters between single quotes is the syntax for literal strings), created by the compiler at compile time.

In the original Parc Place image, the glyph of the underscore character ⟨_⟩ appeared as a left-facing arrow ⟨←⟩ (like in the 1963 version of the ASCII code). Smalltalk originally accepted this left-arrow as the only assignment operator. Some modern code still contains what appear to be underscores acting as assignments, hearkening back to this original usage. Most modern Smalltalk implementations accept either the underscore or the colon-equals syntax.

===Messages===
The message is the most fundamental language construct in Smalltalk. Even control structures are implemented as message sends. Smalltalk adopts by default a dynamic dispatch and single dispatch strategy (as opposed to multiple dispatch, used by some other object-oriented languages). There are three kinds of message sends, unary messages which have a single keyword, such as class and size, binary messages which for example are used for arithmetic, such as a &lt; b, a ~= b, and keyword messages where a keyword followed by a colon precedes each argument in the message, so that a between: b and: c sends the #between:and: message to codice_23 with arguments codice_24 and codice_25. Unary messages have higher precedence than binary messages, which have higher precedence than keyword messages, and evaluation is strictly left-to-right. There is no arithmetic precedence. 1 + 2 * 3 evaluates to 9, not to 7.

The following example sends the message &#x27;factorial&#x27; to number 42:

42 factorial

In this situation 42 is called the message &quot;receiver&quot;, while &#x27;factorial&#x27; is the message &quot;selector&quot;. The receiver responds to the message by returning a value (presumably in this case the factorial of 42). Among other things, the result of the message can be assigned to a variable:

aRatherBigNumber := 42 factorial

&quot;factorial&quot; above is what is called a &quot;unary message&quot; because only one object, the receiver, is involved. Messages can carry additional objects as &quot;arguments&quot;, as follows:

2 raisedTo: 4

In this expression two objects are involved: 2 as the receiver and 4 as the message argument. The message result, or in Smalltalk parlance, &quot;the answer&quot; is supposed to be 16. Such messages are called &quot;keyword messages&quot;. A message can have more arguments, using the following syntax:

&#x27;hello world&#x27; indexOf: $o startingAt: 6

which answers the index of character &#x27;o&#x27; in the receiver string, starting the search from index 6. The selector of this message is &quot;indexOf:startingAt:&quot;, consisting of two pieces, or &quot;keywords&quot;.

Such interleaving of keywords and arguments is meant to improve readability of code, since arguments are explained by their preceding keywords. For example, an expression to create a rectangle using a C++ or Java-like syntax might be written as:

new Rectangle(100, 200);

It&#x27;s unclear which argument is which. By contrast, in Smalltalk, this code would be written as:

Rectangle width: 100 height: 200

The receiver in this case is &quot;Rectangle&quot;, a class, and the answer will be a new instance of the class with the specified width and height.

Finally, most of the special (non-alphabetic) characters can be used as what are called &quot;binary messages&quot;. These allow mathematical and logical operators to be written in their traditional form:

3 + 4

which sends the message &quot;+&quot; to the receiver 3 with 4 passed as the argument (the answer of which will be 7). Similarly,

3 &gt; 4

is the message &quot;&gt;&quot; sent to 3 with argument 4 (the answer of which will be false). The programmer is free to define new binary selectors just as they are free to define novel unary and keyword messages.

Notice, that the Smalltalk-80 language itself does not imply the meaning of those operators. The outcome of the above is only defined by how the receiver of the message (in this case a Number instance) responds to messages &quot;+&quot; and &quot;&gt;&quot;.

A side effect of this mechanism is operator overloading. A message &quot;&gt;&quot; can also be understood by other objects, allowing the use of expressions of the form &quot;a &gt; b&quot; to compare them.

===Expressions===
Smalltalk is an expression-based language. Every statement, including control constructs, has a value, which is some object. An expression can include multiple message sends. In this case expressions are parsed according to a simple order of precedence. Unary messages have the highest precedence, followed by binary messages, followed by keyword messages. For example:

3 factorial + 4 factorial between: 10 and: 100

is evaluated as follows:

#3 receives the message &quot;factorial&quot; and answers 6
#4 receives the message &quot;factorial&quot; and answers 24
#6 receives the message &quot;+&quot; with 24 as the argument and answers 30
#30 receives the message &quot;between:and:&quot; with 10 and 100 as arguments and answers true

The answer of the last message sent is the result of the entire expression.

Parentheses can alter the order of evaluation when needed. For example,

(3 factorial + 4) factorial between: 10 and: 100

will change the meaning so that the expression first computes &quot;3 factorial + 4&quot; yielding 10. That 10 then receives the second &quot;factorial&quot; message, yielding 3628800. 3628800 then receives &quot;between:and:&quot;, answering false.

Because the meaning of binary messages is not coded into Smalltalk-80 syntax, all of them are considered to have equal precedence and are evaluated simply from left to right. Because of this, the meaning of Smalltalk expressions using binary messages can be different from their &quot;traditional&quot; interpretation:

3 + 4 * 5

is evaluated as &quot;(3 + 4) * 5&quot;, producing 35. To obtain the expected answer of 23, parentheses must be used to explicitly define the order of operations:

3 + (4 * 5)

Unary messages can be &quot;chained&quot; by writing them one after another:

3 factorial factorial log

which sends &quot;factorial&quot; to 3, then &quot;factorial&quot; to the result (6), then &quot;log&quot; to the result (720), producing the result 2.85733.

A series of expressions can be written as in the following (hypothetical) example, each separated by a period (period is a statement separator, not a statement terminator). This example first creates a new instance of class Window, stores it in a variable, and then sends two messages to it.
 | window |
 window := Window new.
 window label: &#x27;Hello&#x27;.
 window open
If a series of messages are sent to the same receiver as in the example above, they can also be written as a &quot;cascade&quot; with individual messages separated by semicolons:
 Window new
 label: &#x27;Hello&#x27;;
 open
This rewrite of the earlier example as a single expression avoids the need to store the new window in a temporary variable. According to the usual precedence rules, the unary message &quot;new&quot; is sent first, and then &quot;label:&quot; and &quot;open&quot; are sent to the receiver of &quot;new&quot;.

===Code blocks===
A block of code (an anonymous function) can be expressed as a literal value (which is an object, since all values are objects). This is achieved with square brackets:

[ :params | &lt;message-expressions&gt; ]

Where &quot;:params&quot; is the list of parameters the code can take. This means that the Smalltalk code:

[:x | x + 1]

can be understood as:

:formula_1

or expressed in lambda terms as:

:formula_2

and

[:x | x + 1] value: 3

can be evaluated as

:formula_3

Or in lambda terms as:

:formula_4

The resulting block object can form a closure: it can access the variables of its enclosing lexical scopes at any time. Blocks are first-class objects.

Blocks can be executed by sending them the &quot;value&quot; message. Compound variations exist to provide parameters to the block e.g., codice_26 and codice_27.

The literal representation of blocks was an innovation which on the one hand allowed certain code to be significantly more readable; it allowed algorithms involving iteration to be coded in a clear and concise way. Code that would typically be written with loops in some languages can be written concisely in Smalltalk using blocks, sometimes in a single line. But more importantly blocks allow control structure to be expressed using messages and polymorphism, since blocks defer computation and polymorphism can be used to select alternatives. So if-then-else in Smalltalk is written and implemented as

expr ifTrue: [statements to evaluate if expr] ifFalse: [statements to evaluate if not expr]
&quot;True methods for evaluation&quot;
&quot;False methods for evaluation&quot;
positiveAmounts := allAmounts select: [:anAmount | anAmount isPositive]

This is related to functional programming, wherein patterns of computation (here selection) are abstracted into higher-order functions. For example, the message &quot;select:&quot; on a Collection is equivalent to the higher-order function filter on an appropriate functor.

==Control structures==
Control structures do not have special syntax in Smalltalk. They are instead implemented as messages sent to objects. For example, conditional execution is implemented by sending the message ifTrue: to a Boolean object, passing as an argument the block of code to be executed if and only if the Boolean receiver is true. The two subclasses of Boolean both implement ifTrue:, where the implementation in subclass True always evaluates the block and the implementation in subclass False never evaluates the block.

The following code demonstrates this:

result := a &gt; b
 ifTrue:[ &#x27;greater&#x27; ]
 ifFalse:[ &#x27;less or equal&#x27; ]

Blocks are also used to implement user-defined control structures, enumerators, visitors, exception handling, pluggable behavior and many other patterns.
For example:

| aString vowels |
aString := &#x27;This is a string&#x27;.
vowels := aString select: [:aCharacter | aCharacter isVowel].

In the last line, the string is sent the message select: with an argument that is a code block literal. The code block literal will be used as a predicate function that should answer true if and only if an element of the String should be included in the Collection of characters that satisfy the test represented by the code block that is the argument to the &quot;select:&quot; message.

A String object responds to the &quot;select:&quot; message by iterating through its members (by sending itself the message &quot;do:&quot;), evaluating the selection block (&quot;aBlock&quot;) once with each character it contains as the argument. When evaluated (by being sent the message &quot;value: each&quot;), the selection block (referenced by the parameter &quot;aBlock&quot;, and defined by the block literal &quot;[:aCharacter | aCharacter isVowel]&quot;), answers a Boolean, which is then sent &quot;ifTrue:&quot;. If the Boolean is the object true, the character is added to a string to be returned.
Because the &quot;select:&quot; method is defined in the abstract class Collection, it can also be used like this:

| rectangles aPoint collisions |
rectangles := OrderedCollection
 with: (Rectangle left: 0 right: 10 top: 100 bottom: 200)
 with: (Rectangle left: 10 right: 10 top: 110 bottom: 210).
aPoint := Point x: 20 y: 20.
collisions := rectangles select: [:aRect | aRect containsPoint: aPoint].

The exception handling mechanism uses blocks as handlers (similar to CLOS-style exception handling):
 some operation
] on:Error do:[:ex |
 handler-code
 ex return

The exception handler&#x27;s &quot;ex&quot; argument provides access to the state of the suspended operation (stack frame, line-number, receiver and arguments etc.) and is also used to control how the computation is to proceed (by sending one of &quot;ex proceed&quot;, &quot;ex reject&quot;, &quot;ex restart&quot; or &quot;ex return&quot;).

==Classes==
This is a stock class definition:

Object subclass: #MessagePublisher
 instanceVariableNames: &quot;
 classVariableNames: &quot;
 poolDictionaries: &quot;
 category: &#x27;Smalltalk Examples&#x27;

Often, most of this definition will be filled in by the environment. Notice that this is a message to the codice_28 class to create a subclass named codice_29. In other words: classes are first-class objects in Smalltalk which can receive messages just like any other object and can be created dynamically at execution time.

===Methods===
When an object receives a message, a method matching the message name is invoked. The following code defines a method publish, and so defines what will happen when this object receives the &#x27;publish&#x27; message.

publish
 Transcript show: &#x27;Hello World!&#x27;

The following method demonstrates receiving multiple arguments and returning a value:

quadMultiply: i1 and: i2
 &quot;This method multiplies the given numbers by each other and the result by 4.&quot;
 | mul |
 mul := i1 * i2.
 ^mul * 4

The method&#x27;s name is codice_30. The return value is specified with the codice_31 operator.

Objects are responsible for determining dynamically at runtime which method to execute in response to a message—while in many languages this may be (sometimes, or even always) determined statically at compile time.

===Instantiating classes===
The following code:

MessagePublisher new

creates (and returns) a new instance of the MessagePublisher class. This is typically assigned to a variable:

publisher := MessagePublisher new

However, it is also possible to send a message to a temporary, anonymous object:

MessagePublisher new publish
==Integrated Development Environment==

Smalltalk is one of the first systems to be based around an Integrated Development Environment. There are a rich variety of tools to support code development, and other activities, such as graphics, and music. Smalltalk was the first system in which the modern desktop paradigm of Windows, Icons, Menus, and Pointers (WIMP) was created. Although pointers has already been invented, Smalltalk was the first system to implement overlapping windows and pop-up menus. While there are several programming tools we shall describe the following five major tools. The images of the tools are from a 2024 Squeak system
* browser, the main code viewing and writing tool
* workspace, a text editor in which expressions can be evaluate
* transcript, an output window for text, which in many dialects is also a workspace
* inspector
* notifier/debugger, a window opened in response to an unhandled exception, and can morph into a full debugger
=== Browser ===
Smalltalk-80 derived systems organize classes within &quot;system categories&quot;, such as codice_32, codice_33, codice_34, codice_35, etc, and within classes methods are organized in named categories such as codice_36, codice_37, codice_38, etc. From this follows the classic five paned browser, with four panes in the upper half of the window containing from high to left the list of system categories, that when one is selected displays in the second window the list of classes in that category, that when one is selected displays the list of message categories in the selected class, that when one is selected displays in the last pane the selectors of the methods in the selected category in the selected class. When one of the selectors in the fourth pane is selected the source for that method is displayed in the fifth pane. If only a category is selected and not a method, the fifth pane shows a template for defining a new method. If a system category is selected but no class, a template for creating a class in the category is displayed. Various pop-up menus allow one to query the tool such as searching for a class by name, finding all senders of a selected message, or all implementors of the message, and so on. In this way the browser is both a code reading and system exploration tool and a code authoring tool.

=== Workspace ===
A Workspace is a simple text editor editing a single string. One can type arbitrary text in the workspace, including Smalltalk expressions. On the pop-up menu &quot;do it&quot; (evaluate the selected expression), &quot;print it&quot; (evaluate the selected expression and insert the print string of the result immediately after the selection), and &quot;inspect it&quot; (open an inspector on the result of the evaluation of the selected expression, see &quot;Inspector&quot; below) are three oft used actions. Note that the fifth pane in the Browser is also a workspace, so that one can evaluate expressions and insert their results while editing method definitions, and a common thing is to include evalteable expressions, typically examples, in comments in a method, because almost everywhere the text of a method is shown (for example in the debugger) code is executable as in a workspace. Both workspaces and the browser&#x27;s text panes are typically syntax highlighted. By using blocks to separate different expressions one can have several syntax highlighted expressions, each with their own temporaries in a single workspace. 

=== Transcript ===
The Transcript is a special workspace associated with the global Transcript. So evaluating Transcript print: 52 factorial; cr; flush causes 80658175170943878571660636856403766975289505440883277824000000000000 followed by a newline to appear on the Transcript window. The Transcript therefore serves as a place to emit logging messages, although it can also function as a Workspace
=== Inspector ===
There are various inspectors, some tailored to displaying different kinds of object. The most basic inspector has two panes. To the left is a list of the object itself (with the label &quot;self&quot;), followed by the instance variables in the object, which will include numbered instance variables in sequences such as strings and arrays. To the right is a workspace pane. Selecting a name in the list replaces the workspace&#x27;s contents with a print string of the selected variable. Editing and &quot;accepting&quot; the text in the workspace pane when an instance variable is selected will assign the result of the evaluation to the selected variable. One can &quot;drill down&quot; by using the &quot;inspect&quot; command on the list menu which will apply to the selected instance variable. More sophisticated inspectors (e.g. explorers) support finder-like tree access so that object structure can be traversed without opening additional windows.

=== Notifier/Debugger ===
The default response to an unhandled exception is to open a Notifier, which is a window containing a stack backtrace of the first few activations, and buttons such as &quot;Debug&quot;, &quot;Proceed&quot;, &quot;Close&quot;, etc. If the programmer chooses &quot;Debug&quot; then the full debugger opens. This has six panes. At the top is the stack window, containing a list of the contexts in the stack. Selecting a context causes the middle pane to display the text of the context&#x27;s method, and to highlight the current expression within the method. Selecting the top context will display the method raising the exception and the message raising the exception will be highlighted. Selecting a context causes the bottom four panes to be updated. The bottom left two panes are the receiver inspector, that inspect the receiver of the selected message. The bottom right two panes are the context inspector that show the argument and temporary variable names in the selected context and allow display and modification of these variables.

Sending the message codice_39 causes an exception which opens a notifier, providing a simple breakpoint facility (typically breakpoint facilities provide more than just the simple halt, but it was the first such facility). Workspaces also provide a &quot;debug it&quot; evaluator which opens a debugger on the selected expression positioned at the first message send within the expression. So selecting codice_40 and choosing &quot;debug it&quot; from the pop-up menu opens a debugger with the &quot;doit context&quot; selected and the codice_41 selector highlighted. The debugger provides buttons to do &quot;step into&quot;, &quot;step over&quot;, etc. Hence by choosing &quot;step into&quot; one can explore the evaluation of codice_40. In this way the debugger provides an inspector of a process, allowing one to explore a halted computation.

If an exception results from a doesNotUnderstand:, or subclassResponsibility send, then the notifier will include a &quot;Create&quot; button, allowing the programmer to choose where in the receiver&#x27;s hierarchy to define an &quot;initial draft&quot; of the method to be implemented. Redefining a method in the debugger causes the selected context to reset back to the first statement (arguments are not modifiable in Smalltalk so this gets the execution state back to the start of a method). In this way the debugger supports live programming, defining methods as the computation proceeds. This is an extremely productive and enjoyable way to program. Everything in the system is at your finger tips. One has the full power of workspaces to evaluate subexpressions, and the browser to search for supporting code as one programs.
Clicking on the Debug button opens the Notifier into a Debugger allowing inspecting the call stack and editing and continuing from any method activation. In this case the Notifier has created a template of the missing method that the programmer can edit, compile, and then continue the computation.
==Hello World example==
The Hello world program is used by virtually all texts to new programming languages as the first program learned to show the most basic syntax and environment of the language. For Smalltalk, the program is extremely simple to write. The following code, the message &quot;show:&quot; is sent to the object &quot;Transcript&quot; with the String literal &#x27;Hello, world!&#x27; as its argument. Invocation of the &quot;show:&quot; method causes the characters of its argument (the String literal &#x27;Hello, world!&#x27;) to be displayed in the transcript (&quot;terminal&quot;) window.

Transcript show: &#x27;Hello, world!&#x27;.

To see the results of this example, a Transcript window must be open.

==Image-based persistence==
Most popular programming systems separate static program code (in the form of class definitions, functions or procedures) from dynamic, or run time, program state (such as objects or other forms of program data). They load program code when a program starts, and any prior program state must be recreated explicitly from configuration files or other data sources. Any settings the program (and programmer) does not explicitly save must be set up again for each restart. A traditional program also loses much useful document information each time a program saves a file, quits, and reloads. This loses details such as undo history or cursor position. Image based systems don&#x27;t force losing all that just because a computer is turned off, or an OS updates.

Many Smalltalk systems, however, do not differentiate between program data (objects) and code (classes). In fact, classes are objects. Thus, most Smalltalk systems store the entire program state (including both Class and non-Class objects) in an image file. The image can then be loaded by the Smalltalk virtual machine to restore a Smalltalk-like system to a prior state. This was inspired by FLEX, a language created by Alan Kay and described in his M.Sc. thesis.

Smalltalk images are similar to (restartable) core dumps and can provide the same functionality as core dumps, such as delayed or remote debugging with full access to the program state at the time of error.

Other languages that model application code as a form of data, such as Lisp, often use image-based persistence as well (see EMACS, for example). This method of persistence is powerful for rapid development because all the development information (e.g. parse trees of the program) is saved which facilitates debugging.

However, it also has serious drawbacks as a true persistence mechanism. For one thing, developers may often want to hide implementation details and not make them available in a run time environment. For reasons of legality and maintenance, allowing anyone to modify a program at run time inevitably introduces complexity and potential errors that would not be possible with a compiled system that exposes no source code in the run time environment. Also, while the persistence mechanism is easy to use, it lacks the true persistence abilities needed for most multi-user systems. The most obvious is the ability to do transactions with multiple users accessing the same database in parallel.

==Level of access==
Everything in Smalltalk-80, unless customised to avoid the possibility, is available for modification from within a running program. This means that, for example, the IDE can be changed in a running system without restarting it. In some implementations, the syntax of the language or the garbage collection implementation can also be changed on the fly. Even the statement codice_43 is valid in Smalltalk, although executing it is not recommended except for demonstration purposes (see virtual machine, image-based persistence, and backups).

==Just-in-time compilation==

Smalltalk programs are usually compiled to bytecode, which is then interpreted by a virtual machine or dynamically translated into native machine-code. The results of previous message lookups are cached in self-modifying machine-code resulting in very high-performance sends that can out-perform the indirect function calls in C++ virtual method calls.

==List of implementations==
=== OpenSmalltalk ===
OpenSmalltalk VM (OS VM) is a relatively high-performance implementation of the Smalltalk virtual machine on which several modern open-source Smalltalk dialects are based. The OS VM derives from the original Back-to-the-Future (BTTF) Squeak interpreter implemented by Dan Ingalls, Ted Khaeler, John Maloney and many other contributors. As with the BTTF VM, OS VM is transpiled from the Smalltalk system in which it is developed (using a subset of Smalltalk named Slang) to native C language source code, which is in turn compiled against specific platform and architecture of the hardware practically enabling cross-platform execution of the Smalltalk images. The OS VM differs from the BTTF VM in
* introducing a JIT compiler to native machine code, including sophisticated machine-code method cacheing techniques
* using &quot;context-to-stack-mapping&quot; to vastly reduce the overheads of context objects
* supporting both the original BTTF object representation, and Spur, a much more efficient and native 32-bit and 64-bit scheme with a much improved garbage collector, object pinning, and lazy become
The notable Smalltalk dialects based on the OS VM are:

*Squeak, the original open source Smalltalk that the OpenSmalltalk VM was built for, that derives from Xerox PARC&#x27;s Smalltalk-80 v1
*Pharo Smalltalk, an open-source cross-platform language, that derives from Squeak
*Croquet, a replicating distributed Smalltalk for the Croquet Project
*Cuis Smalltalk that derives from Squeak

=== Others ===
*Amber Smalltalk, runs on JavaScript via transpiling
*Dolphin Smalltalk from Object Arts
*Etoys, a visual programming system for learning built in Squeak
*GemStone/S from GemTalk Systems
*GNU Smalltalk, headless (lacks GUI) implementation of Smalltalk
*Smalltalk MT Smalltalk for Windows from Object Connect
*ObjectStudio from Cincom
*Scratch a visual programming system (only versions before 2.0 are Smalltalk-based)
*Smalltalk/X from exept.de, a descendant of the original Xerox PARC Smalltalk-80
*StepTalk, GNUstep scripting framework uses Smalltalk language on an Objective-C runtime
*Strongtalk, an open-source (since 2006) Windows-only version, offers optional strong typing; initially created at Sun Microsystem Labs.
*VisualAge Smalltalk from IBM
*Visual Smalltalk Enterprise, and family, including Smalltalk/V
*VisualWorks from Cincom, a descendant of the original Xerox PARC Smalltalk-80 v2

==See also==
* Dart
* Objective-C
* Newspeak
* Ruby
* Self
* Strongtalk
* GLASS (software bundle)
* Distributed Data Management Architecture

== References ==
==Further reading==
*
*
*
*
*
**
**

==External links==

*A 1973 semantic description of Smalltalk written in itself
*Free Online Smalltalk Books
*Cuis Smalltalk
*Pharo Smalltalk
*Squeak Smalltalk
*Cincom Smalltalk ObjectStudio
*Cincom Smalltalk VisualWorks
*Dolphin Smalltalk
*GNU Smalltalk
*Smalltalk/X
*StrongTalk
*Amber Smalltalk
*Redline Smalltalk
*Scarlet Smalltalk
*VA Smalltalk
*GemStone
*GLASS (GemStone, Linux, Apache, Seaside, and Smalltalk)
*Smalltalk MT
*Smalltalk-78 online emulator
*OpenSmalltalk cross-platform virtual machine for Squeak, Pharo, Cuis, and Newspeak
*Smalltalk-80 Bluebook implementations in C++: by dbanay and rochus-keller on GitHub</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q235086" start="0" end="9" title="Smalltalk" label="Smalltalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="22" end="37" title="object oriented programming" label="object oriented"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="38" end="58" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574305" start="100" end="105" title="1970s in science and technology" label="1970s"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="110" end="119" title="education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q597136" start="144" end="168" title="constructionist learning" label="constructionist learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="221" end="231" title="PARC (company)" label="Xerox PARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q92742" start="287" end="295" title="Alan Kay" label="Alan Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q92772" start="297" end="308" title="Dan Ingalls" label="Dan Ingalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q11605" start="310" end="324" title="Adele Goldberg (computer scientist)" label="Adele Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q70568260" start="326" end="337" title="Ted Kaehler" label="Ted Kaehler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271235" start="339" end="350" title="Diana Merry" label="Diana Merry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192726" start="584" end="599" title="virtual machine" label="virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="824" end="832" title="Industrial sector" label="industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="887" end="895" title="database" label="database"/>
<link wikidata="Q16622442" start="1121" end="1144" title="interactive programming" label="interactive programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q13741" start="1163" end="1186" title="Integrated development environment" label="development environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056451" start="1202" end="1212" title="Reflective programming" label="reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495369" start="1217" end="1229" title="late binding" label="late binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q778586" start="1246" end="1263" title="executable" label="execution of code"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="1382" end="1406" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q180003" start="1525" end="1562" title="American National Standards Institute" label="American National Standards Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q549037" start="1735" end="1749" title="Stack Overflow" label="Stack Overflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140061" start="2168" end="2178" title="Xerox Alto" label="Xerox Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q92742" start="2236" end="2244" title="Alan Kay" label="Alan Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="2248" end="2279" title="Xerox Palo Alto Research Center" label="Xerox Palo Alto Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q11605" start="2344" end="2358" title="Adele Goldberg (computer scientist)" label="Adele Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q92772" start="2396" end="2407" title="Dan Ingalls" label="Dan Ingalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859284" start="2583" end="2598" title="message passing" label="message passing"/>
<link wikidata="Q212569" start="2611" end="2617" title="Simula" label="Simula"/>
<link wikidata="Q344524" start="2774" end="2785" title="Actor model" label="Actor model"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2791" end="2817" title="Actor model#Smalltalk" label="syntax and execution model"/>
<link wikidata="Q92772" start="2965" end="2976" title="Dan Ingalls" label="Dan Ingalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="2999" end="3004" title="BASIC" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4134229" start="3029" end="3046" title="Data General Nova" label="Data General Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354917" start="3085" end="3095" title="MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory" label="MIT AI Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q70568260" start="3190" end="3201" title="Ted Kaehler" label="Ted Kaehler"/>
<link wikidata="Q212569" start="3442" end="3448" title="Simula" label="Simula"/>
<link wikidata="Q212542" start="3460" end="3471" title="Inheritance (object-oriented programming)" label="inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055454" start="3537" end="3560" title="Development environment (software development process)" label="development environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924819" start="3669" end="3678" title="metaclass" label="metaclass"/>
<link wikidata="Q173183" start="3871" end="3884" title="Boolean value" label="Boolean value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347679" start="4053" end="4062" title="Tektronix" label="Tektronix"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="4064" end="4079" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="4081" end="4095" title="Apple Computer" label="Apple Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="4101" end="4104" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="DEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q192726" start="5019" end="5034" title="virtual machine" label="virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q762464" start="5230" end="5236" title="Squeak" label="Squeak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="5243" end="5254" title="open-source software" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561125" start="5333" end="5344" title="VisualWorks" label="VisualWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q92772" start="5683" end="5694" title="Dan Ingalls" label="Dan Ingalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q47607" start="6261" end="6264" title="SQL" label="SQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q192588" start="6271" end="6290" title="relational database" label="relational database"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120387" start="6864" end="6878" title="Cincom Systems" label="Cincom Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q235086" start="6911" end="6923" title="ObjectStudio" label="ObjectStudio"/>
<link wikidata="Q82059" start="7119" end="7125" title="NASDAQ" label="NASDAQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="7264" end="7268" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120387" start="7646" end="7652" title="Cincom" label="Cincom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120387" start="7678" end="7684" title="Cincom" label="Cincom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120387" start="7847" end="7853" title="Cincom" label="Cincom"/>
<link wikidata="Q762464" start="8172" end="8178" title="Squeak" label="Squeak"/>
<link wikidata="Q842120" start="8338" end="8358" title="One Laptop per Child" label="One Laptop per Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567305" start="8427" end="8442" title="Croquet Project" label="Croquet Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045889" start="8452" end="8463" title="Open Cobalt" label="Open Cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093300" start="8491" end="8504" title="GNU Smalltalk" label="GNU Smalltalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="8510" end="8523" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q44571" start="8580" end="8583" title="GNU" label="GNU"/>
<link wikidata="Q369096" start="8593" end="8598" title="Pharo" label="Pharo"/>
<link wikidata="Q762464" start="8622" end="8628" title="Squeak" label="Squeak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476809" start="8826" end="8833" title="Seaside (software)" label="Seaside"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651843" start="8838" end="8846" title="AIDA/Web" label="AIDA/Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q212569" start="9111" end="9117" title="Simula" label="Simula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427564" start="9251" end="9258" title="Flavors (programming language)" label="Flavors"/>
<link wikidata="Q252340" start="9260" end="9264" title="CLOS" label="CLOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q188531" start="9266" end="9277" title="Objective-C" label="Objective-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="9279" end="9283" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="9285" end="9291" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q161053" start="9293" end="9297" title="Ruby (programming language)" label="Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q30232" start="9402" end="9428" title="agile software development" label="agile software development"/>
<link wikidata="Q795549" start="9438" end="9467" title="rapid application development" label="rapid application development"/>
<link wikidata="Q181156" start="9494" end="9517" title="software design pattern" label="software design pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="9680" end="9713" title="Advanced Research Projects Agency" label="Advanced Research Projects Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q93241" start="9857" end="9866" title="hypertext" label="hypertext"/>
<link wikidata="Q131765" start="9874" end="9884" title="multimedia" label="multimedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q544830" start="9897" end="9909" title="telepresence" label="telepresence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268858" start="10068" end="10076" title="Dynabook" label="Dynabook"/>
<link wikidata="Q44860" start="10281" end="10302" title="model–view–controller" label="model–view–controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146" start="10321" end="10335" title="user interface" label="user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="10849" end="10873" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q170542" start="10930" end="10937" title="WYSIWYG" label="WYSIWYG"/>
<link wikidata="Q13741" start="11133" end="11167" title="integrated development environment" label="integrated development environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653376" start="11184" end="11196" title="Lisp Machine" label="Lisp Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q552925" start="11407" end="11419" title="Arlo Guthrie" label="Arlo Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056843" start="11436" end="11469" title="Alice&amp;#x27;s Restaurant Massacree" label="Alice&amp;#x27;s Restaurant Massacree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859284" start="12447" end="12464" title="Message passing" label="Receive a message"/>
<link wikidata="Q6657122" start="13552" end="13563" title="Live coding" label="Live coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="13803" end="13806" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="13811" end="13815" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q212542" start="14833" end="14844" title="Inheritance (object-oriented programming)" label="subclassing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4479242" start="15320" end="15327" title="Class (computer programming)" label="classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924819" start="15385" end="15394" title="metaclass" label="metaclass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16275" end="16285" title="#Code blocks" label="Code block"/>
<link wikidata="Q567612" start="16322" end="16340" title="anonymous function" label="anonymous function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056451" start="16523" end="16533" title="Reflective programming" label="Reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q815844" start="17141" end="17148" title="method (computer programming)" label="methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127410" start="18163" end="18173" title="Serialization" label="serialized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339231" start="19108" end="19117" title="coroutine" label="coroutine"/>
<link wikidata="Q163468" start="19122" end="19128" title="Prolog" label="Prolog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476809" start="19295" end="19302" title="Seaside (software)" label="Seaside"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157038" start="20154" end="20165" title="reification (computer science)" label="reification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426138" start="21163" end="21171" title="Futures and promises" label="promises"/>
<link wikidata="Q691593" start="21241" end="21246" title="CORBA" label="CORBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152399" start="21274" end="21280" title="Syntax (programming languages)" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q746699" start="21742" end="21751" title="singleton pattern" label="singleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q192425" start="23113" end="23121" title="postcard" label="postcard"/>
<link wikidata="Q92754" start="23340" end="23353" title="Ralph Johnson (computer scientist)" label="Ralph Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q843684" start="24024" end="24029" title="radix" label="radix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736519" start="25074" end="25088" title="string literal" label="string literal"/>
<link wikidata="Q567612" start="25647" end="25665" title="anonymous function" label="anonymous function"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561125" start="26272" end="26283" title="VisualWorks" label="VisualWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q762464" start="26349" end="26355" title="Squeak" label="Squeak"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="27559" end="27564" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859284" start="27999" end="28012" title="message passing" label="message sends"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268939" start="28044" end="28060" title="dynamic dispatch" label="dynamic dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268939" start="28065" end="28080" title="single dispatch" label="single dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756543" start="28105" end="28122" title="multiple dispatch" label="multiple dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q120976" start="29107" end="29116" title="factorial" label="factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q332629" start="31460" end="31480" title="operator overloading" label="operator overloading"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421696" start="31667" end="31692" title="Expression-oriented programming language" label="expression-based language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823694" start="33378" end="33385" title="method chaining" label="chained"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086382" start="34103" end="34110" title="method cascading" label="cascade"/>
<link wikidata="Q535335" start="35088" end="35095" title="closure (computer programming)" label="closure"/>
<link wikidata="Q303462" start="35181" end="35199" title="first-class object" label="first-class object"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240252" start="35814" end="35826" title="Polymorphism (computer science)" label="polymorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193076" start="36237" end="36259" title="functional programming" label="functional programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q224055" start="36314" end="36324" title="Abstraction (computer science)" label="abstracted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474542" start="36330" end="36351" title="higher-order function" label="higher-order function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672873" start="36458" end="36464" title="Filter (higher-order function)" label="filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072111" start="36483" end="36490" title="function object" label="functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q471748" start="37249" end="37267" title="exception handling" label="exception handling"/>
<link wikidata="Q303462" start="39759" end="39777" title="first-class object" label="first-class object"/>
<link wikidata="Q13741" start="41161" end="41195" title="Integrated Development Environment" label="Integrated Development Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116203" start="41419" end="41423" title="WIMP (computing)" label="WIMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q131303" start="48989" end="49008" title="Hello world program" label="Hello world program"/>
<link wikidata="Q4479242" start="49796" end="49812" title="Class (computer programming)" label="class definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077724" start="49857" end="49865" title="Run time (program lifecycle phase)" label="run time"/>
<link wikidata="Q599031" start="49867" end="49880" title="program state" label="program state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047566" start="50725" end="50730" title="system image" label="image"/>
<link wikidata="Q192726" start="50783" end="50798" title="virtual machine" label="virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q92742" start="50901" end="50909" title="Alan Kay" label="Alan Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265166" start="50992" end="51001" title="core dump" label="core dump"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="51225" end="51229" title="Lisp (programming language)" label="Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q189722" start="51278" end="51283" title="EMACS" label="EMACS"/>
<link wikidata="Q13741" start="52352" end="52355" title="integrated development environment" label="IDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q322202" start="52473" end="52491" title="garbage collection (computer science)" label="garbage collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q192726" start="52671" end="52686" title="virtual machine" label="virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52688" end="52711" title="#Image-based persistence" label="image-based persistence"/>
<link wikidata="Q194274" start="52717" end="52724" title="backups" label="backups"/>
<link wikidata="Q837330" start="52801" end="52809" title="bytecode" label="bytecode"/>
<link wikidata="Q192726" start="52842" end="52857" title="virtual machine" label="virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53162" end="53178" title="OpenSmalltalk VM" label="OpenSmalltalk VM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990416" start="53528" end="53538" title="Source-to-source compiler" label="transpiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="53642" end="53643" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q762464" start="54328" end="54334" title="Squeak" label="Squeak"/>
<link wikidata="Q369096" start="54465" end="54470" title="Pharo" label="Pharo"/>
<link wikidata="Q174666" start="54497" end="54511" title="cross-platform" label="cross-platform"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54548" end="54555" title="Croquet Project#Virtual machine" label="Croquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567305" start="54601" end="54616" title="Croquet Project" label="Croquet Project"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54618" end="54632" title="Cuis Smalltalk" label="Cuis Smalltalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741309" start="54675" end="54690" title="Amber Smalltalk" label="Amber Smalltalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="54700" end="54710" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289650" start="54728" end="54745" title="Dolphin Smalltalk" label="Dolphin Smalltalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044290" start="54764" end="54769" title="Etoys (programming language)" label="Etoys"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530763" start="54829" end="54839" title="Gemstone (database)" label="GemStone/S"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093300" start="54862" end="54875" title="GNU Smalltalk" label="GNU Smalltalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543696" start="54927" end="54939" title="Smalltalk MT" label="Smalltalk MT"/>
<link wikidata="Q235086" start="54983" end="54995" title="ObjectStudio" label="ObjectStudio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120387" start="55001" end="55007" title="Cincom" label="Cincom"/>
<link wikidata="Q275131" start="55009" end="55016" title="Scratch (programming language)" label="Scratch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55093" end="55104" title="Smalltalk/X" label="Smalltalk/X"/>
<link wikidata="Q181222" start="55174" end="55182" title="StepTalk" label="StepTalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q188531" start="55242" end="55253" title="Objective-C" label="Objective-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357042" start="55263" end="55273" title="Strongtalk" label="Strongtalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q106650558" start="55341" end="55354" title="Strong and weak typing" label="strong typing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050374" start="55377" end="55397" title="Oracle Labs" label="Sun Microsystem Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370704" start="55400" end="55409" title="IBM VisualAge" label="VisualAge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936571" start="55430" end="55457" title="Visual Smalltalk Enterprise" label="Visual Smalltalk Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561125" start="55494" end="55505" title="VisualWorks" label="VisualWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120387" start="55511" end="55517" title="Cincom" label="Cincom"/>
<link wikidata="Q406009" start="55591" end="55595" title="Dart (programming language)" label="Dart"/>
<link wikidata="Q188531" start="55598" end="55609" title="Objective-C" label="Objective-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019813" start="55612" end="55620" title="Newspeak (programming language)" label="Newspeak"/>
<link wikidata="Q161053" start="55623" end="55627" title="Ruby (programming language)" label="Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864529" start="55630" end="55634" title="Self (programming language)" label="Self"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357042" start="55637" end="55647" title="Strongtalk" label="Strongtalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558983" start="55650" end="55673" title="GLASS (software bundle)" label="GLASS (software bundle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206604" start="55676" end="55716" title="Distributed Data Management Architecture" label="Distributed Data Management Architecture"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28320" wikidata="Q214473" url="?curid=28320" title="Steve Biko">
<text>Bantu Stephen Biko OMSG (18 December 1946 – 12 September 1977) was a South African anti-apartheid activist. Ideologically an African nationalist and African socialist, he was at the forefront of a grassroots anti-apartheid campaign known as the Black Consciousness Movement during the late 1960s and 1970s. His ideas were articulated in a series of articles published under the pseudonym Frank Talk.
Raised in a poor Xhosa family, Biko grew up in Ginsberg township in the Eastern Cape. In 1966, he began studying medicine at the University of Natal, where he joined the National Union of South African Students (NUSAS). Strongly opposed to the apartheid system of racial segregation and white-minority rule in South Africa, Biko was frustrated that NUSAS and other anti-apartheid groups were dominated by white liberals, rather than by the blacks who were most affected by apartheid. He believed that well-intentioned white liberals failed to comprehend the black experience and often acted in a paternalistic manner. He developed the view that to avoid white domination, black people had to organise independently, and to this end he became a leading figure in the creation of the South African Students&#x27; Organisation (SASO) in 1968. Membership was open only to &quot;blacks&quot;, a term that Biko used in reference not just to Bantu-speaking Africans but also to Coloureds and Indians. He was careful to keep his movement independent of white liberals, but opposed anti-white hatred and had white friends. The white-minority National Party government were initially supportive, seeing SASO&#x27;s creation as a victory for apartheid&#x27;s ethos of racial separatism.
Influenced by the Martinican philosopher Frantz Fanon and the African-American Black Power movement, Biko and his compatriots developed Black Consciousness as SASO&#x27;s official ideology. The movement campaigned for an end to apartheid and the transition of South Africa toward universal suffrage and a socialist economy. It organised Black Community Programmes (BCPs) and focused on the psychological empowerment of black people. Biko believed that black people needed to rid themselves of any sense of racial inferiority, an idea he expressed by popularizing the slogan &quot;black is beautiful&quot;. In 1972, he was involved in founding the Black People&#x27;s Convention (BPC) to promote Black Consciousness ideas among the wider population. The government came to see Biko as a subversive threat and placed him under a banning order in 1973, severely restricting his activities. He remained politically active, helping organise BCPs such as a healthcare centre and a crèche in the Ginsberg area. During his ban he received repeated anonymous threats, and was detained by state security services on several occasions. Following his arrest in August 1977, Biko was beaten to death by state security officers. Over 20,000 people attended his funeral.
Biko&#x27;s fame spread posthumously. He became the subject of numerous songs and works of art, while a 1978 biography by his friend Donald Woods formed the basis for the 1987 film &quot;Cry Freedom&quot;. During Biko&#x27;s life, the government alleged that he hated whites, various anti-apartheid activists accused him of sexism, and African racial nationalists criticised his united front with Coloureds and Indians. Nonetheless, Biko became one of the earliest icons of the movement against apartheid, and is regarded as a political martyr and the &quot;Father of Black Consciousness&quot;. His political legacy remains a matter of contention.

==Biography==
===Early life: 1946–1966===
Bantu Stephen Biko was born on 18 December 1946, at his grandmother&#x27;s house in Tarkastad, Eastern Cape. The third child of Mzingaye Mathew Biko and Alice &#x27;Mamcete&#x27; Biko, he had an older sister, Bukelwa, an older brother, Khaya, and a younger sister, Nobandile. His parents had married in Whittlesea, where his father worked as a police officer. Mzingaye was transferred to Queenstown, Port Elizabeth, Fort Cox, and finally King William&#x27;s Town, where he and Alice settled in Ginsberg township. This was a settlement of around 800 families, with every four families sharing a water supply and toilet. Both Africans and Coloured people lived in the township, where Xhosa, Afrikaans, and English were all spoken. After resigning from the police force, Mzingaye worked as a clerk in the King William&#x27;s Town Native Affairs Office, while studying for a law degree by correspondence from the University of South Africa. Alice was employed first in domestic work for local white households, then as a cook at Grey Hospital in King William&#x27;s Town. According to his sister, it was this observation of his mother&#x27;s difficult working conditions that resulted in Biko&#x27;s earliest politicisation.

Biko&#x27;s given name &quot;Bantu&quot; means &quot;people&quot; in IsiXhosa; Biko interpreted this in terms of the saying &quot;Umntu ngumntu ngabantu&quot; (&quot;a person is a person by means of other people&quot;). As a child he was nicknamed &quot;Goofy&quot; and &quot;Xwaku-Xwaku&quot;, the latter a reference to his unkempt appearance. He was raised in his family&#x27;s Anglican Christian faith. In 1950, when Biko was four, his father fell ill, was hospitalised in St. Matthew&#x27;s Hospital, Keiskammahoek, and died, making the family dependent on his mother&#x27;s income.

Biko spent two years at St. Andrews Primary School and four at Charles Morgan Higher Primary School, both in Ginsberg. Regarded as a particularly intelligent pupil, he was allowed to skip a year. In 1963 he transferred to the Forbes Grant Secondary School in the township. Biko excelled at maths and English and topped the class in his exams. In 1964 the Ginsberg community offered him a bursary to join his brother Khaya as a student at Lovedale, a prestigious boarding school in Alice, Eastern Cape. Within three months of Steve&#x27;s arrival, Khaya was accused of having connections to Poqo, the armed wing of the Pan Africanist Congress (PAC), an African nationalist group which the government had banned. Both Khaya and Steve were arrested and interrogated by the police; the former was convicted, then acquitted on appeal. No clear evidence of Steve&#x27;s connection to Poqo was presented, but he was expelled from Lovedale. Commenting later on this situation, he stated: &quot;I began to develop an attitude which was much more directed at authority than at anything else. I hated authority like hell.&quot;

From 1964 to 1965, Biko studied at St. Francis College, a Catholic boarding school in Mariannhill, Natal. The college had a liberal political culture, and Biko developed his political consciousness there. He became particularly interested in the replacement of South Africa&#x27;s white minority government with an administration that represented the country&#x27;s black majority. Among the anti-colonialist leaders who became Biko&#x27;s heroes at this time were Algeria&#x27;s Ahmed Ben Bella and Kenya&#x27;s Jaramogi Oginga Odinga. He later said that most of the &quot;politicos&quot; in his family were sympathetic to the PAC, which had anti-communist and African racialist ideas. Biko admired what he described as the PAC&#x27;s &quot;terribly good organisation&quot; and the courage of many of its members, but he remained unconvinced by its racially exclusionary approach, believing that members of all racial groups should unite against the government. In December 1964, he travelled to Zwelitsha for the ulwaluko circumcision ceremony, symbolically marking his transition from boyhood to manhood.

===Early student activism: 1966–1968===
Biko was initially interested in studying law at university, but many of those around him discouraged this, believing that law was too closely intertwined with political activism. Instead they convinced him to choose medicine, a subject thought to have better career prospects. He secured a scholarship, and in 1966 entered the University of Natal Medical School. There, he joined what his biographer Xolela Mangcu called &quot;a peculiarly sophisticated and cosmopolitan group of students&quot; from across South Africa; many of them later held prominent roles in the post-apartheid era. The late 1960s was the heyday of radical student politics across the world, as reflected in the protests of 1968, and Biko was eager to involve himself in this environment. Soon after he arrived at the university, he was elected to the Students&#x27; Representative Council (SRC).

The university&#x27;s SRC was affiliated with the National Union of South African Students (NUSAS). NUSAS had taken pains to cultivate a multi-racial membership but remained white-dominated because the majority of South Africa&#x27;s students were from the country&#x27;s white minority. As Clive Nettleton, a white NUSAS leader, put it: &quot;the essence of the matter is that NUSAS was founded on white initiative, is financed by white money and reflects the opinions of the majority of its members who are white&quot;. NUSAS officially opposed apartheid, but it moderated its opposition in order to maintain the support of conservative white students. Biko and several other black African NUSAS members were frustrated when it organised parties in white dormitories, which black Africans were forbidden to enter. In July 1967, a NUSAS conference was held at Rhodes University in Grahamstown; after the students arrived, they found that dormitory accommodation had been arranged for the white and Indian delegates but not the black Africans, who were told that they could sleep in a local church. Biko and other black African delegates walked out of the conference in anger. Biko later related that this event forced him to rethink his belief in the multi-racial approach to political activism:

===Founding the South African Students&#x27; Organisation: 1968–1972===
====Developing SASO====
Following the 1968 NUSAS conference in Johannesburg, many of its members attended a July 1968 conference of the University Christian Movement at Stutterheim. There, the black African members decided to hold a December conference to discuss the formation of an independent black student group. The South African Students&#x27; Organisation (SASO) was officially launched at a July 1969 conference at the University of the North; there, the group&#x27;s constitution and basic policy platform were adopted. The group&#x27;s focus was on the need for contact between centres of black student activity, including through sport, cultural activities, and debating competitions. Though Biko played a substantial role in SASO&#x27;s creation, he sought a low public profile during its early stages, believing that this would strengthen its second level of leadership, such as his ally Barney Pityana. Nonetheless, he was elected as SASO&#x27;s first president; Pat Matshaka was elected vice president and Wuila Mashalaba elected secretary. Durban became its &quot;de facto&quot; headquarters.

Biko developed SASO&#x27;s ideology of &quot;Black Consciousness&quot; in conversation with other black student leaders. A SASO policy manifesto produced in July 1971 defined this ideology as &quot;an attitude of mind, a way of life. The basic tenet of Black Consciousness is that the Blackman must reject all value systems that seek to make him a foreigner in the country of his birth and reduce his basic human dignity.&quot; Black Consciousness centred on psychological empowerment, through combating the feelings of inferiority that most black South Africans exhibited. Biko believed that, as part of the struggle against apartheid and white-minority rule, blacks should affirm their own humanity by regarding themselves as worthy of freedom and its attendant responsibilities. It applied the term &quot;black&quot; not only to Bantu-speaking Africans, but also to Indians and Coloureds. SASO adopted this term over &quot;non-white&quot; because its leadership felt that defining themselves in opposition to white people was not a positive self-description. Biko promoted the slogan &quot;black is beautiful&quot;, explaining that this meant &quot;Man, you are okay as you are. Begin to look upon yourself as a human being.&quot;

Biko presented a paper on &quot;White Racism and Black Consciousness&quot; at an academic conference in the University of Cape Town&#x27;s Abe Bailey Centre in January 1971. He also expanded on his ideas in a column written for the &quot;SASO Newsletter&quot; under the pseudonym &quot;Frank Talk&quot;. His tenure as president was taken up largely by fundraising activities, and involved travelling around various campuses in South Africa to recruit students and deepen the movement&#x27;s ideological base. Some of these students censured him for abandoning NUSAS&#x27; multi-racial approach; others disapproved of SASO&#x27;s decision to allow Indian and Coloured students to be members. Biko stepped down from the presidency after a year, insisting that it was necessary for a new leadership to emerge and thus avoid any cult of personality forming around him.

SASO decided after a debate to remain non-affiliated with NUSAS, but would nevertheless recognise the larger organisation as the national student body. One of SASO&#x27;s founding resolutions was to send a representative to each NUSAS conference. In 1970 SASO withdrew its recognition of NUSAS, accusing it of attempting to hinder SASO&#x27;s growth on various campuses. SASO&#x27;s split from NUSAS was a traumatic experience for many white liberal youth who had committed themselves to the idea of a multi-racial organisation and felt that their attempts were being rebuffed. The NUSAS leadership regretted the split, but largely refrained from criticising SASO. The governmentwhich regarded multi-racial liberalism as a threat and had banned multi-racial political parties in 1968was pleased with SASO&#x27;s emergence, regarding it as a victory of apartheid thinking.

====Attitude to liberalism and personal relations====
The early focus of the Black Consciousness Movement (BCM) was on criticising anti-racist white liberals and liberalism itself, accusing it of paternalism and being a &quot;negative influence&quot; on black Africans. In one of his first published articles, Biko stated that although he was &quot;not sneering at the [white] liberals and their involvement&quot; in the anti-apartheid movement, &quot;one has to come to the painful conclusion that the [white] liberal is in fact appeasing his own conscience, or at best is eager to demonstrate his identification with the black people only insofar as it does not sever all ties with his relatives on his side of the colour line.&quot;

Biko and SASO were openly critical of NUSAS&#x27; protests against government policies. Biko argued that NUSAS merely sought to influence the white electorate; in his opinion, this electorate was not legitimate, and protests targeting a particular policy would be ineffective for the ultimate aim of dismantling the apartheid state. SASO regarded student marches, pickets, and strikes to be ineffective and stated it would withdraw from public forms of protest. It deliberately avoided open confrontation with the state until such a point when it had a sufficiently large institutional structure. Instead, SASO&#x27;s focus was on establishing community projects and spreading Black Consciousness ideas among other black organisations and the wider black community. Despite this policy, in May 1972 it issued the Alice Declaration, in which it called for students to boycott lectures in response to the expulsion of SASO member Abram Onkgopotse Tiro from the University of the North after he made a speech criticising its administration. The Tiro incident convinced the government that SASO was a threat.

In Durban, Biko entered a relationship with a nurse, Nontsikelelo &quot;Ntsiki&quot; Mashalaba; they married at the King William&#x27;s Town magistrates court in December 1970. Their first child, Nkosinathi, was born in 1971. Biko initially did well in his university studies, but his grades declined as he devoted increasing time to political activism. Six years after starting his degree, he found himself repeating his third year. In 1972, as a result of his poor academic performance, the University of Natal barred him from further study.

===Black Consciousness activities and Biko&#x27;s banning: 1971–1977===
====Black People&#x27;s Convention====
In August 1971, Biko attended a conference on &quot;The Development of the African Community&quot; in Edendale. There, a resolution was presented calling for the formation of the Black People&#x27;s Convention (BPC), a vehicle for the promotion of Black Consciousness among the wider population. Biko voted in favour of the group&#x27;s creation but expressed reservations about the lack of consultation with South Africa&#x27;s Coloureds or Indians. A. Mayatula became the BPC&#x27;s first president; Biko did not stand for any leadership positions. The group was formally launched in July 1972 in Pietermaritzburg. By 1973, it had 41 branches and 4000 members, sharing much of its membership with SASO.

While the BPC was primarily political, Black Consciousness activists also established the Black Community Programmes (BCPs) to focus on improving healthcare and education and fostering black economic self-reliance. The BCPs had strong ecumenical links, being part-funded by a program on Christian action, established by the Christian Institute of Southern Africa and the South African Council of Churches. Additional funds came from the Anglo-American Corporation, the International University Exchange Fund, and Scandinavian churches. In 1972, the BCP hired Biko and Bokwe Mafuna, allowing Biko to continue his political and community work. In September 1972, Biko visited Kimberley, where he met the PAC founder and anti-apartheid activist Robert Sobukwe.

Biko&#x27;s banning order in 1973 prevented him from working officially for the BCPs from which he had previously earned a small stipend, but he helped to set up a new BPC branch in Ginsberg, which held its first meeting in the church of a sympathetic white clergyman, David Russell. Establishing a more permanent headquarters in Leopold Street, the branch served as a base from which to form new BCPs; these included self-help schemes such as classes in literacy, dressmaking and health education. For Biko, community development was part of the process of infusing black people with a sense of pride and dignity. Near King William&#x27;s Town, a BCP Zanempilo Clinic was established to serve as a healthcare centre catering for rural black people who would not otherwise have access to hospital facilities. He helped to revive the Ginsberg crèche, a daycare for children of working mothers, and establish a Ginsberg education fund to raise bursaries for promising local students. He helped establish Njwaxa Home Industries, a leather goods company providing jobs for local women. In 1975, he co-founded the Zimele Trust, a fund for the families of political prisoners.

Biko endorsed the unification of South Africa&#x27;s black liberationist groupsamong them the BCM, PAC, and African National Congress (ANC)in order to concentrate their anti-apartheid efforts. To this end, he reached out to leading members of the ANC, PAC, and Unity Movement. His communications with the ANC were largely via Griffiths Mxenge, and plans were being made to smuggle him out of the country to meet Oliver Tambo, a leading ANC figure. Biko&#x27;s negotiations with the PAC were primarily through intermediaries who exchanged messages between him and Sobukwe; those with the Unity Movement were largely via Fikile Bam.

====Banning order====
By 1973, the government regarded Black Consciousness as a threat. It sought to disrupt Biko&#x27;s activities, and in March 1973 placed a banning order on him. This prevented him from leaving the King William&#x27;s Town magisterial district, prohibited him from speaking either in public or to more than one person at a time, barred his membership of political organisations, and forbade the media from quoting him. As a result, he returned to Ginsberg, living initially in his mother&#x27;s house and later in his own residence.

In December 1975, attempting to circumvent the restrictions of the banning order, the BPC declared Biko their honorary president. After Biko and other BCM leaders were banned, a new leadership arose, led by Muntu Myeza and Sathasivian Cooper, who were considered part of the Durban Moment. Myeza and Cooper organised a BCM demonstration to mark Mozambique&#x27;s independence from Portuguese colonial rule in 1975. Biko disagreed with this action, correctly predicting that the government would use it to crack down on the BCM. The government arrested around 200 BCM activists, nine of whom were brought before the Supreme Court, accused of subversion by intent. The state claimed that Black Consciousness philosophy was likely to cause &quot;racial confrontation&quot; and therefore threatened public safety. Biko was called as a witness for the defence; he sought to refute the state&#x27;s accusations by outlining the movement&#x27;s aims and development. Ultimately, the accused were convicted and imprisoned on Robben Island.

In 1973, Biko had enrolled for a law degree by correspondence from the University of South Africa. He passed several exams, but had not completed the degree at his time of death. His performance on the course was poor; he was absent from several exams and failed his Practical Afrikaans module. The state security services repeatedly sought to intimidate him; he received anonymous threatening phone calls, and gun shots were fired at his house. A group of young men calling themselves &#x27;The Cubans&#x27; began guarding him from these attacks. The security services detained him four times, once for 101 days. With the ban preventing him from gaining employment, the strained economic situation impacted his marriage.

During his ban, Biko asked for a meeting with Donald Woods, the white liberal editor of the &quot;Daily Dispatch&quot;. Under Woods&#x27; editorship, the newspaper had published articles criticising apartheid and the white-minority regime and had also given space to the views of various black groups, but not the BCM. Biko hoped to convince Woods to give the movement greater coverage and an outlet for its views. Woods was initially reticent, believing that Biko and the BCM advocated &quot;for racial exclusivism in reverse&quot;. When he met Biko for the first time, Woods expressed his concern about the anti-white liberal sentiment of Biko&#x27;s early writings. Biko acknowledged that his earlier &quot;antiliberal&quot; writings were &quot;overkill&quot;, but said that he remained committed to the basic message contained within them.

Over the coming years the pair became close friends. Woods later related that, although he continued to have concerns about &quot;the unavoidably racist aspects of Black Consciousness&quot;, it was &quot;both a revelation and education&quot; to socialise with blacks who had &quot;psychologically emancipated attitudes&quot;. Biko also remained friends with another prominent white liberal, Duncan Innes, who served as NUSAS President in 1969; Innes later commented that Biko was &quot;invaluable in helping me to understand black oppression, not only socially and politically, but also psychologically and intellectually&quot;. Biko&#x27;s friendship with these white liberals came under criticism from some members of the BCM.
===Death: 1977===
====Arrest and death====
In 1977, Biko broke his banning order by travelling to Cape Town, hoping to meet Unity Movement leader Neville Alexander and deal with growing dissent in the Western Cape branch of the BCM, which was dominated by Marxists like Johnny Issel. Biko drove to the city with his friend Peter Jones on 17 August, but Alexander refused to meet with Biko, fearing that he was being monitored by the police. Biko and Jones drove back toward King William&#x27;s Town, but on 18 August they were stopped at a police roadblock near Grahamstown. Biko was arrested for having violated the order restricting him to King William&#x27;s Town. Unsubstantiated claims have been made that the security services were aware of Biko&#x27;s trip to Cape Town and that the road block had been erected to catch him. Jones was also arrested at the roadblock; he was subsequently held without trial for 533 days, during which time he was interrogated on numerous occasions.

The security services took Biko to the Walmer police station in Port Elizabeth, where he was held naked in a cell with his legs in shackles. On 6 September, he was transferred from Walmer to room 619 of the security police headquarters in the Sanlam Building in central Port Elizabeth, where he was interrogated for 22 hours, handcuffed and in shackles, and chained to a grille. Exactly what happened has never been ascertained, but during the interrogation he was severely beaten by at least one of the ten security police officers. He suffered three brain lesions that resulted in a massive brain haemorrhage on 6 September. Following this incident, Biko&#x27;s captors forced him to remain standing and shackled to the wall. The police later said that Biko had attacked one of them with a chair, forcing them to subdue him and place him in handcuffs and leg irons.

Biko was examined by a doctor, Ivor Lang, who stated that there was no evidence of injury on Biko. Later scholarship has suggested Biko&#x27;s injuries must have been obvious. He was then examined by two other doctors who, after a test showed blood cells to have entered Biko&#x27;s spinal fluid, agreed that he should be transported to a prison hospital in Pretoria. On 11 September, police loaded him into the back of a Land Rover, naked and manacled, and drove him to the hospital. There, Biko died alone in a cell on 12 September 1977. According to an autopsy, an &quot;extensive brain injury&quot; had caused &quot;centralisation of the blood circulation to such an extent that there had been intravasal blood coagulation, acute kidney failure, and uremia&quot;. He was the twenty-first person to die in a South African prison in twelve months, and the forty-sixth political detainee to die during interrogation since the government introduced laws permitting imprisonment without trial in 1963.

====Response and investigation====
News of Biko&#x27;s death spread quickly across the world, and became symbolic of the abuses of the apartheid system. His death attracted more global attention than he had ever attained during his lifetime. Protest meetings were held in several cities; many were shocked that the security authorities would kill such a prominent dissident leader. Biko&#x27;s Anglican funeral service, held on 25 September 1977 at King William&#x27;s Town&#x27;s Victoria Stadium, took five hours and was attended by around 20,000 people. The vast majority were black, but a few hundred whites also attended, including Biko&#x27;s friends, such as Russell and Woods, and prominent progressive figures like Helen Suzman, Alex Boraine, and Zach de Beer. Foreign diplomats from thirteen nations were present, as was an Anglican delegation headed by Bishop Desmond Tutu. The event was later described as &quot;the first mass political funeral in the country&quot;. Biko&#x27;s coffin had been decorated with the motifs of a clenched black fist, the African continent, and the statement &quot;One Azania, One Nation&quot;; Azania was the name that many activists wanted South Africa to adopt post-apartheid. Biko was buried in the cemetery at Ginsberg. Two BCM-affiliated artists, Dikobé Ben Martins and Robin Holmes, produced a T-shirt marking the event; the design was banned the following year. Martins also created a commemorative poster for the funeral, the first in a tradition of funeral posters that proved popular throughout the 1980s.

Speaking publicly about Biko&#x27;s death, the country&#x27;s police minister Jimmy Kruger initially implied that it had been the result of a hunger strike, a statement he later denied. His account was challenged by some of Biko&#x27;s friends, including Woods, who said that Biko had told them that he would never kill himself in prison. Publicly, he stated that Biko had been plotting violence, a claim repeated in the pro-government press. South Africa&#x27;s attorney general initially stated that no one would be prosecuted for Biko&#x27;s death. Two weeks after the funeral, the government banned all Black Consciousness organisations, including the BCP, which had its assets seized.

Both domestic and international pressure called for a public inquest to be held, to which the government agreed. It began in Pretoria&#x27;s Old Synagogue courthouse in November 1977, and lasted for three weeks. Both the running of the inquest and the quality of evidence submitted came in for extensive criticism. An observer from the Lawyers&#x27; Committee for Civil Rights Under Law stated that the affidavit&#x27;s statements were &quot;sometimes redundant, sometimes inconsistent, frequently ambiguous&quot;; David Napley described the police investigation of the incident as &quot;perfunctory in the extreme&quot;. The security forces alleged that Biko had acted aggressively and had sustained his injuries in a scuffle, in which he had banged his head against the cell wall. The presiding magistrate accepted the security forces&#x27; account of events and refused to prosecute any of those involved.

The verdict was treated with scepticism by much of the international media and the US Government led by President Jimmy Carter. On 2 February 1978, based on the evidence given at the inquest, the attorney general of the Eastern Cape stated that he would not prosecute the officers. After the inquest, Biko&#x27;s family brought a civil case against the state; at the advice of their lawyers, they agreed to a settlement of R65,000 (US$78,000) in July 1979. Shortly after the inquest, the South African Medical and Dental Council initiated proceedings against the medical professionals who had been entrusted with Biko&#x27;s care; eight years later two of the medics were found guilty of improper conduct. The failure of the government-employed doctors to diagnose or treat Biko&#x27;s injuries has been frequently cited as an example of a repressive state influencing medical practitioners&#x27; decisions, and Biko&#x27;s death as evidence of the need for doctors to serve the needs of patients before those of the state.

After the abolition of apartheid and the establishment of a majority government in 1994, a Truth and Reconciliation Commission was established to investigate past human-rights abuses. The commission made plans to investigate Biko&#x27;s death, but his family petitioned against this on the grounds that the commission could grant amnesty to those responsible, thereby preventing the family&#x27;s right to justice and redress. In 1996, the Constitutional Court ruled against the family, allowing the investigation to proceed. Five police officers (Harold Snyman, Gideon Nieuwoudt, Ruben Marx, Daantjie Siebert, and Johan Beneke) appeared before the commission and requested amnesty in return for information about the events surrounding Biko&#x27;s death. In December 1998, the Commission refused amnesty to the five men; this was because their accounts were conflicting and thus deemed untruthful, and because Biko&#x27;s killing had no clear political motive, but seemed to have been motivated by &quot;ill-will or spite&quot;. In October 2003, South Africa&#x27;s justice ministry announced that the five policemen would not be prosecuted because the statute of limitations had elapsed and there was insufficient evidence to secure a prosecution.

== Ideology ==
The ideas of the Black Consciousness Movement were not developed solely by Biko, but through lengthy discussions with other black students who were rejecting white liberalism. Biko was influenced by his reading of authors like Frantz Fanon, Malcolm X, Léopold Sédar Senghor, James Cone, and Paulo Freire. The Martinique-born Fanon, in particular, has been cited as a profound influence over Biko&#x27;s ideas about liberation. Biko&#x27;s biographer Xolela Mangcu cautioned that it would be wrong to reduce Biko&#x27;s thought to an interpretation of Fanon, and that the impact of &quot;the political and intellectual history of the Eastern Cape&quot; had to be appreciated too. Additional influences on Black Consciousness were the United States–based Black Power movement, and forms of Christianity like the activist-oriented black theology.

===Black Consciousness and empowerment===
Biko rejected the apartheid government&#x27;s division of South Africa&#x27;s population into &quot;whites&quot; and &quot;non-whites,&quot; a distinction that was marked on signs and buildings throughout the country. Building on Fanon&#x27;s work, Biko regarded &quot;non-white&quot; as a negative category, defining people in terms of an absence of whiteness. In response, Biko replaced &quot;non-white&quot; with the category &quot;black,&quot; which he regarded as being neither derivative nor negative. He defined blackness as a &quot;mental attitude&quot; rather than a &quot;matter of pigmentation&quot;, referring to &quot;blacks&quot; as &quot;those who are by law or tradition politically, economically and socially discriminated against as a group in the South African society&quot; and who identify &quot;themselves as a unit in the struggle towards the realization of their aspirations&quot;. In this way, he and the Black Consciousness Movement used &quot;black&quot; in reference not only to Bantu-speaking Africans but also to Coloureds and Indians, who together made up almost 90% of South Africa&#x27;s population in the 1970s. Biko was not a Marxist and believed that it was oppression based on race, rather than class, which would be the main political motivation for change in South Africa. He argued that those on the &quot;white left&quot; often promoted a class-based analysis as a &quot;defence mechanism... primarily because they want to detach us from anything relating to race. In case it has a rebound effect on them because they are white&quot;.

Biko saw white racism in South Africa as the totality of the white power structure. He argued that under apartheid, white people not only participated in the oppression of black people but were also the main voices in opposition to that oppression. He thus argued that in dominating both the apartheid system and the anti-apartheid movement, white people totally controlled the political arena, leaving black people marginalised. He believed white people were able to dominate the anti-apartheid movement because of their access to resources, education, and privilege. He nevertheless thought that white South Africans were poorly suited to this role because they had not personally experienced the oppression that their black counterparts faced.

Biko and his comrades regarded multi-racial anti-apartheid groups as unwittingly replicating the structure of apartheid because they contained whites in dominant positions of control. For this reason, Biko and the others did not participate in these multi-racial organisations. Instead, they called for an anti-apartheid programme that was controlled by black people. Although he called on sympathetic whites to reject any concept that they themselves could be spokespeople for the black majority, Biko nevertheless believed that they had a place in the anti-apartheid struggle, asking them to focus their efforts on convincing the wider white community on the inevitability of apartheid&#x27;s fall. Biko clarified his position to Woods: &quot;I don&#x27;t reject liberalism as such or white liberals as such. I reject only the concept that black liberation can be achieved through the leadership of white liberals.&quot; He added that &quot;the [white] liberal is no enemy, he&#x27;s a friend – but for the moment he holds us back, offering a formula too gentle, too inadequate for our struggle&quot;.

Biko&#x27;s approach to activism focused on psychological empowerment, and both he and the BCM saw their main purpose as combating the feeling of inferiority that most black South Africans experienced. Biko expressed dismay at how &quot;the black man has become a shell, a shadow of man ... bearing the yoke of oppression with sheepish timidity&quot;, and stated that &quot;the most potent weapon in the hands of the oppressor is the mind of the oppressed&quot;. He believed that blacks needed to affirm their own humanity by overcoming their fears and believing themselves worthy of freedom and its attendant responsibilities. He defined Black Consciousness as &quot;an inward-looking process&quot; that would &quot;infuse people with pride and dignity&quot;. To promote this, the BCM adopted the slogan &quot;Black is Beautiful&quot;.

One of the ways that Biko and the BCM sought to achieve psychological empowerment was through community development. Community projects were seen not only as a way to alleviate poverty in black communities but also as a means of transforming society psychologically, culturally, and economically. They would also help students to learn about the &quot;daily struggles&quot; of ordinary black people and to spread Black Consciousness ideas among the population. Among the projects that SASO set its members to conduct in the holidays were repairs to schools, house-building, and instructions on financial management and agricultural techniques. Healthcare was also a priority, with SASO members focusing on primary and preventative care.

===Foreign and domestic relations===
Biko opposed any collaboration with the apartheid government, such as the agreements that the Coloured and Indian communities made with the regime. In his view, the Bantustan system was &quot;the greatest single fraud ever invented by white politicians&quot;, stating that it was designed to divide the Bantu-speaking African population along tribal lines. He openly criticised the Zulu leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi, stating that the latter&#x27;s co-operation with the South African government &quot;[diluted] the cause&quot; of black liberation. He believed that those fighting apartheid in South Africa should link with anti-colonial struggles elsewhere in the world and with activists in the global African diaspora combating racial prejudice and discrimination. He also hoped that foreign countries would boycott South Africa&#x27;s economy.

Biko believed that while apartheid and white-minority rule continued, &quot;sporadic outbursts&quot; of violence against the white minority were inevitable. He wanted to avoid violence, stating that &quot;if at all possible, we want the revolution to be peaceful and reconciliatory&quot;. He noted that views on violence differed widely within the BCMwhich contained both pacifists and believers in violent revolutionalthough the group had agreed to operate peacefully, and unlike the PAC and ANC, had no armed wing.

A staunch anti-imperialist, Biko saw the South African situation as a &quot;microcosm&quot; of the broader &quot;black–white power struggle&quot; which manifests as &quot;the global confrontation between the Third World and the rich white nations of the world&quot;. He was suspicious of the Soviet Union&#x27;s motives in supporting African liberation movements, relating that &quot;Russia is as imperialistic as America&quot;, although he acknowledged that &quot;in the eyes of the Third World they have a cleaner slate&quot;. He also acknowledged that the material assistance provided by the Soviets was &quot;more valuable&quot; to the anti-apartheid cause than the &quot;speeches and wrist-slapping&quot; provided by Western governments. He was cautious of the possibility of a post-apartheid South Africa getting caught up in the imperialist Cold War rivalries of the United States and the Soviet Union.

===On a post-apartheid society===
Biko hoped that a future socialist South Africa could become a completely non-racial society, with people of all ethnic backgrounds living peacefully together in a &quot;joint culture&quot; that combined the best of all communities. He did not support guarantees of minority rights, believing that doing so would continue to recognise divisions along racial lines. Instead he supported a one person, one vote system. Initially arguing that one-party states were appropriate for Africa, he developed a more positive view of multi-party systems after conversations with Woods. He saw individual liberty as desirable, but regarded it as a lesser priority than access to food, employment, and social security.

Biko was neither a communist nor capitalist. Described as a proponent of African socialism, he called for &quot;a socialist solution that is an authentic expression of black communalism&quot;. This idea was derided by some of his Marxist contemporaries, but later found parallels in the ideas of the Mexican Zapatistas. Noting that there was significant inequality in the distribution of wealth in South Africa, Biko believed that a socialist society was necessary to ensure social justice. In his view, this required a move towards a mixed economy that allowed private enterprise but in which all land was owned by the state and in which state industries played a significant part in forestry, mining, and commerce. He believed that, if post-apartheid South Africa remained capitalist, some black people would join the bourgeoisie but inequality and poverty would remain. As he put it, if South Africa transitioned to proportional democracy without socialist economic reforms, then &quot;it would not change the position of &quot;economic&quot; oppression of the blacks&quot;.

In conversation with Woods, Biko insisted that the BCM would not degenerate into anti-white hatred &quot;because it isn&#x27;t a negative, hating thing. It&#x27;s a positive black self-confidence thing involving no hatred of anyone&quot;. He acknowledged that a &quot;fringe element&quot; may retain &quot;anti-white bitterness&quot;; he added: &quot;we&#x27;ll do what we can to restrain that, but frankly it&#x27;s not one of our top priorities or one of our major concerns. Our main concern is the liberation of the blacks.&quot; Elsewhere, Biko argued that it was the responsibility of a vanguard movement to ensure that, in a post-apartheid society, the black majority would not seek vengeance upon the white minority. He stated that this would require an education of the black population in order to teach them how to live in a non-racial society.

==Personal life and personality==
Tall and slim in his youth, by his twenties Biko was over six feet tall, with the &quot;bulky build of a heavyweight boxer carrying more weight than when in peak condition&quot;, according to Woods. His friends regarded him as &quot;handsome, fearless, a brilliant thinker&quot;. Woods saw him as &quot;unusually gifted ... His quick brain, superb articulation of ideas and sheer mental force were highly impressive.&quot; According to Biko&#x27;s friend Trudi Thomas, with Biko &quot;you had a remarkable sense of being in the presence of a great mind&quot;. Woods felt that Biko &quot;could enable one to share his vision&quot; with &quot;an economy of words&quot; because &quot;he seemed to communicate ideas through extraverbal media – almost psychically.&quot; Biko exhibited what Woods referred to as &quot;a new style of leadership&quot;, never proclaiming himself to be a leader and discouraging any cult of personality from growing up around him. Other activists did regard him as a leader and often deferred to him at meetings. When engaged in conversations, he displayed an interest in listening and often drew out the thoughts of others.

Biko and many others in his activist circle had an antipathy toward luxury items because most South African blacks could not afford them. He owned few clothes and dressed in a low-key manner. He had a large record collection and particularly liked gumba. He enjoyed parties, and according to his biographer Linda Wilson, he often drank substantial quantities of alcohol. Religion did not play a central role in his life. He was often critical of the established Christian churches, but remained a believer in God and found meaning in the Gospels. Woods described him as &quot;not conventionally religious, although he had genuine religious feeling in broad terms&quot;. Mangcu noted that Biko was critical of organised religion and denominationalism and that he was &quot;at best an unconventional Christian&quot;.

The Nationalist government portrayed Biko as a hater of whites, but he had several close white friends, and both Woods and Wilson insisted that he was not a racist. Woods related that Biko &quot;simply wasn&#x27;t a hater of people&quot;, and that he did not even hate prominent National Party politicians like B. J. Vorster and Andries Treurnicht, instead hating their ideas. It was rare and uncharacteristic of him to display any rage, and was rare for him to tell people about his doubts and inner misgivings, reserving those for a small number of confidants.

Biko never addressed questions of gender and sexism in his politics. The sexism was evident in many ways, according to Mamphela Ramphele, a BCM activist and doctor at the Zanempilo Clinic, including that women tended to be given responsibility for the cleaning and catering at functions. &quot;There was no way you could think of Steve making a cup of tea or whatever for himself&quot;, another activist said. Feminism was viewed as irrelevant &quot;bra-burning&quot;. Surrounded by women who cared about him, Biko developed a reputation as a womaniser, something that Woods described as &quot;well earned&quot;. He displayed no racial prejudice, sleeping with both black and white women. At NUSAS, he and his friends competed to see who could have sex with the most female delegates. Responding to this behaviour, the NUSAS general secretary Sheila Lapinsky accused Biko of sexism, to which he responded: &quot;Don&#x27;t worry about my sexism. What about your white racist friends in NUSAS?&quot; Sobukwe also admonished Biko for his womanising, believing that it set a bad example to other activists.

Biko married Ntsiki Mashalaba in December 1970. They had two children together: Nkosinathi, born in 1971, and Samora, born in 1975. Biko&#x27;s wife chose the name Nkosinathi (&quot;The Lord is with us&quot;), and Biko named their second child after the Mozambican revolutionary leader Samora Machel. Angered by her husband&#x27;s serial adultery, Mashalaba ultimately moved out of their home, and by the time of his death, she had begun divorce proceedings. Biko had also begun an extra-marital relationship with Mamphela Ramphele. In 1974, they had a daughter, Lerato, who died after two months. A son, Hlumelo, was born to Ramphele in 1978, after Biko&#x27;s death. Biko was also in a relationship with Lorrain Tabane; they had a child named Motlatsi in 1977.

==Legacy==
===Influence===

Biko is viewed as the &quot;father&quot; of the Black Consciousness Movement and the anti-apartheid movement&#x27;s first icon. Nelson Mandela called him &quot;the spark that lit a veld fire across South Africa&quot;, adding that the Nationalist government &quot;had to kill him to prolong the life of apartheid&quot;. Opening an anthology of his work in 2008, Manning Marable and Peniel Joseph wrote that his death had &quot;created a vivid symbol of black resistance&quot; to apartheid that &quot;continues to inspire new black activists&quot; over a decade after the transition to majority rule. Johann de Wet, a professor of communication studies, described him as &quot;one of South Africa&#x27;s most gifted political strategists and communicators&quot;. In 2004 he was elected 13th in SABC 3&#x27;s Great South Africans public poll.

Although Biko&#x27;s ideas have not received the same attention as Frantz Fanon&#x27;s, in 2001 Ahluwalia and Zegeye wrote that the men shared &quot;a highly similar pedigree in their interests in the philosophical psychology of consciousness, their desire for a decolonising of the mind, the liberation of Africa and in the politics of nationalism and socialism for the &#x27;wretched of the earth. Some academics argue that Biko&#x27;s thought remains relevant; for example, in &quot;African Identities&quot; in 2015, Isaac Kamola wrote that Biko&#x27;s critique of white liberalism was relevant to situations like the United Nations&#x27; Millennium Development Goals and Invisible Children, Inc.&#x27;s &quot;KONY 2012&quot; campaign.

Woods held the view that Biko had filled the vacuum within the country&#x27;s African nationalist movement that arose in the late 1960s following the imprisonment of Nelson Mandela and the banning of Sobukwe. Following Biko&#x27;s death, the Black Consciousness Movement declined in influence as the ANC emerged as a resurgent force in anti-apartheid politics. This brought about a shift in focus from the BCM&#x27;s community organising to wider mass mobilisation, including attempts to follow Tambo&#x27;s call to make South Africa &quot;ungovernable&quot;, which involved increasing violence and clashes between rival anti-apartheid groups.

Followers of Biko&#x27;s ideas re-organised as the Azanian People&#x27;s Organisation (AZAPO), which subsequently split into the Socialist Party of Azania and the Black People&#x27;s Convention. Several figures associated with the ANC denigrated Biko during the 1980s. For instance, members of the ANC-affiliated United Democratic Front assembled outside Biko&#x27;s Ginsberg home shouting &quot;U-Steve Biko, I-CIA!&quot;, an allegation that Biko was a spy for the United States&#x27; Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). These demonstrations resulted in clashes with Biko supporters from AZAPO.

A year after Biko&#x27;s death, his &quot;Frank Talk&quot; writings were published as an edited collection, &quot;I Write What I Like&quot;. The defence that Biko provided for arrested SASO activists was used as the basis for the 1978 book &quot;The Testimony of Steve Biko&quot;, edited by Millard Arnold. Woods fled to England that year, where he campaigned against apartheid and further publicised Biko&#x27;s life and death, writing many newspaper articles about him, as well as a book, &quot;Biko&quot; (1978). This was made into the 1987 film &quot;Cry Freedom&quot; by Richard Attenborough, starring Denzel Washington as Biko. Many film critics and Black Consciousness proponents were concerned that the film foregrounded white characters like Woods over Biko himself, but &quot;Cry Freedom&quot; brought Biko&#x27;s life and activism to a wider audience. The state censors initially permitted its release in South Africa, but after it began screening in the country&#x27;s cinemas, copies were confiscated by police on the order of Police Commissioner General Hendrik de Wit, who claimed that it would inflame tensions and endanger public safety. The South African government banned many books about Biko, including those of Arnold and Woods.

===Commemoration===
Biko was commemorated in several artworks after his death. Gerard Sekoto, a South African artist based in France, produced &quot;Homage to Steve Biko&quot; in 1978, and another South African artist, Peter Stopforth, included a work entitled &quot;The Interrogators&quot; in his 1979 exhibition. A triptych, it depicted the three police officers implicated in Biko&#x27;s death. Kenya released a commemorative postage stamp featuring Biko&#x27;s face.

Biko&#x27;s death also inspired several songs, including from artists outside South Africa such as Tom Paxton and Peter Hammill. The English singer-songwriter Peter Gabriel released &quot;Biko&quot; in tribute to him, which was a hit single in 1980, and was banned in South Africa soon after. Along with other anti-apartheid music, the song helped to integrate anti-apartheid themes into Western popular culture. Biko&#x27;s life was also commemorated through theatre. The inquest into his death was dramatised as a play, &quot;The Biko Inquest&quot;, first performed in London in 1978; a 1984 performance was directed by Albert Finney and broadcast on television. Anti-apartheid activists used Biko&#x27;s name and memory in their protests; in 1979, a mountaineer climbed the spire of Grace Cathedral in San Francisco to unfurl a banner with the names of Biko and imprisoned Black Panther Party leader Geronimo Pratt on it.

Following apartheid&#x27;s collapse, Woods raised funds to commission a bronze statue of Biko from Naomi Jacobson. It was erected outside the front door of city hall in East London on the Eastern cape, opposite a statue commemorating British soldiers killed in the Second Boer War. Over 10,000 people attended the monument&#x27;s unveiling in September 1997. In the following months it was vandalised several times; in one instance it was daubed with the letters &quot;AWB&quot;, an acronym of the Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging, a far-right Afrikaner paramilitary group. In 1997, the cemetery where Biko was buried was renamed the Steve Biko Garden of Remembrance. The District Six Museum also held an exhibition of artwork marking the 20th anniversary of his death by examining his legacy.

Also in September 1997, Biko&#x27;s family established the Steve Biko Foundation. The Ford Foundation donated money to the group to establish a Steve Biko Centre in Ginsberg, opened in 2012. The Foundation launched its annual Steve Biko Memorial Lecture in 2000, each given by a prominent black intellectual. The first speaker was Njabulo Ndebele; later speakers included Zakes Mda, Chinua Achebe, Ngũgĩ wa Thiong&#x27;o, and Mandela.

Buildings, institutes and public spaces around the world have been named after Biko, such as the Steve Bikoplein in Amsterdam. In 2008, the Pretoria Academic Hospital was renamed the Steve Biko Hospital. The University of the Witwatersrand has a Steve Biko Centre for Bioethics. In Salvador, Bahia, a Steve Biko Institute was established to promote educational attainment among poor Afro-Brazilians. In 2012, the Google Cultural Institute published an online archive containing documents and photographs owned by the Steve Biko Foundation. On 18 December 2016, Google marked what would have been Biko&#x27;s 70th birthday with a Google Doodle.

Amid the dismantling of apartheid in the early 1990s, various political parties competed over Biko&#x27;s legacy, with several saying they were the party that Biko would support if he were still alive. AZAPO in particular claimed exclusive ownership over Black Consciousness. In 1994, the ANC issued a campaign poster suggesting that Biko had been a member of their party, which was untrue. Following the end of apartheid when the ANC formed the government, they were accused of appropriating his legacy. In 2002, AZAPO issued a statement declaring that &quot;Biko was not a neutral, apolitical and mythical icon&quot; and that the ANC was &quot;scandalously&quot; using Biko&#x27;s image to legitimise their &quot;weak&quot; government. Members of the ANC have also criticised AZAPO&#x27;s attitude to Biko; in 1997, Mandela said that &quot;Biko belongs to us all, not just AZAPO.&quot; On the anniversary of Biko&#x27;s death in 2015, delegations from both the ANC and the Economic Freedom Fighters independently visited his grave. In March 2017, the South African President Jacob Zuma laid a wreath at Biko&#x27;s grave to mark Human Rights Day.

== See also ==
* List of people subject to banning orders under apartheid

== References ==
===Footnotes===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==
* The Steve Biko Foundation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q214473" start="0" end="18" title="Steve Biko" label="Bantu Stephen Biko"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100433" start="19" end="23" title="Order for Meritorious Service" label="OMSG"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354415" start="83" end="97" title="internal resistance to apartheid" label="anti-apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874021" start="125" end="144" title="African nationalism" label="African nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q590478" start="149" end="166" title="African socialism" label="African socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q880194" start="245" end="273" title="Black Consciousness Movement" label="Black Consciousness Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q214473" start="388" end="398" title="Steve Biko" label="Frank Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q207996" start="417" end="422" title="Xhosa people" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12313898" start="447" end="464" title="Ginsberg, South Africa" label="Ginsberg township"/>
<link wikidata="Q130840" start="472" end="484" title="Eastern Cape" label="Eastern Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021166" start="529" end="548" title="University of Natal" label="University of Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979163" start="570" end="610" title="National Union of South African Students" label="National Union of South African Students"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="644" end="653" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="664" end="682" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q785378" start="687" end="701" title="White South African" label="white-minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411992" start="1182" end="1223" title="South African Students&amp;#x27; Organisation" label="South African Students&amp;#x27; Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857258" start="1335" end="1358" title="Bantu peoples of South Africa" label="Bantu-speaking Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130204" start="1371" end="1380" title="Coloureds" label="Coloureds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120990" start="1385" end="1392" title="Indian South Africans" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q740718" start="1533" end="1547" title="National Party (South Africa)" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054" start="1694" end="1704" title="Martinique" label="Martinican"/>
<link wikidata="Q193670" start="1717" end="1729" title="Frantz Fanon" label="Frantz Fanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q21260516" start="1755" end="1775" title="Black Power movement" label="Black Power movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="1956" end="1974" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="1981" end="1998" title="Socialism" label="socialist economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922353" start="2256" end="2274" title="black is beautiful" label="black is beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921453" start="2323" end="2353" title="Black People&amp;#x27;s Convention" label="Black People&amp;#x27;s Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q19893151" start="2503" end="2516" title="banning order" label="banning order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240511" start="3065" end="3077" title="Donald Woods" label="Donald Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q962363" start="3119" end="3130" title="Cry Freedom" label="Cry Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q993209" start="3707" end="3716" title="Tarkastad" label="Tarkastad"/>
<link wikidata="Q130840" start="3718" end="3730" title="Eastern Cape" label="Eastern Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027839" start="3926" end="3936" title="Whittlesea, Eastern Cape" label="Whittlesea"/>
<link wikidata="Q610600" start="4011" end="4021" title="Queenstown, Eastern Cape" label="Queenstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q125434" start="4023" end="4037" title="Port Elizabeth" label="Port Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q13553755" start="4039" end="4047" title="Fort Cox, Eastern Cape" label="Fort Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016100" start="4061" end="4085" title="King William&amp;#x27;s Town" label="King William&amp;#x27;s Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q12313898" start="4117" end="4134" title="Ginsberg, Eastern Cape" label="Ginsberg township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183734" start="4247" end="4255" title="Ethnic groups of Africa" label="Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130204" start="4260" end="4268" title="Coloureds" label="Coloured"/>
<link wikidata="Q519630" start="4289" end="4297" title="township (South Africa)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218" start="4305" end="4310" title="Xhosa language" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="4312" end="4321" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q677993" start="4532" end="4558" title="University of South Africa" label="University of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4648" end="4661" title="Grey Hospital" label="Grey Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218" start="4914" end="4922" title="Xhosa language" label="IsiXhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q540785" start="5225" end="5233" title="Anglican Church of Southern Africa" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5321" end="5348" title="St. Matthew&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="St. Matthew&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644445" start="5350" end="5363" title="Keiskammahoek" label="Keiskammahoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q849410" start="5616" end="5627" title="grade skipping" label="skip a year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692063" start="5871" end="5879" title="Lovedale (South Africa)" label="Lovedale"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="5895" end="5910" title="boarding school" label="boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003910" start="5914" end="5933" title="Alice, Eastern Cape" label="Alice, Eastern Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643845" start="6023" end="6027" title="Poqo" label="Poqo"/>
<link wikidata="Q775460" start="6051" end="6074" title="Pan Africanist Congress of Azania" label="Pan Africanist Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874021" start="6085" end="6104" title="African nationalism" label="African nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2202405" start="6609" end="6617" title="Catholic Church in South Africa" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847738" start="6637" end="6648" title="Mariannhill" label="Mariannhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q917867" start="6650" end="6655" title="Natal Province" label="Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="6675" end="6682" title="liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581810" start="6832" end="6846" title="dominant minority" label="white minority"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6847" end="6857" title="South Africa#Republic" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="6943" end="6959" title="anti-colonialism" label="anti-colonialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q179908" start="7031" end="7046" title="Ahmed Ben Bella" label="Ahmed Ben Bella"/>
<link wikidata="Q645228" start="7064" end="7086" title="Jaramogi Oginga Odinga" label="Jaramogi Oginga Odinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="7194" end="7208" title="anti-communism" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075657" start="7548" end="7557" title="Zwelitsha" label="Zwelitsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111510" start="7566" end="7574" title="ulwaluko" label="ulwaluko"/>
<link wikidata="Q83345" start="7575" end="7587" title="circumcision" label="circumcision"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021166" start="8028" end="8047" title="University of Natal" label="University of Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q257758" start="8385" end="8401" title="protests of 1968" label="protests of 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979163" start="8621" end="8661" title="National Union of South African Students" label="National Union of South African Students"/>
<link wikidata="Q377757" start="9432" end="9449" title="Rhodes University" label="Rhodes University"/>
<link wikidata="Q951161" start="9453" end="9464" title="Grahamstown" label="Grahamstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120990" start="9570" end="9576" title="Indian South Africans" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="10004" end="10016" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q320121" start="10077" end="10106" title="World Student Christian Federation" label="University Christian Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021884" start="10110" end="10121" title="Stutterheim" label="Stutterheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411992" start="10262" end="10303" title="South African Students&amp;#x27; Organisation" label="South African Students&amp;#x27; Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q45612" start="10368" end="10391" title="University of Limpopo" label="University of the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005877" start="10842" end="10856" title="Barney Pityana" label="Barney Pityana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10918" end="10930" title="Pat Matshaka" label="Pat Matshaka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10962" end="10977" title="Wuila Mashalaba" label="Wuila Mashalaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="11859" end="11864" title="black people" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922353" start="12144" end="12162" title="black is beautiful" label="black is beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020153" start="12367" end="12386" title="academic conference" label="academic conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q951305" start="12394" end="12417" title="University of Cape Town" label="University of Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12425" end="12442" title="Abe Bailey Centre" label="Abe Bailey Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q192914" start="13111" end="13130" title="cult of personality" label="cult of personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q880194" start="14102" end="14130" title="Black Consciousness Movement" label="Black Consciousness Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="14187" end="14197" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q58434" start="14221" end="14232" title="paternalism" label="paternalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669378" start="15690" end="15711" title="Abram Onkgopotse Tiro" label="Abram Onkgopotse Tiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283585" start="16626" end="16634" title="Edendale, KwaZulu-Natal" label="Edendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921453" start="16703" end="16733" title="Black People&amp;#x27;s Convention" label="Black People&amp;#x27;s Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q185591" start="17123" end="17139" title="Pietermaritzburg" label="Pietermaritzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109763" start="17554" end="17592" title="Christian Institute of Southern Africa" label="Christian Institute of Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q388430" start="17601" end="17634" title="South African Council of Churches" label="South African Council of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q541451" start="17667" end="17693" title="Anglo American plc" label="Anglo-American Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17798" end="17810" title="Bokwe Mafuna" label="Bokwe Mafuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q125905" start="17904" end="17913" title="Kimberley, Northern Cape" label="Kimberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q121885" start="17972" end="17986" title="Robert Sobukwe" label="Robert Sobukwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176060" start="18258" end="18271" title="David Russell (bishop)" label="David Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q83162" start="19269" end="19294" title="African National Congress" label="African National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19422" end="19436" title="Unity Movement (South Africa)" label="Unity Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q635776" start="19487" end="19503" title="Griffiths Mxenge" label="Griffiths Mxenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q359579" start="19573" end="19585" title="Oliver Tambo" label="Oliver Tambo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19780" end="19790" title="Fikile Bam" label="Fikile Bam"/>
<link wikidata="Q19893151" start="19953" end="19966" title="banning order" label="banning order"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20554" end="20565" title="Muntu Myeza" label="Muntu Myeza"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840015" start="20570" end="20588" title="Sathasivian Cooper" label="Sathasivian Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316290" start="20622" end="20635" title="Durban Moment" label="Durban Moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="20692" end="20702" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002270" start="20710" end="20752" title="Mozambican War of Independence" label="independence from Portuguese colonial rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q55819532" start="21364" end="21377" title="Maximum Security Prison, Robben Island" label="Robben Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240511" start="22149" end="22161" title="Donald Woods" label="Donald Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777784" start="22201" end="22215" title="Daily Dispatch" label="Daily Dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q44791211" start="23339" end="23351" title="Duncan Innes" label="Duncan Innes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="23775" end="23784" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862611" start="23823" end="23840" title="Neville Alexander" label="Neville Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q127167" start="23878" end="23890" title="Western Cape" label="Western Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="23933" end="23941" title="Marxism" label="Marxists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23947" end="23959" title="Johnny Issel" label="Johnny Issel"/>
<link wikidata="Q332946" start="24224" end="24233" title="roadblock" label="roadblock"/>
<link wikidata="Q951161" start="24239" end="24250" title="Grahamstown" label="Grahamstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478548" start="24797" end="24805" title="legcuffs" label="shackles"/>
<link wikidata="Q720026" start="25218" end="25230" title="brain damage" label="brain lesion"/>
<link wikidata="Q166019" start="25265" end="25276" title="haemorrhage" label="haemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478548" start="25523" end="25532" title="leg irons" label="leg irons"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="25818" end="25830" title="spinal fluid" label="spinal fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="25893" end="25901" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q35907" start="25957" end="25967" title="Land Rover" label="Land Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q41482" start="26091" end="26098" title="autopsy" label="autopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179217" start="26250" end="26261" title="coagulation" label="coagulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="26269" end="26283" title="kidney failure" label="kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365776" start="26289" end="26295" title="uremia" label="uremia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165405" start="27261" end="27273" title="Helen Suzman" label="Helen Suzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716715" start="27275" end="27287" title="Alex Boraine" label="Alex Boraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11267129" start="27293" end="27305" title="Zach de Beer" label="Zach de Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43033" start="27408" end="27420" title="Desmond Tutu" label="Desmond Tutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q786942" start="27673" end="27679" title="Azania" label="Azania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27831" end="27849" title="Dikobé Ben Martins" label="Dikobé Ben Martins"/>
<link wikidata="Q60770787" start="27854" end="27866" title="Robin Holmes" label="Robin Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q538741" start="28174" end="28186" title="Jimmy Kruger" label="Jimmy Kruger"/>
<link wikidata="Q191355" start="28238" end="28251" title="hunger strike" label="hunger strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036832" start="28848" end="28855" title="inquest" label="inquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q56478257" start="28928" end="28941" title="The Old Synagogue, Pretoria" label="Old Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505097" start="29123" end="29173" title="Lawyers&amp;#x27; Committee for Civil Rights Under Law" label="Lawyers&amp;#x27; Committee for Civil Rights Under Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q454263" start="29190" end="29199" title="affidavit" label="affidavit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237924" start="29302" end="29314" title="David Napley" label="David Napley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="29811" end="29823" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q130840" start="29917" end="29929" title="Eastern Cape" label="Eastern Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q181907" start="30120" end="30121" title="South African rand" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="30129" end="30132" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q65082103" start="30185" end="30225" title="South African Medical and Dental Council" label="South African Medical and Dental Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q373032" start="30813" end="30848" title="Truth and Reconciliation Commission (South Africa)" label="Truth and Reconciliation Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q185943" start="31052" end="31059" title="amnesty" label="amnesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133886" start="31162" end="31182" title="Constitutional Court of South Africa" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5662411" start="31270" end="31283" title="Harold Snyman" label="Harold Snyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16016451" start="31285" end="31301" title="Gideon Nieuwoudt" label="Gideon Nieuwoudt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899048" start="31876" end="31898" title="statute of limitations" label="statute of limitations"/>
<link wikidata="Q193670" start="32215" end="32227" title="Frantz Fanon" label="Frantz Fanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43303" start="32229" end="32238" title="Malcolm X" label="Malcolm X"/>
<link wikidata="Q154545" start="32240" end="32261" title="Léopold Sédar Senghor" label="Léopold Sédar Senghor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806509" start="32263" end="32273" title="James Cone" label="James Cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q164797" start="32279" end="32291" title="Paulo Freire" label="Paulo Freire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21260516" start="32741" end="32761" title="Black Power movement" label="Black Power movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943023" start="32816" end="32830" title="black theology" label="black theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q190354" start="38083" end="38092" title="Bantustan" label="Bantustan"/>
<link wikidata="Q554131" start="38312" end="38332" title="Mangosuthu Buthelezi" label="Mangosuthu Buthelezi"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="39137" end="39146" title="pacifism" label="pacifists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144178" start="39293" end="39309" title="anti-imperialism" label="anti-imperialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="39491" end="39502" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="39575" end="39587" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="40131" end="40139" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318122" start="40616" end="40636" title="one person, one vote" label="one person, one vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="40668" end="40683" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="40751" end="40769" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979" start="40821" end="40828" title="liberty" label="liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="40954" end="40963" title="communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="40968" end="40978" title="capitalism" label="capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q590478" start="41008" end="41025" title="African socialism" label="African socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188590" start="41243" end="41253" title="Zapatista Army of National Liberation" label="Zapatistas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="41368" end="41385" title="socialism" label="socialist society"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="41470" end="41483" title="mixed economy" label="mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589009" start="41497" end="41515" title="private enterprise" label="private enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="41755" end="41766" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43359" end="43371" title="Trudi Thomas" label="Trudi Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q192914" start="43812" end="43831" title="cult of personality" label="cult of personality"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44303" end="44308" title="gumba (music)" label="gumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="44593" end="44599" title="Gospel" label="Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359138" start="44764" end="44782" title="Organized religion" label="organised religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q313903" start="45182" end="45195" title="B. J. Vorster" label="B. J. Vorster"/>
<link wikidata="Q510574" start="45200" end="45218" title="Andries Treurnicht" label="Andries Treurnicht"/>
<link wikidata="Q48277" start="45469" end="45475" title="gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q93200" start="45480" end="45486" title="sexism" label="sexism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637050" start="45554" end="45571" title="Mamphela Ramphele" label="Mamphela Ramphele"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="45845" end="45853" title="Feminism" label="Feminism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45978" end="45987" title="Promiscuity#Male promiscuity" label="womaniser"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46278" end="46293" title="Sheila Lapinsky" label="Sheila Lapinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q219918" start="46826" end="46839" title="Samora Machel" label="Samora Machel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873580" start="47145" end="47152" title="Hlumelo Biko" label="Hlumelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="47460" end="47474" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q977425" start="47693" end="47708" title="Manning Marable" label="Manning Marable"/>
<link wikidata="Q20195276" start="47713" end="47726" title="Peniel Joseph" label="Peniel Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680831" start="47961" end="47982" title="communication studies" label="communication studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459137" start="48124" end="48130" title="SABC 3" label="SABC 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428733" start="48138" end="48158" title="Great South Africans" label="Great South Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689790" start="48659" end="48677" title="African Identities" label="African Identities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="48794" end="48808" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q81737" start="48815" end="48843" title="Millennium Development Goals" label="Millennium Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q44460" start="48848" end="48872" title="Invisible Children, Inc." label="Invisible Children, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q31681" start="48886" end="48895" title="Kony 2012" label="KONY 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q793572" start="49609" end="49643" title="Azanian People&amp;#x27;s Organisation" label="Azanian People&amp;#x27;s Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551658" start="49687" end="49712" title="Socialist Party of Azania" label="Socialist Party of Azania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921453" start="49721" end="49751" title="Black People&amp;#x27;s Convention" label="Black People&amp;#x27;s Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529503" start="49871" end="49894" title="United Democratic Front (South Africa)" label="United Democratic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="50044" end="50071" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655303" start="50268" end="50287" title="I Write What I Like" label="I Write What I Like"/>
<link wikidata="Q962363" start="50709" end="50720" title="Cry Freedom" label="Cry Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q51506" start="50730" end="50750" title="Richard Attenborough" label="Richard Attenborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q42101" start="50761" end="50778" title="Denzel Washington" label="Denzel Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103960" start="51485" end="51498" title="Gerard Sekoto" label="Gerard Sekoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q106300384" start="51625" end="51640" title="Peter Stopforth" label="Peter Stopforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="51835" end="51848" title="postage stamp" label="postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351527" start="51977" end="51987" title="Tom Paxton" label="Tom Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q163063" start="51992" end="52005" title="Peter Hammill" label="Peter Hammill"/>
<link wikidata="Q175195" start="52037" end="52050" title="Peter Gabriel" label="Peter Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902619" start="52066" end="52070" title="Biko (song)" label="Biko"/>
<link wikidata="Q28868524" start="52188" end="52208" title="Music in the movement against apartheid" label="anti-apartheid music"/>
<link wikidata="Q219546" start="52500" end="52513" title="Albert Finney" label="Albert Finney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082361" start="52664" end="52679" title="Grace Cathedral, San Francisco" label="Grace Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q189150" start="52754" end="52773" title="Black Panther Party" label="Black Panther Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q711080" start="52781" end="52795" title="Geronimo Pratt" label="Geronimo Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q37330165" start="52903" end="52917" title="Naomi Jacobson" label="Naomi Jacobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q209537" start="52973" end="52984" title="East London, Eastern Cape" label="East London"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="53069" end="53084" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q385873" start="53302" end="53330" title="Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging" label="Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616757" start="53472" end="53491" title="District Six Museum" label="District Six Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611956" start="53654" end="53675" title="Steve Biko Foundation" label="Steve Biko Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313036" start="53681" end="53696" title="Ford Foundation" label="Ford Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136965" start="53926" end="53941" title="Njabulo Ndebele" label="Njabulo Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q144653" start="53967" end="53976" title="Zakes Mda" label="Zakes Mda"/>
<link wikidata="Q155845" start="53978" end="53991" title="Chinua Achebe" label="Chinua Achebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q302910" start="53993" end="54015" title="Ngũgĩ wa Thiong&amp;#x27;o" label="Ngũgĩ wa Thiong&amp;#x27;o"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="54147" end="54156" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611957" start="54214" end="54233" title="Steve Biko Hospital" label="Steve Biko Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q534643" start="54239" end="54270" title="University of the Witwatersrand" label="University of the Witwatersrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q36947" start="54313" end="54328" title="Salvador, Bahia" label="Salvador, Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q388315" start="54414" end="54429" title="Afro-Brazilians" label="Afro-Brazilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q369089" start="54444" end="54469" title="Google Cultural Institute" label="Google Cultural Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="54592" end="54598" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q18156042" start="54660" end="54673" title="Google Doodle" label="Google Doodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15613585" start="55651" end="55676" title="Economic Freedom Fighters" label="Economic Freedom Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q57282" start="55753" end="55763" title="Jacob Zuma" label="Jacob Zuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q206206" start="55807" end="55823" title="Human Rights Day" label="Human Rights Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q19893151" start="55843" end="55899" title="List of people subject to banning orders under apartheid" label="List of people subject to banning orders under apartheid"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="28321" wikidata="Q4050430" url="?curid=28321" title="Survivor">
<text>Survivor(s) may refer to:

* one who survives

==Arts, entertainment and media==
===Fictional entities===
* Survivors, characters in the 1997 &quot;KKnD&quot; video-game series
* &quot;The Survivors&quot;, or the &quot;New Survivors Foundation&quot;, a fictional cult from Robert Muchamore&#x27;s a 2006 novel &quot;Divine Madness&quot;

===Films===
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (1987 film), a film written by Bima Stagg
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (2008 film), a film featuring Cyril Nri
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (2014 film), a film featuring Danielle Chuchran and Kevin Sorbo
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (film), a 2015 British spy-thriller starring Milla Jovovich and Pierce Brosnan
* &quot;Survivors&quot; (2015 film), a British horror
* &quot;Survivors&quot; (2018 film), a Sierra Leonean documentary
* &quot;Survivors&quot; (2022 film), a Nigerian comedy
* &quot;The Survivors&quot; (1983 film)
* &quot;The Survivor&quot; (2016 film), a short about the 2014 APS Massacre

=== Games ===
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (1982 video game), a 1982 shooter game
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (1987 video game), a 1987 8-bit action game
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (2001 video game), a tie-in to the &quot;Survivor&quot; reality TV franchise
* &quot;Survivors&quot; (video game), 1986, published by Atlantis Software
* &quot;Resident Evil Survivor&quot;, a 2000 light gun shooter
* &quot;Star Wars Jedi: Survivor&quot;, a 2023 action-adventure video game

=== Literature ===
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (Octavia Butler novel), a 1978 science fiction novel by Octavia Butler
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (Gonzalez novel), a 2004 horror novel by J. F. Gonzalez
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (Palahniuk novel), a 1999 satirical novel by Chuck Palahniuk
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (story), a 2004 novella in &quot;Accelerando&quot; by Charles Stross
* &quot;Survivor&quot;, a 1988 novel by Christina Crawford
* &quot;Survivor&quot;, a 2004 novel by William W. Johnstone that begins The Last Rebel series
* &quot;Survivor&quot;, a 1997 novel by Tabitha King
* &quot;Survivor&quot;, a 2011 novel by James Clancy Phelan
* &quot;Survivors&quot; (novel series), series of children&#x27;s novels by Erin Hunter
* &quot;Survivors&quot; (&quot;Star Trek&quot;), 1989 Star Trek: The Next Generation novel by Jean Lorrah
* &quot;Survivors&quot;, a 1976 novel by Terry Nation, adapted from the eponymous 1970s TV series
* &quot;&quot;, 2011 novel by James Wesley Rawles
* &quot;Survivors&quot; (), a French comic book in the &quot;Worlds of Aldebaran&quot; comic book series

=== Music ===
====Groups and labels====
* Survivor (band), an American rock band
* Survivor Records, a British Christian music record label

====Albums====
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (Randy Bachman 1978 album), or the title song
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (Eric Burdon album), 1977
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (Destiny&#x27;s Child album), 2001
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (Fifteen album), 2000
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (George Fox album), 1998
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (Survivor album), 1979
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (Funker Vogt album), 2002
* &quot;Survivor&quot;, a 2017 album by Hillary Hawkins
* &quot;Survivors&quot; (Max Roach album), 1984
* &quot;Survivors&quot; (Samson album), 1979

====Songs====
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (Destiny&#x27;s Child song), 2001
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (Elena Paparizou song), 2014
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (Parg song), 2025
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (TVXQ song), 2009
* &quot;Survivor&quot;, a 1978 song by Cindy Bullens
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (Mike Francis song), 1984
* &quot;Survivor&quot;, a 2009 song by Mavado featuring Akon
* &quot;Survivor&quot;, a 2016 song by M.I.A.
* &quot;Survivor&quot;, a 2005 song by Vanilla Ice from &quot;Platinum Underground&quot;
* &quot;Survivor&quot;, a 2016 song by Zach Williams
* &quot;Survivors&quot;, a 2015 song by Selena Gomez
* &quot;Survivors&quot;, a 2015 song by Hardwell and Dannic
* &quot;Survivors&quot;, a 2016 song by The Afters from &quot;Live On Forever&quot;
* &quot;Survivors&quot;, a 2014 song by Zomboy and MUST DIE!

=== Television ===

====Series====
* &quot;Survivor&quot; (franchise), a reality-television show with numerous international versions:
** &quot;Australian Survivor&quot;
** &quot;Survivor&quot; (American TV series)
** &quot;Survivor&quot; (British TV series)
** &quot;Survivor&quot; (Israeli TV series), formerly &quot;Survivor 10&quot;
** &quot;Survivor India&quot;
*** &quot;Survivor India – The Ultimate Battle&quot; (Hindi TV series)
*** &quot;Survivor&quot; (Tamil TV series)
** &quot;Survivor BG&quot;, Bulgaria
** &quot;Survivor Philippines&quot;
** &quot;Survivor South Africa&quot;
** &quot;Survivor Srbija&quot;, Serbia
** See the main article for a list of other international versions
* &quot;Survivor Series&quot;, a professional wrestling pay-per-view event
* &quot;The Survivors&quot;, an American primetime soap opera
* &quot;Survivors&quot; (1975 TV series), a British post-apocalyptic fiction series
* &quot;Survivors&quot; (2008 TV series), an adaptation of Terry Nation&#x27;s eponymous book

====Episodes====
* &quot;Survivors&quot; (&quot;Babylon 5&quot;), 1994 television series episode
* &quot;Survivors&quot; (&quot;Supergirl&quot;), 2016 episode of American TV series &quot;Supergirl&quot;
* &quot;The Survivors&quot; (&quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot;), 1989

== Other uses ==
* Survivor (horse), a racehorse that won the first Preakness Stakes in 1873
* Survivor: The Ride!, a former roller coaster in California&#x27;s Great America, in Santa Clara, California, U.S.

==See also==
* :Category:Survivors
* The Survivor (disambiguation)
* Lone Survivor (disambiguation)
* Sole Survivor (disambiguation)
* &quot;Survivor Song&quot;, a 2020 horror novel by American author Paul Tremblay
* Survival (disambiguation)
* Survivants (disambiguation) ()
* Survive (disambiguation)
* Surviving (disambiguation)
* Survivor guilt, a mental condition</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4050430" start="0" end="11" title="Survivor" label="Survivor(s)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104482419" start="37" end="44" title="survive" label="survive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="142" end="176" title="KKnD series#Armies" label="&amp;quot;KKnD&amp;quot; video-game series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235663" start="316" end="330" title="Divine Madness (novel)" label="Divine Madness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913674" start="404" end="414" title="Bima Stagg" label="Bima Stagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261060" start="468" end="477" title="Cyril Nri" label="Cyril Nri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014974" start="531" end="548" title="Danielle Chuchran" label="Danielle Chuchran"/>
<link wikidata="Q313655" start="553" end="564" title="Kevin Sorbo" label="Kevin Sorbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15715647" start="567" end="594" title="Survivor (film)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25136533" start="669" end="702" title="Survivors (2015 film)" label="&amp;quot;Survivors&amp;quot; (2015 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104864091" start="723" end="756" title="Survivors (2018 film)" label="&amp;quot;Survivors&amp;quot; (2018 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q113133176" start="789" end="822" title="Survivors (2022 film)" label="&amp;quot;Survivors&amp;quot; (2022 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q502680" start="844" end="881" title="The Survivors (1983 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Survivors&amp;quot; (1983 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q58769220" start="884" end="920" title="The Survivor (2016 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Survivor&amp;quot; (2016 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20874901" start="975" end="1013" title="Survivor (1982 video game)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (1982 video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647274" start="1037" end="1075" title="Survivor (1987 video game)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (1987 video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754084" start="1104" end="1142" title="Survivor (2001 video game)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (2001 video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647333" start="1204" end="1238" title="Survivors (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Survivors&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q602617" start="1285" end="1307" title="Resident Evil Survivor" label="Resident Evil Survivor"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1348" end="1372" title="Star Wars Jedi: Survivor" label="Star Wars Jedi: Survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647264" start="1437" end="1480" title="Survivor (Octavia Butler novel)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (Octavia Butler novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21079173" start="1531" end="1568" title="Survivor (Gonzalez novel)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (Gonzalez novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q568143" start="1610" end="1648" title="Survivor (Palahniuk novel)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (Palahniuk novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300209" start="1694" end="1722" title="Survivor (story)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (story)"/>
<link wikidata="Q523816" start="1824" end="1842" title="Christina Crawford" label="Christina Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1883" end="1903" title="William W. Johnstone#The Last Rebel series" label="William W. Johnstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q284287" start="1978" end="1990" title="Tabitha King" label="Tabitha King"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131354" start="2031" end="2050" title="James Clancy Phelan" label="James Clancy Phelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55739548" start="2053" end="2089" title="Survivors (novel series)" label="&amp;quot;Survivors&amp;quot; (novel series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647331" start="2141" end="2186" title="Survivors (Star Trek)" label="&amp;quot;Survivors&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Star Trek&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q628479" start="2286" end="2298" title="Terry Nation" label="Terry Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647380" start="2454" end="2473" title="Worlds of Aldebaran" label="Worlds of Aldebaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135315" start="2541" end="2556" title="Survivor (band)" label="Survivor (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647306" start="2582" end="2598" title="Survivor Records" label="Survivor Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647265" start="2657" end="2704" title="Survivor (Randy Bachman album)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (Randy Bachman 1978 album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647262" start="2726" end="2766" title="Survivor (Eric Burdon album)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (Eric Burdon album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q913320" start="2775" end="2824" title="Survivor (Destiny&amp;#x27;s Child album)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (Destiny&amp;#x27;s Child album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647259" start="2833" end="2869" title="Survivor (Fifteen album)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (Fifteen album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647260" start="2878" end="2917" title="Survivor (George Fox album)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (George Fox album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q762410" start="2926" end="2963" title="Survivor (Survivor album)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (Survivor album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q665745" start="2972" end="3012" title="Survivor (Funker Vogt album)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (Funker Vogt album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17460722" start="3059" end="3074" title="Hillary Hawkins" label="Hillary Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647330" start="3077" end="3116" title="Survivors (Max Roach album)" label="&amp;quot;Survivors&amp;quot; (Max Roach album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3978210" start="3125" end="3161" title="Survivors (Samson album)" label="&amp;quot;Survivors&amp;quot; (Samson album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q149099" start="3185" end="3233" title="Survivor (Destiny&amp;#x27;s Child song)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (Destiny&amp;#x27;s Child song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15938398" start="3242" end="3285" title="Survivor (Elena Paparizou song)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (Elena Paparizou song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q132457944" start="3294" end="3326" title="Survivor (Parg song)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (Parg song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647268" start="3335" end="3367" title="Survivor (TVXQ song)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (TVXQ song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120491" start="3413" end="3426" title="Cindy Bullens" label="Cindy Bullens"/>
<link wikidata="Q367201" start="3429" end="3469" title="Survivor (Mike Francis song)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (Mike Francis song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q262517" start="3515" end="3521" title="Mavado (singer)" label="Mavado"/>
<link wikidata="Q204019" start="3576" end="3582" title="M.I.A. (rapper)" label="M.I.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q7202382" start="3645" end="3665" title="Platinum Underground" label="Platinum Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q27899163" start="3711" end="3724" title="Zach Williams (musician)" label="Zach Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q83287" start="3765" end="3777" title="Selena Gomez" label="Selena Gomez"/>
<link wikidata="Q923731" start="3818" end="3826" title="Hardwell" label="Hardwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15912617" start="3831" end="3837" title="Dannic" label="Dannic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26963000" start="3900" end="3915" title="Live On Forever" label="Live On Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q14546605" start="3962" end="3968" title="Zomboy" label="Zomboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q755975" start="4021" end="4053" title="Survivor (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (franchise)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824734" start="4128" end="4147" title="Australian Survivor" label="Australian Survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q28856068" start="4157" end="4198" title="Survivor (American TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (American TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647269" start="4202" end="4242" title="Survivor (British TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (British TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647266" start="4246" end="4286" title="Survivor (Israeli TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (Israeli TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108704398" start="4330" end="4344" title="Survivor India" label="Survivor India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136270" start="4355" end="4421" title="Survivor India – The Ultimate Battle (Hindi TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor India – The Ultimate Battle&amp;quot; (Hindi TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108131444" start="4426" end="4464" title="Survivor (Tamil TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Survivor&amp;quot; (Tamil TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6762233" start="4474" end="4485" title="Survivor BG" label="Survivor BG"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647301" start="4511" end="4531" title="Survivor Philippines" label="Survivor Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647308" start="4547" end="4568" title="Survivor South Africa" label="Survivor South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647315" start="4584" end="4599" title="Survivor Srbija" label="Survivor Srbija"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4642" end="4680" title="Survivor (franchise)#Survivor around the world" label="a list of other international versions"/>
<link wikidata="Q59759" start="4689" end="4704" title="Survivor Series" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072899" start="4758" end="4783" title="Harold Robbins&amp;#x27; The Survivors" label="&amp;quot;The Survivors&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226179" start="4820" end="4858" title="Survivors (1975 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Survivors&amp;quot; (1975 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553921" start="4904" end="4942" title="Survivors (2008 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Survivors&amp;quot; (2008 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647329" start="5016" end="5061" title="Survivors (Babylon 5)" label="&amp;quot;Survivors&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Babylon 5&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185752" start="5096" end="5141" title="Survivors (Supergirl)" label="&amp;quot;Survivors&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Supergirl&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5202" end="5272" title="The Survivors (Star Trek: The Next Generation)" label="&amp;quot;The Survivors&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647270" start="5299" end="5315" title="Survivor (horse)" label="Survivor (horse)"/>
<link wikidata="Q987756" start="5423" end="5454" title="California&amp;#x27;s Great America" label="California&amp;#x27;s Great America"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5505" end="5524" title=":Category:Survivors" label=":Category:Survivors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989558" start="5527" end="5556" title="The Survivor (disambiguation)" label="The Survivor (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671472" start="5559" end="5589" title="Lone Survivor (disambiguation)" label="Lone Survivor (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557459" start="5592" end="5622" title="Sole Survivor (disambiguation)" label="Sole Survivor (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q102079080" start="5631" end="5644" title="Survivor Song" label="Survivor Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q398847" start="5707" end="5732" title="Survival (disambiguation)" label="Survival (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q114873193" start="5735" end="5762" title="Survivants (disambiguation)" label="Survivants (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206382" start="5768" end="5792" title="Survive (disambiguation)" label="Survive (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q114888974" start="5795" end="5821" title="Surviving (disambiguation)" label="Surviving (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q332768" start="5824" end="5838" title="Survivor guilt" label="Survivor guilt"/>
</links>
</doc>
