<doc id="25532" wikidata="Q4692" url="?curid=25532" title="Renaissance">
<text>The Renaissance ( , ) is a period of history and a European cultural movement covering the 15th and 16th centuries. It marked the transition from the Middle Ages to modernity and was characterized by an effort to revive and surpass the ideas and achievements of classical antiquity. Associated with great social change in most fields and disciplines, including art, architecture, politics, literature, exploration and science, the Renaissance was first centered in the Republic of Florence, then spread to the rest of Italy and later throughout Europe. The term &quot;rinascita&quot; (&quot;rebirth&quot;) first appeared in &quot;Lives of the Artists&quot; () by Giorgio Vasari, while the corresponding French word was adopted into English as the term for this period during the 1830s.

The Renaissance&#x27;s intellectual basis was founded in its version of humanism, derived from the concept of Roman and the rediscovery of classical Greek philosophy, such as that of Protagoras, who said that &quot;man is the measure of all things&quot;. Although the invention of metal movable type sped the dissemination of ideas from the later 15th century, the changes of the Renaissance were not uniform across Europe: the first traces appear in Italy as early as the late 13th century, in particular with the writings of Dante and the paintings of Giotto.

As a cultural movement, the Renaissance encompassed innovative flowering of literary Latin and an explosion of vernacular literatures, beginning with the 14th-century resurgence of learning based on classical sources, which contemporaries credited to Petrarch; the development of linear perspective and other techniques of rendering a more natural reality in painting; and gradual but widespread educational reform. It saw myriad artistic developments and contributions from such polymaths as Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo, who inspired the term &quot;Renaissance man&quot;. In politics, the Renaissance contributed to the development of the customs and conventions of diplomacy, and in science to an increased reliance on observation and inductive reasoning. The period also saw revolutions in other intellectual and social scientific pursuits, as well as the introduction of modern banking and the field of accounting.

==Period==
The Renaissance period started during the crisis of the Late Middle Ages and conventionally ends by the 1600s with the waning of humanism, and the advents of the Reformation and Counter-Reformation, and in art the Baroque period. It had a different period and characteristics in different regions, such as the Italian Renaissance, the Northern Renaissance, the Spanish Renaissance, etc.

In addition to the standard periodization, proponents of a &quot;long Renaissance&quot; may put its beginning in the 14th century and its end in the 17th century.

The traditional view focuses more on the Renaissance&#x27;s early modern aspects and argues that it was a break from the past, but many historians today focus more on its medieval aspects and argue that it was an extension of the Middle Ages. The beginnings of the period—the early Renaissance of the 15th century and the Italian Proto-Renaissance from around 1250 or 1300—overlap considerably with the Late Middle Ages, conventionally dated to , and the Middle Ages themselves were a long period filled with gradual changes, like the modern age; as a transitional period between both, the Renaissance has close similarities to both, especially the late and early sub-periods of either.

The Renaissance began in Florence, one of the many states of Italy. Various theories have been proposed to account for its origins and characteristics, focusing on a variety of factors, including Florence&#x27;s social and civic peculiarities at the time: its political structure, the patronage of its dominant family, the Medici, and the migration of Greek scholars and their texts to Italy following the fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Empire. Other major centers were Venice, Genoa, Milan, Rome during the Renaissance Papacy, and Naples. From Italy, the Renaissance spread throughout Europe and also to American, African and Asian territories ruled by the European colonial powers of the time or where Christian missionaries were active.

The Renaissance has a long and complex historiography, and in line with general skepticism of discrete periodizations, there has been much debate among historians reacting to the 19th-century glorification of the &quot;Renaissance&quot; and individual cultural heroes as &quot;Renaissance men&quot;, questioning the usefulness of &quot;Renaissance&quot; as a term and as a historical delineation.

Some observers have questioned whether the Renaissance was a cultural &quot;advance&quot; from the Middle Ages, instead seeing it as a period of pessimism and nostalgia for classical antiquity, while social and economic historians, especially of the &quot;longue durée&quot;, have instead focused on the continuity between the two eras, which are linked, as Panofsky observed, &quot;by a thousand ties&quot;.

The word has also been extended to other historical and cultural movements, such as the Carolingian Renaissance (8th and 9th centuries), Ottonian Renaissance (10th and 11th century), and the Renaissance of the 12th century.

==Overview==
The Renaissance was a cultural movement that profoundly affected European intellectual life in the early modern period. Beginning in Italy, and spreading to the rest of Europe by the 16th century, its influence was felt in art, architecture, philosophy, literature, music, science, technology, politics, religion, and other aspects of intellectual inquiry. Renaissance scholars employed the humanist method in study, and searched for realism and human emotion in art.

Renaissance humanists such as Poggio Bracciolini sought out in Europe&#x27;s monastic libraries the Latin literary, historical, and oratorical texts of antiquity, while the fall of Constantinople (1453) generated a wave of émigré Greek scholars bringing precious manuscripts in ancient Greek, many of which had fallen into obscurity in the West. It was in their new focus on literary and historical texts that Renaissance scholars differed so markedly from the medieval scholars of the Renaissance of the 12th century, who had focused on studying Greek and Arabic works of natural sciences, philosophy, and mathematics, rather than on such cultural texts.

In the revival of neoplatonism, Renaissance humanists did not reject Christianity; on the contrary, many of the Renaissance&#x27;s greatest works were devoted to it, and the Church patronized many works of Renaissance art. But a subtle shift took place in the way that intellectuals approached religion that was reflected in many other areas of cultural life. In addition, many Greek Christian works, including the Greek New Testament, were brought back from Byzantium to Western Europe and engaged Western scholars for the first time since late antiquity. This new engagement with Greek Christian works, and particularly the return to the original Greek of the New Testament promoted by humanists Lorenzo Valla and Erasmus, helped pave the way for the Reformation.

Well after the first artistic return to classicism had been exemplified in the sculpture of Nicola Pisano, Florentine painters led by Masaccio strove to portray the human form realistically, developing techniques to render perspective and light more naturally. Political philosophers, most famously Niccolò Machiavelli, sought to describe political life as it really was, that is to understand it rationally. A critical contribution to Italian Renaissance humanism, Giovanni Pico della Mirandola wrote &quot;De hominis dignitate&quot; (&quot;Oration on the Dignity of Man&quot;, 1486), a series of theses on philosophy, natural thought, faith, and magic defended against any opponent on the grounds of reason. In addition to studying classical Latin and Greek, Renaissance authors also began increasingly to use vernacular languages; combined with the introduction of the printing press, this allowed many more people access to books, especially the Bible.

In all, the Renaissance can be viewed as an attempt by intellectuals to study and improve the secular and worldly, both through the revival of ideas from antiquity and through novel approaches to thought. Political philosopher Hans Kohn describes it as an age where &quot;Men looked for new foundations&quot;; some like Erasmus and Thomas More envisioned new reformed spiritual foundations, others. in the words of Machiavelli, &quot;una lunga sperienza delle cose moderne ed una continua lezione delle antiche&quot; (a long experience with modern life and a continuous learning from antiquity).

Sociologist Rodney Stark plays down the Renaissance in favor of the earlier innovations of the Italian city-states in the High Middle Ages, which married responsive government, Christianity and the birth of capitalism. This analysis argues that, whereas the great European states (France and Spain) were absolute monarchies, and others were under direct Church control, the independent city-republics of Italy took over the principles of capitalism invented on monastic estates and set off a vast unprecedented Commercial Revolution that preceded and financed the Renaissance.

Historian Leon Poliakov offers a critical view in his seminal study of European racist thought: &quot;The Aryan Myth&quot;. According to Poliakov, the use of ethnic origin myths are first used by Renaissance humanists &quot;in the service of a new born chauvinism&quot;.

==Origins==

Many argue that the ideas characterizing the Renaissance had their origin in Florence at the turn of the 13th and 14th centuries, in particular with the writings of Dante Alighieri (1265–1321) and Petrarch (1304–1374), as well as the paintings of Giotto di Bondone (1267–1337). Some writers date the Renaissance quite precisely; one proposed starting point is 1401, when the rival geniuses Lorenzo Ghiberti and Filippo Brunelleschi competed for the contract to build the bronze doors for the Baptistery of the Florence Cathedral (Ghiberti won). Others see more general competition between artists and polymaths such as Brunelleschi, Ghiberti, Donatello, and Masaccio for artistic commissions as sparking the creativity of the Renaissance.

Yet it remains much debated why the Renaissance began in Italy, and why it began when it did. Accordingly, several theories have been put forward to explain its origins. Peter Rietbergen posits that various influential Proto-Renaissance movements started from roughly 1300 onwards across many regions of Europe.

===Latin and Greek phases of Renaissance humanism===

In stark contrast to the High Middle Ages, when Latin scholars focused almost entirely on studying Greek and Arabic works of natural science, philosophy and mathematics, Renaissance scholars were most interested in recovering and studying Latin and Greek literary, historical, and oratorical texts. Broadly speaking, this began in the 14th century with a Latin phase, when Renaissance scholars such as Petrarch, Coluccio Salutati (1331–1406), Niccolò de&#x27; Niccoli (1364–1437), and Poggio Bracciolini (1380–1459) scoured the libraries of Europe in search of works by such Latin authors as Cicero, Lucretius, Livy, and Seneca. By the early 15th century, the bulk of the surviving such Latin literature had been recovered; the Greek phase of Renaissance humanism was under way, as Western European scholars turned to recovering ancient Greek literary, historical, oratorical and theological texts.

Unlike with Latin texts, which had been preserved and studied in Western Europe since late antiquity, the study of ancient Greek texts was very limited in medieval Western Europe. Ancient Greek works on science, mathematics, and philosophy had been studied since the High Middle Ages in Western Europe and in the Islamic Golden Age (normally in translation), but Greek literary, oratorical and historical works (such as Homer, the Greek dramatists, Demosthenes and Thucydides) were not studied in either the Latin or medieval Islamic worlds; in the Middle Ages these sorts of texts were only studied by Byzantine scholars. Some argue that the Timurid Renaissance in Samarkand and Herat, whose magnificence toned with Florence as the center of a cultural rebirth, were linked to the Ottoman Empire, whose conquests led to the migration of Greek scholars to Italian cities. One of the greatest achievements of Renaissance scholars was to bring this entire class of Greek cultural works back into Western Europe for the first time since late antiquity.

Muslim logicians, most notably Avicenna and Averroes, had inherited Greek ideas after they had invaded and conquered Egypt and the Levant. Their translations and commentaries on these ideas worked their way through the Arab West into Iberia and Sicily, which became important centers for this transmission of ideas. Between the 11th and 13th centuries, many schools dedicated to the translation of philosophical and scientific works from Classical Arabic to Medieval Latin were established in Iberia, most notably the Toledo School of Translators. This work of translation from Islamic culture, though largely unplanned and disorganized, constituted one of the greatest transmissions of ideas in history.

The movement to reintegrate the regular study of Greek literary, historical, oratorical, and theological texts back into the Western European curriculum is usually dated to the 1396 invitation from Coluccio Salutati to the Byzantine diplomat and scholar Manuel Chrysoloras (c. 1355–1415) to teach Greek in Florence. This legacy was continued by a number of expatriate Greek scholars, from Basilios Bessarion to Leo Allatius.

===Social and political structures in Italy===
The unique political structures of Italy during the Late Middle Ages have led some to theorize that its unusual social climate allowed the emergence of a rare cultural efflorescence. Italy did not exist as a political entity in the early modern period. Instead, it was divided into smaller city-states and territories: the Neapolitans controlled the south, the Florentines and the Romans at the center, the Milanese and the Genoese to the north and west respectively, and the Venetians to the north east. 15th-century Italy was one of the most urbanized areas in Europe. Many of its cities stood among the ruins of ancient Roman buildings; it seems likely that the classical nature of the Renaissance was linked to its origin in the Roman Empire&#x27;s heartland.

Historian and political philosopher Quentin Skinner points out that Otto of Freising (c. 1114–1158), a German bishop visiting north Italy during the 12th century, noticed a widespread new form of political and social organization, observing that Italy appeared to have exited from feudalism so that its society was based on merchants and commerce. Linked to this was anti-monarchical thinking, represented in the famous early Renaissance fresco cycle &quot;The Allegory of Good and Bad Government&quot; by Ambrogio Lorenzetti (painted 1338–1340), whose strong message is about the virtues of fairness, justice, republicanism and good administration. Holding both Church and Empire at bay, these city republics were devoted to notions of liberty. Skinner reports that there were many defences of liberty such as the Matteo Palmieri (1406–1475) celebration of Florentine genius not only in art, sculpture and architecture, but &quot;the remarkable efflorescence of moral, social and political philosophy that occurred in Florence at the same time&quot;.

Even cities and states beyond central Italy, such as the Republic of Florence at this time, were also notable for their merchant republics, especially the Republic of Venice. Although in practice these were oligarchical, and bore little resemblance to a modern democracy, they did have democratic features and were responsive states, with forms of participation in governance and belief in liberty. The relative political freedom they afforded was conducive to academic and artistic advancement. Likewise, the position of Italian cities such as Venice as great trading centres made them intellectual crossroads. Merchants brought with them ideas from far corners of the globe, particularly the Levant. Venice was Europe&#x27;s gateway to trade with the East, and a producer of fine glass, while Florence was a capital of textiles. The wealth such business brought to Italy meant large public and private artistic projects could be commissioned and individuals had more leisure time for study.

===Black Death===

One theory that has been advanced is that the devastation in Florence caused by the Black Death, which hit Europe between 1348 and 1350, resulted in a shift in the world view of people in 14th century Italy. Italy was particularly badly hit by the plague, and it has been speculated that the resulting familiarity with death caused thinkers to dwell more on their lives on Earth, rather than on spirituality and the afterlife. It has also been argued that the Black Death prompted a new wave of piety, manifested in the sponsorship of religious works of art. However, this does not fully explain why the Renaissance occurred specifically in Italy in the 14th century. The Black Death was a pandemic that affected all of Europe in the ways described, not only Italy. The Renaissance&#x27;s emergence in Italy was most likely the result of the complex interaction of the above factors.

The plague was carried by fleas on sailing vessels returning from the ports of Asia, spreading quickly due to lack of proper sanitation: the population of England, then about 4.2 million, lost 1.4 million people to the bubonic plague. Florence&#x27;s population was nearly halved in the year 1348. As a result of the decimation in the populace the value of the working class increased, and commoners came to enjoy more freedom. To answer the increased need for labor, workers traveled in search of the most favorable position economically.

The demographic decline due to the plague had economic consequences: the prices of food dropped and land values declined by 30–40% in most parts of Europe between 1350 and 1400. Landholders faced a great loss, but for ordinary men and women it was a windfall. The survivors of the plague found not only that the prices of food were cheaper but also that lands were more abundant, and many of them inherited property from their dead relatives.

The spread of disease was significantly more rampant in areas of poverty. Epidemics ravaged cities, particularly children. Plagues were easily spread by lice, unsanitary drinking water, armies, or by poor sanitation. Children were hit the hardest because many diseases, such as typhus and congenital syphilis, target the immune system, leaving young children without a fighting chance. Children in city dwellings were more affected by the spread of disease than the children of the wealthy.

The Black Death caused greater upheaval to Florence&#x27;s social and political structure than later epidemics. Despite a significant number of deaths among members of the ruling classes, the government of Florence continued to function during this period. Formal meetings of elected representatives were suspended during the height of the epidemic due to the chaotic conditions in the city, but a small group of officials was appointed to conduct the affairs of the city, which ensured continuity of government.

===Cultural conditions in Florence===
It has long been a matter of debate why the Renaissance began in Florence, and not elsewhere in Italy. Scholars have noted several features unique to Florentine cultural life that may have caused such a cultural movement. Many have emphasized the role played by the Medici, a banking family and later ducal ruling house, in patronizing and stimulating the arts. Some historians have postulated that Florence was the birthplace of the Renaissance as a result of luck, i.e., because &quot;Great Men&quot; were born there by chance: Leonardo, Botticelli and Michelangelo were all born in Tuscany. Arguing that such chance seems improbable, other historians have contended that these &quot;Great Men&quot; were only able to rise to prominence because of the prevailing cultural conditions at the time.

Lorenzo de&#x27; Medici (1449–1492) was the catalyst for an enormous amount of arts patronage, encouraging his countrymen to commission works from the leading artists of Florence, including Leonardo da Vinci, Sandro Botticelli, and Michelangelo Buonarroti. Works by Neri di Bicci, Botticelli, Leonardo, and Filippino Lippi had been commissioned additionally by the Convent of San Donato in Scopeto in Florence.

The Renaissance was certainly underway before Lorenzo de&#x27; Medici came to power – indeed, before the Medici family itself achieved hegemony in Florentine society.

==Characteristics==
===Humanism===

In some ways, Renaissance humanism was not a philosophy but a method of learning. In contrast to the medieval scholastic mode, which focused on resolving contradictions between authors, Renaissance humanists would study ancient texts in their original languages and appraise them through a combination of reasoning and empirical evidence. Humanist education was based on the programme of &quot;Studia Humanitatis&quot;, the study of five humanities: poetry, grammar, history, moral philosophy, and rhetoric. Although historians have sometimes struggled to define humanism precisely, most have settled on &quot;a middle of the road definition... the movement to recover, interpret, and assimilate the language, literature, learning and values of ancient Greece and Rome&quot;. Above all, humanists asserted &quot;the genius of man ... the unique and extraordinary ability of the human mind&quot;.

Humanist scholars shaped the intellectual landscape throughout the early modern period. Political philosophers such as Niccolò Machiavelli and Thomas More revived the ideas of Greek and Roman thinkers and applied them in critiques of contemporary government, following the Islamic steps of Ibn Khaldun. Pico della Mirandola wrote the &quot;manifesto&quot; of the Renaissance, the &quot;Oration on the Dignity of Man&quot;, a vibrant defence of thinking. Matteo Palmieri (1406–1475), another humanist, is most known for his work &quot;Della vita civile&quot; (&quot;On Civic Life&quot;; printed 1528), which advocated civic humanism, and for his influence in refining the Tuscan vernacular to the same level as Latin. Palmieri drew on Roman philosophers and theorists, especially Cicero, who, like Palmieri, lived an active public life as a citizen and official, as well as a theorist and philosopher and also Quintilian. Perhaps the most succinct expression of his perspective on humanism is in a 1465 poetic work &quot;La città di vita&quot;, but an earlier work, &quot;Della vita civile&quot;, is more wide-ranging. Composed as a series of dialogues set in a country house in the Mugello countryside outside Florence during the plague of 1430, Palmieri expounds on the qualities of the ideal citizen. The dialogues include ideas about how children develop mentally and physically, how citizens can conduct themselves morally, how citizens and states can ensure probity in public life, and an important debate on the difference between that which is pragmatically useful and that which is honest.

The humanists believed that it is important to transcend to the afterlife with a perfect mind and body, which could be attained with education. The purpose of humanism was to create a universal man whose person combined intellectual and physical excellence and who was capable of functioning honorably in virtually any situation. This ideology was referred to as the &quot;uomo universale&quot;, an ancient Greco-Roman ideal. Education during the Renaissance was mainly composed of ancient literature and history as it was thought that the classics provided moral instruction and an intensive understanding of human behavior.

===Humanism and libraries===
A unique characteristic of some Renaissance libraries is that they were open to the public. These libraries were places where ideas were exchanged and where scholarship and reading were considered both pleasurable and beneficial to the mind and soul. As freethinking was a hallmark of the age, many libraries contained a wide range of writers. Classical texts could be found alongside humanist writings. These informal associations of intellectuals profoundly influenced Renaissance culture. An essential tool of Renaissance librarianship was the catalog that listed, described, and classified a library&#x27;s books. Some of the richest &quot;bibliophiles&quot; built libraries as temples to books and knowledge. A number of libraries appeared as manifestations of immense wealth joined with a love of books. In some cases, cultivated library builders were also committed to offering others the opportunity to use their collections. Prominent aristocrats and princes of the Church created great libraries for the use of their courts, called &quot;court libraries&quot;, and were housed in lavishly designed monumental buildings decorated with ornate woodwork, and the walls adorned with frescoes (Murray, Stuart A.P.).

===Art===
Renaissance art marks a cultural rebirth at the close of the Middle Ages and rise of the Modern world. One of the distinguishing features of Renaissance art was its development of highly realistic linear perspective. Giotto di Bondone (1267–1337) is credited with first treating a painting as a window into space, but it was not until the demonstrations of architect Filippo Brunelleschi (1377–1446) and the subsequent writings of Leon Battista Alberti (1404–1472) that perspective was formalized as an artistic technique.
The development of perspective was part of a wider trend toward realism in the arts. Painters developed other techniques, studying light, shadow, and, famously in the case of Leonardo da Vinci, human anatomy. Underlying these changes in artistic method was a renewed desire to depict the beauty of nature and to unravel the axioms of aesthetics, with the works of Leonardo, Michelangelo and Raphael representing artistic pinnacles that were much imitated by other artists. Other notable artists include Sandro Botticelli, working for the Medici in Florence, Donatello, another Florentine, and Titian in Venice, among others.

In the Low Countries, a particularly vibrant artistic culture developed. The work of Hugo van der Goes and Jan van Eyck was particularly influential on the development of painting in Italy, both technically with the introduction of oil paint and canvas, and stylistically in terms of naturalism in representation. Later, the work of Pieter Brueghel the Elder would inspire artists to depict themes of everyday life.

In architecture, Filippo Brunelleschi was foremost in studying the remains of ancient classical buildings. With rediscovered knowledge from the 1st-century writer Vitruvius and the flourishing discipline of mathematics, Brunelleschi formulated the Renaissance style that emulated and improved on classical forms. His major feat of engineering was building the dome of Florence Cathedral. Another building demonstrating this style is the Basilica of Sant&#x27;Andrea, Mantua, built by Alberti. The outstanding architectural work of the High Renaissance was the rebuilding of St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica, combining the skills of Bramante, Michelangelo, Raphael, Sangallo and Maderno.

During the Renaissance, architects aimed to use columns, pilasters, and entablatures as an integrated system. The Roman orders types of columns are used: Tuscan and Composite. These can either be structural, supporting an arcade or architrave, or purely decorative, set against a wall in the form of pilasters. One of the first buildings to use pilasters as an integrated system was in the Old Sacristy (1421–1440) by Brunelleschi. Arches, semi-circular or (in the Mannerist style) segmental, are often used in arcades, supported on piers or columns with capitals. There may be a section of entablature between the capital and the springing of the arch. Alberti was one of the first to use the arch on a monumental. Renaissance vaults do not have ribs; they are semi-circular or segmental and on a square plan, unlike the Gothic vault, which is frequently rectangular.

Renaissance artists were not pagans, although they admired antiquity and kept some ideas and symbols of the medieval past. Nicola Pisano (c. 1220 – c. 1278) imitated classical forms by portraying scenes from the Bible. His &quot;Annunciation&quot;, from the Pisa Baptistry, demonstrates that classical models influenced Italian art before the Renaissance took root as a literary movement.

===Science===


Applied innovation extended to commerce. At the end of the 15th century, Luca Pacioli published the first work on bookkeeping, making him the founder of accounting.

The rediscovery of ancient texts and the invention of the printing press in about 1440 democratized learning and allowed a faster propagation of more widely distributed ideas. In the first period of the Italian Renaissance, humanists favored the study of humanities over natural philosophy or applied mathematics, and their reverence for classical sources further enshrined the Aristotelian and Ptolemaic views of the universe. Writing around 1450, Nicholas of Cusa anticipated the heliocentric worldview of Copernicus, but in a philosophical fashion.

Science and art were intermingled in the early Renaissance, with polymath artists such as Leonardo da Vinci making observational drawings of anatomy and nature. Leonardo set up controlled experiments in water flow, medical dissection, and systematic study of movement and aerodynamics, and he devised principles of research method that led Fritjof Capra to classify him as the &quot;father of modern science&quot;. Other examples of Da Vinci&#x27;s contribution during this period include machines designed to saw marbles and lift monoliths, and new discoveries in acoustics, botany, geology, anatomy, and mechanics.

A suitable environment had developed to question classical scientific doctrine. The discovery in 1492 of the New World by Christopher Columbus challenged the classical worldview. The works of Ptolemy (in geography) and Galen (in medicine) were found to not always match everyday observations. As the Reformation and Counter-Reformation clashed, the Northern Renaissance showed a decisive shift in focus from Aristotelean natural philosophy to chemistry and the biological sciences (botany, anatomy, and medicine). The willingness to question previously held truths and search for new answers resulted in a period of major scientific advancements.

Some view this as a &quot;scientific revolution&quot;, heralding the beginning of the modern age, others as an acceleration of a continuous process stretching from the ancient world to the present day. Significant scientific advances were made during this time by Galileo Galilei, Tycho Brahe, and Johannes Kepler. Copernicus, in &quot;De revolutionibus orbium coelestium&quot; (&quot;On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres&quot;), posited that the Earth moved around the Sun. &quot;De humani corporis fabrica&quot; (&quot;On the Workings of the Human Body&quot;) by Andreas Vesalius, gave a new confidence to the role of dissection, observation, and the mechanistic view of anatomy.

Another important development was in the &quot;process&quot; for discovery, the scientific method, focusing on empirical evidence and the importance of mathematics, while discarding much of Aristotelian science. Early and influential proponents of these ideas included Copernicus, Galileo, and Francis Bacon. The new scientific method led to great contributions in the fields of astronomy, physics, biology, and anatomy.

===Navigation and geography===
During the Renaissance, extending from 1450 to 1650, every continent was visited and mostly mapped by Europeans, except the south polar continent now known as Antarctica. This development is depicted in the large world map &quot;Nova Totius Terrarum Orbis Tabula&quot; made by the Dutch cartographer Joan Blaeu in 1648 to commemorate the Peace of Westphalia.

In 1492, Christopher Columbus sailed across the Atlantic Ocean from Spain seeking a direct route to India of the Delhi Sultanate. He accidentally stumbled upon the Americas, but believed he had reached the East Indies.

In 1606, the Dutch navigator Willem Janszoon sailed from the East Indies in the Dutch East India Company ship Duyfken and landed in Australia. He charted about 300 km of the west coast of Cape York Peninsula in Queensland. More than thirty Dutch expeditions followed, mapping sections of the north, west, and south coasts. In 1642–1643, Abel Tasman circumnavigated the continent, proving that it was not joined to the imagined south polar continent.

By 1650, Dutch cartographers had mapped most of the coastline of the continent, which they named New Holland, except the east coast which was charted in 1770 by James Cook.

The long-imagined south polar continent was eventually sighted in 1820. Throughout the Renaissance it had been known as Terra Australis, or &#x27;Australia&#x27; for short. However, after that name was transferred to New Holland in the nineteenth century, the new name of &#x27;Antarctica&#x27; was bestowed on the south polar continent.

===Music===
From this changing society emerged a common, unifying musical language, in particular the polyphonic style of the Franco-Flemish school. The development of printing made distribution of music possible on a wide scale. Demand for music as entertainment and as an activity for educated amateurs increased with the emergence of a bourgeois class. Dissemination of chansons, motets, and masses throughout Europe coincided with the unification of polyphonic practice into the fluid style that culminated in the second half of the sixteenth century in the work of composers such as Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina, Orlande de Lassus, Tomás Luis de Victoria, and William Byrd.

===Religion===
The new ideals of humanism, although more secular in some aspects, developed against a Christian backdrop, especially in the Northern Renaissance. Much, if not most, of the new art was commissioned by or in dedication to the Roman Catholic Church. However, the Renaissance had a profound effect on contemporary theology, particularly in the way people perceived the relationship between man and God. Many of the period&#x27;s foremost theologians were followers of the humanist method, including Erasmus, Huldrych Zwingli, Thomas More, Martin Luther, and John Calvin.

The Renaissance began in times of religious turmoil. The Late Middle Ages was a period of political intrigue surrounding the Papacy, culminating in the Western Schism, in which three men simultaneously claimed to be true Bishop of Rome. While the schism was resolved by the Council of Constance (1414), a resulting reform movement known as Conciliarism sought to limit the power of the pope. Although the papacy eventually emerged supreme in ecclesiastical matters by the Fifth Council of the Lateran (1511), it was dogged by continued accusations of corruption, most famously in the person of Pope Alexander VI, who was accused variously of simony, nepotism, and fathering children (most of whom were married off, presumably for the consolidation of power) while a cardinal.

Churchmen such as Erasmus and Luther proposed reform to the Church, often based on humanist textual criticism of the New Testament. In October 1517, Luther published the &quot;Ninety-five Theses&quot;, challenging papal authority and criticizing its perceived corruption, particularly with regard to instances of sold indulgences. The 95 Theses led to the Reformation, a break with the Roman Catholic Church that previously claimed hegemony in Western Europe. Humanism and the Renaissance therefore played a direct role in sparking the Reformation, as well as in many other contemporaneous religious debates and conflicts.

Pope Paul III came to the papal throne (1534–1549) after the sack of Rome in 1527, with uncertainties prevalent in the Catholic Church following the Reformation. Nicolaus Copernicus dedicated &quot;De revolutionibus orbium coelestium&quot; (On the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres) to Paul III, who became the grandfather of Alessandro Farnese, who had paintings by Titian, Michelangelo, and Raphael, as well as an important collection of drawings, and who commissioned the masterpiece of Giulio Clovio, arguably the last major illuminated manuscript, the &quot;Farnese Hours&quot;.

===Self-awareness===

By the 15th century, writers, artists, and architects in Italy were well aware of the transformations that were taking place and were using phrases such as &quot;modi antichi&quot; (in the antique manner) or &quot;alle romana et alla antica&quot; (in the manner of the Romans and the ancients) to describe their work. In the 1330s Petrarch referred to pre-Christian times as &quot;antiqua&quot; (ancient) and to the Christian period as &quot;nova&quot; (new). From Petrarch&#x27;s Italian perspective, this new period (which included his own time) was an age of national eclipse. Leonardo Bruni was the first to use tripartite periodization in his &quot;History of the Florentine People&quot; (1442). Bruni&#x27;s first two periods were based on those of Petrarch, but he added a third period because he believed that Italy was no longer in a state of decline. Flavio Biondo used a similar framework in &quot;Decades of History from the Deterioration of the Roman Empire&quot; (1439–1453).

Humanist historians argued that contemporary scholarship restored direct links to the classical period, thus bypassing the Medieval period, which they then named for the first time the &quot;Middle Ages&quot;. The term first appears in Latin in 1469 as &quot;media tempestas&quot; (middle times). The term &quot;rinascita&quot; (rebirth) first appeared, however, in its broad sense in Giorgio Vasari&#x27;s &quot;Lives of the Artists&quot;, 1550, revised 1568. Vasari divides the age into three phases: the first phase contains Cimabue, Giotto, and Arnolfo di Cambio; the second phase contains Masaccio, Brunelleschi, and Donatello; the third centers on Leonardo da Vinci and culminates with Michelangelo. It was not just the growing awareness of classical antiquity that drove this development, according to Vasari, but also the growing desire to study and imitate nature.

==Spread==
In the 15th century, the Renaissance spread rapidly from its birthplace in Florence to the rest of Italy and soon to the rest of Europe. The invention of the printing press by German printer Johannes Gutenberg allowed the rapid transmission of these new ideas. As it spread, its ideas diversified and changed, being adapted to local culture. In the 20th century, scholars began to break the Renaissance into regional and national movements.

===England===
The Elizabethan era in the second half of the 16th century is usually regarded as the height of the English Renaissance. Many scholars see its beginnings in the early 16th century during the reign of Henry VIII.

The English Renaissance is different from the Italian Renaissance in several ways. The dominant art forms of the English Renaissance were literature and music, which had a rich flowering. Visual arts in the English Renaissance were much less significant than in the Italian Renaissance. The English Renaissance period in art began far later than the Italian, which had moved into Mannerism by the 1530s.

In literature the later part of the 16th century saw the flowering of Elizabethan literature, with poetry heavily influenced by Italian Renaissance literature but Elizabethan theatre a distinctive native style. Writers include William Shakespeare (1564–1616), Christopher Marlowe (1564–1593), Edmund Spenser (1552–1599), Sir Thomas More (1478–1535), and Sir Philip Sidney (1554–1586). English Renaissance music competed with that in Europe with composers such as Thomas Tallis (1505–1585), John Taverner (1490–1545), and William Byrd (1540–1623). Elizabethan architecture produced the large prodigy houses of courtiers, and in the next century Inigo Jones (1573–1652), who introduced Palladian architecture to England.

Elsewhere, Sir Francis Bacon (1561–1626) was the pioneer of modern scientific thought, and is commonly regarded as one of the founders of the Scientific Revolution.

===France===


The word &quot;Renaissance&quot; is borrowed from the French language, where it means &quot;re-birth&quot;. It was first used in the eighteenth century and was later popularized by French historian Jules Michelet (1798–1874) in his 1855 work, &quot;Histoire de France&quot; (History of France).

In 1495 the Italian Renaissance arrived in France, imported by King Charles VIII after his invasion of Italy. A factor that promoted the spread of secularism was the inability of the Church to offer assistance against the Black Death. Francis I imported Italian art and artists, including Leonardo da Vinci, and built ornate palaces at great expense. Writers such as François Rabelais, Pierre de Ronsard, Joachim du Bellay, and Michel de Montaigne, painters such as Jean Clouet, and musicians such as Jean Mouton also borrowed from the spirit of the Renaissance.

In 1533, a fourteen-year-old Catherine de&#x27; Medici (1519–1589), born in Florence to Lorenzo de&#x27; Medici, Duke of Urbino and Madeleine de La Tour d&#x27;Auvergne, married Henry II of France, second son of King Francis I and Queen Claude. Though she became famous and infamous for her role in the French Wars of Religion, she made a direct contribution in bringing arts, sciences, and music (including the origins of ballet) to the French court from her native Florence.

===Germany===

In the second half of the 15th century, the Renaissance spirit spread to Germany and the Low Countries, where the development of the printing press (ca. 1450) and Renaissance artists such as Albrecht Dürer (1471–1528) predated the influence from Italy. In the early Protestant areas of the country humanism became closely linked to the turmoil of the Reformation, and the art and writing of the German Renaissance frequently reflected this dispute. However, the Gothic style and medieval scholastic philosophy remained exclusively until the turn of the 16th century. Emperor Maximilian I of Habsburg (ruling 1493–1519) was the first truly Renaissance monarch of the Holy Roman Empire.

===Hungarian trecento and quattrocento===

After Italy, Hungary was the first European country where the Renaissance appeared. The Renaissance style came directly from Italy during the Quattrocento (1400s) to Hungary first in the Central European region, thanks to the development of early Hungarian-Italian relationships — not only in dynastic connections, but also in cultural, humanistic and commercial relationsgrowing in strength from the 14th century. The relationship between Hungarian and Italian Gothic styles was a second reasonexaggerated breakthrough of walls is avoided, preferring clean and light structures. Large-scale building schemes provided ample and long term work for the artists, for example, the building of the Friss (New) Castle in Buda, the castles of Visegrád, Tata, and Várpalota. In Sigismund&#x27;s court there were patrons such as Pippo Spano, a descendant of the Scolari family of Florence, who invited Manetto Ammanatini and Masolino da Pannicale to Hungary.

The new Italian trend combined with existing national traditions to create a particular local Renaissance art. Acceptance of Renaissance art was furthered by the continuous arrival of humanist thought in the country. Many young Hungarians studying at Italian universities came closer to the Florentine humanist center, so a direct connection with Florence evolved. The growing number of Italian traders moving to Hungary, specially to Buda, helped this process. New thoughts were carried by the humanist prelates, among them Vitéz János, archbishop of Esztergom, one of the founders of Hungarian humanism. During the long reign of Emperor Sigismund of Luxemburg the Royal Castle of Buda became probably the largest Gothic palace of the late Middle Ages. King Matthias Corvinus (r. 1458–1490) rebuilt the palace in early Renaissance style and further expanded it.

After the marriage in 1476 of King Matthias to Beatrice of Naples, Buda became one of the most important artistic centers of the Renaissance north of the Alps. The most important humanists living in Matthias&#x27; court were Antonio Bonfini and the famous Hungarian poet Janus Pannonius. András Hess set up a printing press in Buda in 1472. Matthias Corvinus&#x27;s library, the Bibliotheca Corviniana, was Europe&#x27;s greatest collections of secular books: historical chronicles, philosophic and scientific works in the 15th century. His library was second only in size to the Vatican Library. (However, the Vatican Library mainly contained Bibles and religious materials.) In 1489, Bartolomeo della Fonte of Florence wrote that Lorenzo de&#x27; Medici founded his own Greek-Latin library encouraged by the example of the Hungarian king. Corvinus&#x27;s library is part of UNESCO World Heritage.

Matthias started at least two major building projects. The works in Buda and Visegrád began in about 1479. Two new wings and a hanging garden were built at the royal castle of Buda, and the palace at Visegrád was rebuilt in Renaissance style. Matthias appointed the Italian Chimenti Camicia and the Dalmatian Giovanni Dalmata to direct these projects. Matthias commissioned the leading Italian artists of his age to embellish his palaces: for instance, the sculptor Benedetto da Majano and the painters Filippino Lippi and Andrea Mantegna worked for him. A copy of Mantegna&#x27;s portrait of Matthias survived. Matthias also hired the Italian military engineer Aristotele Fioravanti to direct the rebuilding of the forts along the southern frontier. He had new monasteries built in Late Gothic style for the Franciscans in Kolozsvár, Szeged and Hunyad, and for the Paulines in Fejéregyháza. In the spring of 1485, Leonardo da Vinci travelled to Hungary on behalf of Sforza to meet King Matthias Corvinus, and was commissioned by him to paint a Madonna.

Matthias enjoyed the company of Humanists and had lively discussions on various topics with them. The fame of his magnanimity encouraged many scholarsmostly Italianto settle in Buda. Antonio Bonfini, Pietro Ranzano, Bartolomeo Fonzio, and Francesco Bandini spent many years in Matthias&#x27;s court. This circle of educated men introduced the ideas of Neoplatonism to Hungary. Like all intellectuals of his age, Matthias was convinced that the movements and combinations of the stars and planets exercised influence on individuals&#x27; life and on the history of nations. Martius Galeotti described him as &quot;king and astrologer&quot;, and Antonio Bonfini said Matthias &quot;never did anything without consulting the stars&quot;. Upon his request, the famous astronomers of the age, Johannes Regiomontanus and Marcin Bylica, set up an observatory in Buda and installed it with astrolabes and celestial globes. Regiomontanus dedicated his book on navigation that was used by Christopher Columbus to Matthias.

Other important figures of Hungarian Renaissance include Bálint Balassi (poet), Sebestyén Tinódi Lantos (poet), Bálint Bakfark (composer and lutenist), and Master MS (fresco painter).

===Renaissance in the Low Countries===

Culture in the Netherlands at the end of the 15th century was influenced by the Italian Renaissance through trade via Bruges, which made Flanders wealthy. Its nobles commissioned artists who became known across Europe. In science, the anatomist Andreas Vesalius led the way; in cartography, Gerardus Mercator&#x27;s map assisted explorers and navigators. In art, Dutch and Flemish Renaissance painting ranged from the strange work of Hieronymus Bosch to the everyday life depictions of Pieter Brueghel the Elder.

Erasmus was arguably the Netherlands&#x27; best known humanist and Catholic intellectual during the Renaissance.

===Northern Europe===
The Renaissance in Northern Europe has been termed the &quot;Northern Renaissance&quot;. While Renaissance ideas were moving north from Italy, there was a simultaneous southward spread of some areas of innovation, particularly in music. The music of the 15th-century Burgundian School defined the beginning of the Renaissance in music, and the polyphony of the Netherlanders, as it moved with the musicians themselves into Italy, formed the core of the first true international style in music since the standardization of Gregorian Chant in the 9th century. The culmination of the Netherlandish school was in the music of the Italian composer Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina. At the end of the 16th century Italy again became a center of musical innovation, with the development of the polychoral style of the Venetian School, which spread northward into Germany around 1600. In Denmark, the Renaissance sparked the translation of the works of Saxo Grammaticus into Danish as well as Frederick II and Christian IV ordering the redecoration or construction of several important works of architecture, i.e. Kronborg, Rosenborg and Børsen. Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe greatly contributed to turn astronomy into the first modern science and also helped launch the Scientific Revolution.

The paintings of the Italian Renaissance differed from those of the Northern Renaissance. Italian Renaissance artists were among the first to paint secular scenes, breaking away from the purely religious art of medieval painters. Northern Renaissance artists initially remained focused on religious subjects, such as the contemporary religious upheaval portrayed by Albrecht Dürer. Later, the works of Pieter Bruegel the Elder influenced artists to paint scenes of daily life rather than religious or classical themes. It was also during the Northern Renaissance that Flemish brothers Hubert and Jan van Eyck perfected the oil painting technique, which enabled artists to produce strong colors on a hard surface that could survive for centuries. A feature of the Northern Renaissance was its use of the vernacular in place of Latin or Greek, which allowed greater freedom of expression. This movement had started in Italy with the decisive influence of Dante Alighieri on the development of vernacular languages; in fact the focus on writing in Italian has neglected a major source of Florentine ideas expressed in Latin. The spread of the printing press technology boosted the Renaissance in Northern Europe as elsewhere, with Venice becoming a world center of printing.

===Poland===

The Polish Renaissance lasted from the late 15th to the late 16th century and was the Golden Age of Polish culture. Ruled by the Jagiellonian dynasty, the Kingdom of Poland (from 1569 known as the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth) actively participated in the broad European Renaissance. An early Italian humanist who came to Poland in the mid-15th century was Filippo Buonaccorsi, who was employed as royal advisor and councillor. The tomb of John I Albert, completed in 1505 by Francesco Fiorentino, is the first example of a Renaissance composition in the country. Many Italian artists subsequently came to Poland with Bona Sforza of Milan, when she married King Sigismund I in 1518. This was supported by temporarily strengthened monarchies in both areas, as well as by newly established universities. 

The Renaissance was a period when the multi-national Polish state experienced a substantial period of cultural growth thanks in part to a century without major wars, aside from conflicts in the sparsely populated eastern and southern borderlands. Architecture became more refined and decorative. Mannerism played an important part in shaping what is now considered to be the truly Polish architectural style – high attics above the cornice with pinnacles and pilasters. It was also the time when the first major works of Polish literature were published, particularly those of Mikołaj Rey and Jan Kochanowski, and the Polish language became the &quot;lingua franca&quot; of East-Central Europe. The Jagiellonian University transformed into a major institution of higher education for the region and hosted many notable scholars, chiefly Nicolaus Copernicus and Conrad Celtes. Three more academies were founded at Königsberg (1544), Vilnius (1579), and Zamość (1594). The Reformation spread peacefully throughout the country, giving rise to the Nontrinitarian Polish Brethren. Living conditions improved, cities grew, and exports of agricultural products enriched the population, especially the nobility (&quot;szlachta&quot;) and magnates. The nobles gained dominance in the new political system of Golden Liberty, a counterweight to monarchical absolutism.

===Portugal===
Although Italian Renaissance had a modest impact in Portuguese arts, Portugal was influential in broadening the European worldview, stimulating humanist inquiry. Renaissance arrived through the influence of wealthy Italian and Flemish merchants who invested in the profitable commerce overseas. As the pioneer headquarters of European exploration, Lisbon flourished in the late 15th century, attracting experts who made several breakthroughs in mathematics, astronomy and naval technology, including Pedro Nunes, João de Castro, Abraham Zacuto, and Martin Behaim. Cartographers Pedro Reinel, Lopo Homem, Estêvão Gomes, and Diogo Ribeiro made crucial advances in mapping the world. Apothecary Tomé Pires and physicians Garcia de Orta and Cristóvão da Costa collected and published works on plants and medicines, soon translated by Flemish pioneer botanist Carolus Clusius.

In architecture, the huge profits of the spice trade financed a sumptuous composite style in the first decades of the 16th century, the Manueline, incorporating maritime elements. The primary painters were Nuno Gonçalves, Gregório Lopes, and Vasco Fernandes. In music, Pedro de Escobar and Duarte Lobo produced four songbooks, including the Cancioneiro de Elvas.

In literature, Luís de Camões inscribed the Portuguese feats overseas in the epic poem &quot;Os Lusíadas&quot;. Sá de Miranda introduced Italian forms of verse and Bernardim Ribeiro developed pastoral romance, while plays by Gil Vicente fused it with popular culture, reporting the changing times. Travel literature especially flourished: João de Barros, Fernão Lopes de Castanheda, António Galvão, Gaspar Correia, Duarte Barbosa, and Fernão Mendes Pinto, among others, described new lands and were translated and spread with the new printing press. After joining the Portuguese exploration of Brazil in 1500, Amerigo Vespucci coined the term New World, in his letters to Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de&#x27; Medici.

The intense international exchange produced several cosmopolitan humanist scholars, including Francisco de Holanda, André de Resende, and Damião de Góis, a friend of Erasmus who wrote with rare independence on the reign of King Manuel I. Diogo de Gouveia and André de Gouveia made relevant teaching reforms via France. Foreign news and products in the Portuguese factory in Antwerp attracted the interest of Thomas More and Albrecht Dürer to the wider world. There, profits and know-how helped nurture the Dutch Renaissance and Golden Age, especially after the arrival of the wealthy cultured Jewish community expelled from Portugal.

===Spain===


The Renaissance arrived in the Iberian peninsula through the Mediterranean possessions of the Crown of Aragon and the city of Valencia. Many early Spanish Renaissance writers come from the Crown of Aragon, including Ausiàs March and Joanot Martorell. In the Crown of Castile, the early Renaissance was heavily influenced by the Italian humanism, starting with writers and poets such as Íñigo López de Mendoza, marqués de Santillana, who introduced the new Italian poetry to Spain in the early 15th century. Other writers, such as Jorge Manrique, Fernando de Rojas, Juan del Encina, Juan Boscán Almogáver, and Garcilaso de la Vega, kept a close resemblance to the Italian canon. Miguel de Cervantes&#x27;s masterpiece &quot;Don Quixote&quot; is credited as the first Western novel. Renaissance humanism flourished in the early 16th century, with influential writers such as philosopher Juan Luis Vives, grammarian Antonio de Nebrija and natural historian Pedro de Mexía. The poet and philosopher Luisa de Medrano, celebrated among her Renaissance contemporaries as one of the &quot;puellae doctae&quot; (&quot;learned girls&quot;), was the first female professor in Europe at the University of Salamanca.

Later Spanish Renaissance tended toward religious themes and mysticism, with poets such as Luis de León, Teresa of Ávila, and John of the Cross, and treated issues related to the exploration of the New World, with chroniclers and writers such as Inca Garcilaso de la Vega and Bartolomé de las Casas, giving rise to a body of work, now known as Spanish Renaissance literature. The late Renaissance in Spain produced political and religious authors such as Tomás Fernández de Medrano and artists such as El Greco and composers such as Tomás Luis de Victoria and Antonio de Cabezón.

=== Further countries ===
* Renaissance in Croatia
* Renaissance in Scotland

==Historiography==

===Conception===
The Italian artist and critic Giorgio Vasari (1511–1574) first used the term &quot;rinascita&quot; in his book &quot;The Lives of the Artists&quot; (published 1550). In the book Vasari attempted to define what he described as a break with the barbarities of Gothic art: the arts (he held) had fallen into decay with the collapse of the Roman Empire and only the Tuscan artists, beginning with Cimabue (1240–1301) and Giotto (1267–1337) began to reverse this decline in the arts. Vasari saw ancient art as central to the rebirth of Italian art.

However, only in the 19th century did the French word achieve popularity in describing the self-conscious cultural movement based on revival of Roman models that began in the late 13th century. French historian Jules Michelet (1798–1874) defined &quot;The Renaissance&quot; in his 1855 work &quot;Histoire de France&quot; as an entire historical period, whereas previously it had been used in a more limited sense. For Michelet, the Renaissance was more a development in science than in art and culture. He asserted that it spanned the period from Columbus to Copernicus to Galileo; that is, from the end of the 15th century to the middle of the 17th century. Moreover, Michelet distinguished between what he called, &quot;the bizarre and monstrous&quot; quality of the Middle Ages and the democratic values that he, as a vocal Republican, chose to see in its character. A French nationalist, Michelet also sought to claim the Renaissance as a French movement.

The Swiss historian Jacob Burckhardt (1818–1897) in his &quot;The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy&quot; (1860), by contrast, defined the Renaissance as the period between Giotto and Michelangelo in Italy, that is, the 14th to mid-16th centuries. He saw in the Renaissance the emergence of the modern spirit of individuality, which the Middle Ages had stifled. His book was widely read and became influential in the development of the modern interpretation of the Italian Renaissance.

More recently, some historians have been much less keen to define the Renaissance as a historical age, or even as a coherent cultural movement. The historian Randolph Starn, of the University of California Berkeley, stated in 1998:

===Debates about progress===

There is debate about the extent to which the Renaissance improved on the culture of the Middle Ages. Both Michelet and Burckhardt were keen to describe the progress made in the Renaissance toward the modern age. Burckhardt likened the change to a veil being removed from man&#x27;s eyes, allowing him to see clearly.


On the other hand, many historians now point out that most of the negative social factors popularly associated with the medieval periodpoverty, warfare, religious and political persecution, for exampleseem to have worsened in this era, which saw the rise of Machiavellian politics, the Wars of Religion, the corrupt Borgia Popes, and the intensified witch-hunts of the 16th century. Many people who lived during the Renaissance did not view it as the &quot;golden age&quot; imagined by certain 19th-century authors, but were concerned by these social maladies. Significantly, though, the artists, writers, and patrons involved in the cultural movements in question believed they were living in a new era that was a clean break from the Middle Ages. Some Marxist historians prefer to describe the Renaissance in material terms, holding the view that the changes in art, literature, and philosophy were part of a general economic trend from feudalism toward capitalism, resulting in a bourgeois class with leisure time to devote to the arts.

Johan Huizinga (1872–1945) acknowledged the existence of the Renaissance but questioned whether it was a positive change. In his book &quot;The Autumn of the Middle Ages&quot;, he argued that the Renaissance was a period of decline from the High Middle Ages, destroying much that was important. The Medieval Latin language, for instance, had evolved greatly from the classical period and was still a living language used in the church and elsewhere. The Renaissance obsession with classical purity halted its further evolution and saw Latin revert to its classical form. This view is however somewhat contested by recent studies. Robert S. Lopez has contended that it was a period of deep economic recession. Meanwhile, George Sarton and Lynn Thorndike have both argued that scientific progress was perhaps less original than has traditionally been supposed. Finally, Joan Kelly argued that the Renaissance led to greater gender dichotomy, lessening the agency women had had during the Middle Ages.

Some historians have begun to consider the word &quot;Renaissance&quot; to be unnecessarily loaded, implying an unambiguously positive rebirth from the supposedly more primitive &quot;Dark Ages&quot;, the Middle Ages. Most political and economic historians now prefer to use the term &quot;early modern&quot; for this period (and a considerable period afterwards), a designation intended to highlight the period as a transitional one between the Middle Ages and the modern era. Others such as Roger Osborne have come to consider the Italian Renaissance as a repository of the myths and ideals of western history in general, and instead of rebirth of ancient ideas as a period of great innovation.

The art historian Erwin Panofsky observed of this resistance to the concept of &quot;Renaissance&quot;:

It is perhaps no accident that the factuality of the Italian Renaissance has been most vigorously questioned by those who are not obliged to take a professional interest in the aesthetic aspects of civilization – historians of economic and social developments, political and religious situations, and, most particularly, natural science – but only exceptionally by students of literature and hardly ever by historians of Art.

==Other Renaissances==
The term &quot;Renaissance&quot; has also been used to define periods outside of the 15th and 16th centuries in the earlier Medieval period. Charles H. Haskins (1870–1937), for example, made a case for a Renaissance of the 12th century. Other historians have argued for a Carolingian Renaissance in the 8th and 9th centuries, Ottonian Renaissance in the 10th century and for the Timurid Renaissance of the 14th century. The Islamic Golden Age has been also sometimes termed with the Islamic Renaissance. The Macedonian Renaissance is a term used for a period in the Roman Empire in the 9th-11th centuries CE.

Other periods of cultural rebirth in Modern times have also been termed &quot;renaissances&quot;, such as the Bengal Renaissance, Tamil Renaissance, Nepal Bhasa renaissance, al-Nahda or the Harlem Renaissance. The term can also be used in cinema. In animation, the Disney Renaissance is a period that spanned the years from 1989 to 1999 which saw the studio return to the level of quality not witnessed since their Golden Age of Animation. The San Francisco Renaissance was a vibrant period of exploratory poetry and fiction writing in San Francisco in the mid-20th century.

==See also==

* Index of Renaissance articles
* Outline of the Renaissance
* List of Renaissance figures
* List of Renaissance structures
* Roman Renaissance
* Venetian Renaissance

==References==
=== Explanatory notes ===
=== Citations ===
=== General sources ===

* Burckhardt, Jacob, &quot;The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy&quot; (1860), a famous classic; excerpt and text search 2007 edition; also complete text online.
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==

* Cronin, Vincent (1969), &quot;The Flowering of the Renaissance&quot;, 
* Cronin, Vincent (1992), &quot;The Renaissance&quot;, 
* Campbell, Gordon. &quot;The Oxford Dictionary of the Renaissance&quot;. (2003). 862 pp. online at OUP
* Davis, Robert C. and Beth Lindsmith. &quot;Renaissance People: Lives that Shaped the Modern Age&quot;. (2011). 
* Ergang, Robert (1967), &quot;The Renaissance&quot;, 
* Ferguson, Wallace K. (1962), [&quot;Europe in Transition, 1300–1500&quot;], 
* Fisher, Celia. &quot;Flowers of the Renaissance&quot;. (2011). 
* Fletcher, Stella. &quot;The Longman Companion to Renaissance Europe, 1390–1530&quot;. (2000). 347 pp.
* Grendler, Paul F., ed. &quot;The Renaissance: An Encyclopedia for Students&quot;. (2003). 970 pp.
* Hale, John. &quot;The Civilization of Europe in the Renaissance&quot;. (1994). 648 pp.; a magistral survey, heavily illustrated; excerpt and text search
* Hall, Bert S. &quot;Weapons and Warfare in Renaissance Europe: Gunpowder, Technology, and Tactics&quot; (2001); excerpt and text search
* Hattaway, Michael, ed. &quot;A Companion to English Renaissance Literature and Culture&quot;. (2000). 747 pp.
* Jensen, De Lamar (1992), &quot;Renaissance Europe&quot;, 
* Johnson, Paul. &quot;The Renaissance: A Short History&quot;. (2000). 197 pp. excerpt and text search; also online free
* Keene, Bryan C. &quot;Gardens of the Renaissance&quot;. (2013). 
* King, Margaret L. &quot;Women of the Renaissance&quot; (1991) excerpt and text search
* Kristeller, Paul Oskar, and Michael Mooney. &quot;Renaissance Thought and its Sources&quot; (1979); excerpt and text search
* Nauert, Charles G. &quot;Historical Dictionary of the Renaissance&quot;. (2004). 541 pp.
* Patrick, James A., ed. &quot;Renaissance and Reformation&quot; (5 vol 2007), 1584 pages; comprehensive encyclopedia
* Plumb, J.H. &quot;The Italian Renaissance&quot; (2001); excerpt and text search
* Paoletti, John T. and Gary M. Radke. &quot;Art in Renaissance Italy&quot; (4th ed. 2011)
* Potter, G.R. ed. &quot;The New Cambridge Modern History: Volume 1: The Renaissance, 1493–1520&quot; (1957) online; major essays by multiple scholars. Summarizes the viewpoint of the 1950s.
* Robin, Diana; Larsen, Anne R.; and Levin, Carole, eds. &quot;Encyclopedia of Women in the Renaissance: Italy, France, and England&quot; (2007) 459 pp.
* Rowse, A.L. &quot;The Elizabethan Renaissance: The Life of the Society&quot; (2000); excerpt and text search
* Ruggiero, Guido. &quot;The Renaissance in Italy: A Social and Cultural History of the Rinascimento&quot; (Cambridge University Press, 2015). 648 pp. online review
* Rundle, David, ed. &quot;The Hutchinson Encyclopedia of the Renaissance&quot;. (1999). 434 pp.; numerous brief articles online edition
* Turner, Richard N. &quot;Renaissance Florence&quot; (2005); excerpt and text search
* Ward, A. &quot;The Cambridge Modern History&quot;. Vol 1: The Renaissance (1902); older essays by scholars; emphasis on politics
===Historiography===

* Bouwsma, William J. &quot;The Renaissance and the drama of Western history.&quot; &quot;American Historical Review&quot; (1979): 1–15. in JSTOR
* Caferro, William. &quot;Contesting the Renaissance&quot; (2010); excerpt and text search
* Ferguson, Wallace K. &quot;The Interpretation of the Renaissance: Suggestions for a Synthesis.&quot; &quot;Journal of the History of Ideas&quot; (1951): 483–495. online in JSTOR
* Ferguson, Wallace K. &quot;Recent trends in the economic historiography of the Renaissance.&quot; &quot;Studies in the Renaissance&quot; (1960): 7–26.
* Ferguson, Wallace Klippert. &quot;The Renaissance in historical thought&quot; (AMS Press, 1981)
* Grendler, Paul F. &quot;The Future of Sixteenth Century Studies: Renaissance and Reformation Scholarship in the Next Forty Years&quot;, &quot;Sixteenth Century Journal&quot; Spring 2009, Vol. 40 Issue 1, pp. 182+
* Murray, Stuart A.P. The Library: An Illustrated History. American Library Association, Chicago, 2012.
* Ruggiero, Guido, ed. &quot;A Companion to the Worlds of the Renaissance&quot;. (2002). 561 pp.
* Starn, Randolph. &quot;A Postmodern Renaissance?&quot; &quot;Renaissance Quarterly&quot; 2007 60(1): 1–24 in Project MUSE
* Summit, Jennifer. &quot;Renaissance Humanism and the Future of the Humanities&quot;. &quot;Literature Compass&quot; (2012) 9#10 pp: 665–678.
* Trivellato, Francesca. &quot;Renaissance Italy and the Muslim Mediterranean in Recent Historical Work&quot;, &quot;Journal of Modern History&quot; (March 2010), 82#1 pp: 127–155.
* Woolfson, Jonathan, ed. &quot;Palgrave advances in Renaissance historiography&quot; (Palgrave Macmillan, 2005)
===Primary sources===

* Bartlett, Kenneth, ed. &quot;The Civilization of the Italian Renaissance: A Sourcebook&quot; (2nd ed., 2011)
* Ross, James Bruce, and Mary M. McLaughlin, eds. &quot;The Portable Renaissance Reader&quot; (1977); excerpt and text search
==External links==


* &quot;The Renaissance&quot; episode of &quot;In Our Time&quot;, a BBC Radio 4 discussion with Francis Ames-Lewis, Peter Burke and Evelyn Welch (8 June 2000).
* Renaissance Philosophy entry in the &quot;Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot;
* Official website of the Society for Renaissance Studies</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="4" end="15" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q816829" start="27" end="44" title="Periodization" label="period of history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198855" start="60" end="77" title="cultural movement" label="cultural movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="150" end="161" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084414" start="165" end="174" title="modernity" label="modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="262" end="281" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510761" start="305" end="318" title="social change" label="social change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133779" start="361" end="364" title="Renaissance art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q236122" start="366" end="378" title="Renaissance architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781608" start="390" end="400" title="Renaissance literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="402" end="413" title="Renaissance exploration" label="exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288583" start="418" end="425" title="Science in the Renaissance" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q148540" start="469" end="489" title="Republic of Florence" label="Republic of Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="510" end="523" title="Italian Renaissance" label="rest of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645493" start="630" end="650" title="Lives of the Artists" label="Lives of the Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q128027" start="663" end="677" title="Giorgio Vasari" label="Giorgio Vasari"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="859" end="867" title="Renaissance humanism" label="humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q999259" start="926" end="952" title="classical Greek philosophy" label="classical Greek philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q169243" start="970" end="980" title="Protagoras" label="Protagoras"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1068" end="1086" title="Movable type#Europe" label="metal movable type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="1314" end="1319" title="Dante" label="Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814" start="1341" end="1347" title="Giotto" label="Giotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q499083" start="1426" end="1440" title="Renaissance Latin" label="literary Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921930" start="1461" end="1482" title="vernacular literature" label="vernacular literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401" start="1601" end="1609" title="Petrarch" label="Petrarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q861408" start="1746" end="1764" title="History of education" label="educational reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q270141" start="1830" end="1838" title="polymath" label="polymath"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="1843" end="1860" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="1865" end="1877" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q484511" start="2094" end="2113" title="inductive reasoning" label="inductive reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="2173" end="2190" title="Social science" label="social scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604642" start="2330" end="2360" title="crisis of the Late Middle Ages" label="crisis of the Late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="2417" end="2425" title="humanism" label="humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="2450" end="2461" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="2466" end="2485" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="2502" end="2509" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q610877" start="2623" end="2643" title="Northern Renaissance" label="Northern Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q430167" start="2649" end="2668" title="Spanish Renaissance" label="Spanish Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="2900" end="2912" title="Early modern period" label="early modern"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3170" end="3187" title="Italian Renaissance painting#Proto-Renaissance painting" label="Proto-Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="3243" end="3259" title="Late Middle Ages" label="Late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q148540" start="3553" end="3561" title="Republic of Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480041" start="3589" end="3594" title="Italy in the Middle Ages" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170022" start="3851" end="3857" title="House of Medici" label="Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639386" start="3880" end="3894" title="Greek scholars in the Renaissance" label="Greek scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="3934" end="3956" title="fall of Constantinople" label="fall of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="3964" end="3978" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="4005" end="4011" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="4013" end="4018" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q153529" start="4020" end="4025" title="Duchy of Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="4027" end="4031" title="Papal States" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q276442" start="4043" end="4061" title="Renaissance Papacy" label="Renaissance Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="4067" end="4073" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q50675" start="4315" end="4329" title="historiography" label="historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q12151852" start="4833" end="4842" title="nostalgia" label="nostalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="4847" end="4866" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q247145" start="4930" end="4942" title="longue durée" label="longue durée"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165430" start="4974" end="4988" title="Continuity thesis" label="the continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q57656" start="5032" end="5040" title="Panofsky" label="Panofsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q157123" start="5172" end="5195" title="Carolingian Renaissance" label="Carolingian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399604" start="5221" end="5241" title="Ottonian Renaissance" label="Ottonian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q755709" start="5275" end="5306" title="Renaissance of the 12th century" label="Renaissance of the 12th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="5421" end="5440" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133779" start="5545" end="5548" title="Renaissance art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q236122" start="5550" end="5562" title="Renaissance architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q917440" start="5564" end="5574" title="Renaissance philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781608" start="5576" end="5586" title="Renaissance literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q201405" start="5588" end="5593" title="Renaissance music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288583" start="5595" end="5602" title="History of science in the Renaissance" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312473" start="5604" end="5614" title="Renaissance technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="5791" end="5812" title="Renaissance humanism" label="Renaissance humanists"/>
<link wikidata="Q318254" start="5821" end="5839" title="Poggio Bracciolini" label="Poggio Bracciolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="5943" end="5952" title="Classical antiquity" label="antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="5964" end="5986" title="fall of Constantinople" label="fall of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q4989857" start="6014" end="6020" title="émigré" label="émigré"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639386" start="6021" end="6035" title="Greek scholars in the Renaissance" label="Greek scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="6069" end="6082" title="ancient Greek" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q755709" start="6277" end="6308" title="Renaissance of the 12th century" label="Renaissance of the 12th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="6338" end="6343" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="6348" end="6354" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="6466" end="6478" title="neoplatonism" label="neoplatonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="6517" end="6529" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="6907" end="6916" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q214115" start="7146" end="7159" title="Lorenzo Valla" label="Lorenzo Valla"/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="7164" end="7171" title="Erasmus" label="Erasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="7201" end="7212" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170292" start="7255" end="7265" title="classicism" label="classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q364413" start="7307" end="7320" title="Nicola Pisano" label="Nicola Pisano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5811" start="7349" end="7357" title="Masaccio" label="Masaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="7438" end="7449" title="Perspective (graphical)" label="perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q179805" start="7476" end="7498" title="Political philosophy" label="Political philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="7514" end="7533" title="Niccolò Machiavelli" label="Niccolò Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q182128" start="7681" end="7710" title="Giovanni Pico della Mirandola" label="Giovanni Pico della Mirandola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085760" start="7757" end="7786" title="Oration on the Dignity of Man" label="Oration on the Dignity of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="8087" end="8101" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q716095" start="8400" end="8409" title="Hans Kohn" label="Hans Kohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="8493" end="8500" title="Erasmus" label="Erasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="8505" end="8516" title="Thomas More" label="Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="8588" end="8599" title="Machiavelli" label="Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q971756" start="8782" end="8794" title="Rodney Stark" label="Rodney Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115680" start="8865" end="8884" title="Italian city-states" label="Italian city-states"/>
<link wikidata="Q212685" start="8892" end="8908" title="High Middle Ages" label="High Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="8977" end="8987" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="9074" end="9093" title="Absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="9156" end="9170" title="City-state" label="city-republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608559" start="9281" end="9302" title="Commercial Revolution" label="Commercial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q701745" start="9358" end="9371" title="Leon Poliakov" label="Leon Poliakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="9710" end="9718" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="9798" end="9813" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante Alighieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401" start="9830" end="9838" title="Petrarch" label="Petrarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814" start="9880" end="9897" title="Giotto di Bondone" label="Giotto di Bondone"/>
<link wikidata="Q208125" start="10023" end="10039" title="Lorenzo Ghiberti" label="Lorenzo Ghiberti"/>
<link wikidata="Q174330" start="10044" end="10064" title="Filippo Brunelleschi" label="Filippo Brunelleschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q732511" start="10125" end="10135" title="Florence Baptistery" label="Baptistery"/>
<link wikidata="Q191739" start="10143" end="10161" title="Florence Cathedral" label="Florence Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q37562" start="10276" end="10285" title="Donatello" label="Donatello"/>
<link wikidata="Q5811" start="10291" end="10299" title="Masaccio" label="Masaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="10677" end="10683" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q212685" start="10765" end="10781" title="High Middle Ages" label="High Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401" start="11142" end="11150" title="Petrarch" label="Petrarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q93113" start="11152" end="11169" title="Coluccio Salutati" label="Coluccio Salutati"/>
<link wikidata="Q730505" start="11183" end="11207" title="Niccolò de&amp;#x27; Niccoli" label="Niccolò de&amp;#x27; Niccoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q318254" start="11225" end="11243" title="Poggio Bracciolini" label="Poggio Bracciolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="11332" end="11338" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q47154" start="11340" end="11349" title="Lucretius" label="Lucretius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="11351" end="11355" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="11361" end="11367" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q212685" start="11907" end="11923" title="High Middle Ages" label="High Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="11953" end="11971" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="Islamic Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="12060" end="12065" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q117253" start="12089" end="12100" title="Demosthenes" label="Demosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="12105" end="12115" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="12166" end="12179" title="Islamic world" label="Islamic world"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424763" start="12283" end="12302" title="Timurid Renaissance" label="Timurid Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5753" start="12306" end="12315" title="Samarkand" label="Samarkand"/>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="12320" end="12325" title="Herat" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="12422" end="12436" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639386" start="12478" end="12492" title="Greek scholars in the Renaissance" label="Greek scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="12691" end="12697" title="Muslims" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="12722" end="12730" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q39837" start="12735" end="12743" title="Averroes" label="Averroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q317519" start="12808" end="12813" title="Muslim conquest of Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q248984" start="12822" end="12828" title="Muslim conquest of the Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="12925" end="12931" title="Al-Andalus" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250763" start="12936" end="12942" title="Emirate of Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654327" start="13129" end="13145" title="Classical Arabic" label="Classical Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="13149" end="13163" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q69199" start="13209" end="13237" title="Toledo School of Translators" label="Toledo School of Translators"/>
<link wikidata="Q434356" start="13651" end="13669" title="Manuel Chrysoloras" label="Manuel Chrysoloras"/>
<link wikidata="Q299446" start="13786" end="13804" title="Basilios Bessarion" label="Basilios Bessarion"/>
<link wikidata="Q725712" start="13808" end="13820" title="Leo Allatius" label="Leo Allatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="13905" end="13910" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="13922" end="13938" title="Late Middle Ages" label="Late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="14078" end="14094" title="Nation state" label="political entity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115680" start="14160" end="14171" title="Italian city-states" label="city-states"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="14193" end="14204" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="Neapolitans"/>
<link wikidata="Q148540" start="14231" end="14242" title="Republic of Florence" label="Florentines"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="14251" end="14257" title="Papal States" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q153529" start="14277" end="14285" title="Duchy of Milan" label="Milanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="14294" end="14301" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="14346" end="14355" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venetians"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="14414" end="14423" title="Urbanization" label="urbanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q465807" start="14671" end="14686" title="Quentin Skinner" label="Quentin Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q435942" start="14703" end="14719" title="Otto of Freising" label="Otto of Freising"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="14916" end="14925" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="15073" end="15079" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401235" start="15092" end="15131" title="The Allegory of Good and Bad Government" label="The Allegory of Good and Bad Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q211562" start="15141" end="15160" title="Ambrogio Lorenzetti" label="Ambrogio Lorenzetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="15309" end="15315" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229872" start="15450" end="15465" title="Matteo Palmieri" label="Matteo Palmieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q62825" start="15808" end="15826" title="Maritime republics" label="merchant republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="15895" end="15907" title="Oligarchy" label="oligarchical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="15949" end="15958" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q215536" start="16300" end="16308" title="Merchant" label="Merchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="16382" end="16388" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116707" start="16465" end="16475" title="Venetian glass" label="fine glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="16762" end="16770" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="16785" end="16796" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q91702918" start="16909" end="16914" title="Black Death in Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="17096" end="17108" title="spirituality" label="spirituality"/>
<link wikidata="Q623282" start="17117" end="17126" title="afterlife" label="afterlife"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17221" end="17232" title="Patron#Arts" label="sponsorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184" start="17391" end="17399" title="pandemic" label="pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="17741" end="17748" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q217519" start="17805" end="17819" title="bubonic plague" label="bubonic plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q44512" start="18645" end="18653" title="Epidemic" label="Epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q160649" start="18849" end="18855" title="typhus" label="typhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160454" start="18860" end="18879" title="congenital syphilis" label="congenital syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="19680" end="19688" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q170022" start="19881" end="19887" title="House of Medici" label="Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q164950" start="19916" end="19934" title="dynasty" label="ducal ruling house"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526892" start="20102" end="20111" title="Great man theory" label="Great Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="20200" end="20207" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q177854" start="20414" end="20437" title="Lorenzo de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Lorenzo de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="20604" end="20621" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669" start="20623" end="20640" title="Sandro Botticelli" label="Sandro Botticelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="20646" end="20669" title="Michelangelo Buonarroti" label="Michelangelo Buonarroti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452198" start="20680" end="20693" title="Neri di Bicci" label="Neri di Bicci"/>
<link wikidata="Q296265" start="20721" end="20736" title="Filippino Lippi" label="Filippino Lippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="21044" end="21064" title="Renaissance humanism" label="Renaissance humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="21140" end="21150" title="scholasticism" label="scholastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83021" start="21349" end="21367" title="empirical evidence" label="empirical evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="21480" end="21486" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="21488" end="21495" title="grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="21497" end="21504" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="21506" end="21522" title="moral philosophy" label="moral philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="21528" end="21536" title="rhetoric" label="rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="22070" end="22081" title="Thomas More" label="Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="22217" end="22228" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q182128" start="22230" end="22250" title="Pico della Mirandola" label="Pico della Mirandola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085760" start="22313" end="22342" title="Oration on the Dignity of Man" label="Oration on the Dignity of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229872" start="22381" end="22396" title="Matteo Palmieri" label="Matteo Palmieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128354" start="22544" end="22558" title="Classical republicanism" label="civic humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990745" start="22598" end="22615" title="Tuscan language" label="Tuscan vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="22706" end="22712" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q193769" start="22836" end="22846" title="Quintilian" label="Quintilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q270141" start="23899" end="23914" title="Polymath" label="uomo universale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814" start="25630" end="25647" title="Giotto" label="Giotto di Bondone"/>
<link wikidata="Q174330" start="25780" end="25800" title="Filippo Brunelleschi" label="Filippo Brunelleschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q182046" start="25844" end="25865" title="Leon Battista Alberti" label="Leon Battista Alberti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="25955" end="25966" title="Perspective (graphical)" label="perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="26000" end="26007" title="Realism (arts)" label="realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="26111" end="26128" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3999" start="26130" end="26143" title="human anatomy" label="human anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="26270" end="26280" title="aesthetics" label="aesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="26310" end="26322" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="26327" end="26334" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669" start="26439" end="26456" title="Sandro Botticelli" label="Sandro Botticelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q37562" start="26494" end="26503" title="Donatello" label="Donatello"/>
<link wikidata="Q47551" start="26529" end="26535" title="Titian" label="Titian"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="26569" end="26582" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q215251" start="26647" end="26664" title="Hugo van der Goes" label="Hugo van der Goes"/>
<link wikidata="Q102272" start="26669" end="26681" title="Jan van Eyck" label="Jan van Eyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q296955" start="26794" end="26803" title="oil paint" label="oil paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q43270" start="26895" end="26920" title="Pieter Brueghel the Elder" label="Pieter Brueghel the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q47163" start="27142" end="27151" title="Vitruvius" label="Vitruvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q191739" start="27347" end="27365" title="Florence Cathedral" label="Florence Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581882" start="27416" end="27452" title="Basilica of Sant&amp;#x27;Andrea, Mantua" label="Basilica of Sant&amp;#x27;Andrea, Mantua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474884" start="27514" end="27530" title="High Renaissance" label="High Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="27553" end="27578" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793" start="27604" end="27612" title="Bramante" label="Bramante"/>
<link wikidata="Q357276" start="27637" end="27645" title="Antonio da Sangallo the Younger" label="Sangallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q122328" start="27650" end="27657" title="Carlo Maderno" label="Maderno"/>
<link wikidata="Q175112" start="27717" end="27725" title="pilaster" label="pilaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q187459" start="27732" end="27744" title="entablatures" label="entablatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q654057" start="27814" end="27820" title="Tuscan order" label="Tuscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q734649" start="27825" end="27834" title="Composite order" label="Composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q131808" start="28125" end="28134" title="Mannerism" label="Mannerist"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="28482" end="28488" title="Gothic style" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q364413" start="28653" end="28666" title="Nicola Pisano" label="Nicola Pisano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278477" start="28788" end="28802" title="Pisa Baptistry" label="Pisa Baptistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q87620" start="29009" end="29021" title="Luca Pacioli" label="Luca Pacioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707847" start="29050" end="29061" title="bookkeeping" label="bookkeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116214" start="29089" end="29099" title="accounting" label="accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="29160" end="29174" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="29305" end="29324" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="29357" end="29367" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q269323" start="29373" end="29391" title="natural philosophy" label="natural philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q33521" start="29395" end="29414" title="applied mathematics" label="applied mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="29480" end="29492" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="29497" end="29506" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q154751" start="29551" end="29567" title="Nicholas of Cusa" label="Nicholas of Cusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984081" start="29584" end="29596" title="Copernican heliocentrism" label="heliocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="29610" end="29620" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="29745" end="29762" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q84258" start="29995" end="30008" title="Fritjof Capra" label="Fritjof Capra"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="30357" end="30366" title="Age of Discovery" label="discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="30382" end="30391" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="30395" end="30415" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="30492" end="30497" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="30589" end="30608" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q610877" start="30622" end="30642" title="Northern Renaissance" label="Northern Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q214078" start="30947" end="30968" title="scientific revolution" label="scientific revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="31185" end="31200" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q36620" start="31202" end="31213" title="Tycho Brahe" label="Tycho Brahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="31219" end="31234" title="Johannes Kepler" label="Johannes Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q845981" start="31257" end="31292" title="De revolutionibus orbium coelestium" label="De revolutionibus orbium coelestium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233009" start="31408" end="31434" title="De humani corporis fabrica" label="De humani corporis fabrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q170267" start="31492" end="31508" title="Andreas Vesalius" label="Andreas Vesalius"/>
<link wikidata="Q116646" start="31547" end="31557" title="dissection" label="dissection"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103443" start="31580" end="31591" title="Mechanical philosophy" label="mechanistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="31690" end="31707" title="scientific method" label="scientific method"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="31721" end="31739" title="Empiricism" label="empirical evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="31762" end="31773" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37388" start="31904" end="31917" title="Francis Bacon" label="Francis Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="32222" end="32232" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q379677" start="32363" end="32373" title="Joan Blaeu" label="Joan Blaeu"/>
<link wikidata="Q150995" start="32401" end="32420" title="Peace of Westphalia" label="Peace of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="32432" end="32452" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="32536" end="32551" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q213137" start="32629" end="32640" title="East Indies" label="East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q174085" start="32672" end="32687" title="Willem Janszoon" label="Willem Janszoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="32723" end="32747" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268123" start="32753" end="32760" title="Duyfken" label="Duyfken"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="32775" end="32784" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q233770" start="32831" end="32850" title="Cape York Peninsula" label="Cape York Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q42188" start="32980" end="32991" title="Abel Tasman" label="Abel Tasman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074145" start="33191" end="33202" title="New Holland (Australia)" label="New Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="33255" end="33265" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q323750" start="33388" end="33403" title="Terra Australis" label="Terra Australis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179465" start="33709" end="33719" title="polyphony" label="polyphonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185858" start="33733" end="33747" title="Franco-Flemish" label="Franco-Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="33775" end="33783" title="printing press" label="printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062400" start="33980" end="33987" title="chanson" label="chanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q188285" start="33990" end="33995" title="motet" label="motet"/>
<link wikidata="Q217295" start="34002" end="34008" title="mass (music)" label="masses"/>
<link wikidata="Q179277" start="34195" end="34227" title="Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina" label="Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q154792" start="34229" end="34246" title="Orlande de Lassus" label="Orlande de Lassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q215128" start="34248" end="34270" title="Tomás Luis de Victoria" label="Tomás Luis de Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q208375" start="34276" end="34288" title="William Byrd" label="William Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q610877" start="34431" end="34451" title="Northern Renaissance" label="Northern Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="34531" end="34552" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="34617" end="34625" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="34802" end="34809" title="Erasmus" label="Erasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q123034" start="34811" end="34827" title="Huldrych Zwingli" label="Huldrych Zwingli"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="34829" end="34840" title="Thomas More" label="Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="34842" end="34855" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q37577" start="34861" end="34872" title="John Calvin" label="John Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="35000" end="35006" title="Papacy" label="Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q26189" start="35027" end="35041" title="Western Schism" label="Western Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="35096" end="35102" title="Bishop" label="Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q665037" start="35106" end="35110" title="diocese of Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q154001" start="35149" end="35169" title="Council of Constance" label="Council of Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163981" start="35215" end="35227" title="Conciliarism" label="Conciliarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q542845" start="35347" end="35375" title="Fifth Council of the Lateran" label="Fifth Council of the Lateran"/>
<link wikidata="Q108316" start="35469" end="35486" title="Pope Alexander VI" label="Pope Alexander VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q205302" start="35517" end="35523" title="simony" label="simony"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="35525" end="35533" title="nepotism" label="nepotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q65074911" start="35539" end="35557" title="Children of the ordained" label="fathering children"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="35641" end="35649" title="Cardinal (Catholic Church)" label="cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q275456" start="35744" end="35761" title="textual criticism" label="textual criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="35769" end="35782" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q157506" start="35828" end="35846" title="Ninety-five Theses" label="Ninety-five Theses"/>
<link wikidata="Q44777" start="35970" end="35980" title="indulgence" label="indulgence"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="36008" end="36019" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="36096" end="36110" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q133001" start="36276" end="36289" title="Pope Paul III" label="Pope Paul III"/>
<link wikidata="Q465627" start="36337" end="36357" title="Sack of Rome (1527)" label="sack of Rome in 1527"/>
<link wikidata="Q845981" start="36474" end="36509" title="De revolutionibus orbium coelestium" label="De revolutionibus orbium coelestium"/>
<link wikidata="Q248459" start="36605" end="36623" title="Alessandro Farnese (cardinal)" label="Alessandro Farnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q47551" start="36646" end="36652" title="Titian" label="Titian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="36654" end="36666" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="36672" end="36679" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q281219" start="36769" end="36782" title="Giulio Clovio" label="Giulio Clovio"/>
<link wikidata="Q48498" start="36808" end="36830" title="illuminated manuscript" label="illuminated manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877619" start="36842" end="36855" title="Farnese Hours" label="Farnese Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401" start="37217" end="37225" title="Petrarch" label="Petrarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q314488" start="37466" end="37480" title="Leonardo Bruni" label="Leonardo Bruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q816829" start="37513" end="37526" title="periodization" label="periodization"/>
<link wikidata="Q434834" start="37747" end="37760" title="Flavio Biondo" label="Flavio Biondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q128027" start="38262" end="38276" title="Giorgio Vasari" label="Giorgio Vasari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645493" start="38290" end="38310" title="Le Vite de&amp;#x27; più eccellenti pittori, scultori, e architettori" label="Lives of the Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q15790" start="38405" end="38412" title="Cimabue" label="Cimabue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814" start="38414" end="38420" title="Giotto" label="Giotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q315249" start="38426" end="38443" title="Arnolfo di Cambio" label="Arnolfo di Cambio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5811" start="38471" end="38479" title="Masaccio" label="Masaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q174330" start="38481" end="38493" title="Filippo Brunelleschi" label="Brunelleschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q37562" start="38499" end="38508" title="Donatello" label="Donatello"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="38531" end="38548" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="38569" end="38581" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="38921" end="38935" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q8958" start="38954" end="38972" title="Johannes Gutenberg" label="Johannes Gutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q912595" start="39223" end="39238" title="Elizabethan era" label="Elizabethan era"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="39419" end="39429" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="39478" end="39497" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="39570" end="39580" title="literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="39585" end="39590" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q36649" start="39620" end="39631" title="Visual arts" label="Visual arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q131808" start="39812" end="39821" title="Mannerism" label="Mannerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q929304" start="39907" end="39929" title="Elizabethan literature" label="Elizabethan literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q74217" start="39965" end="39995" title="Italian Renaissance literature" label="Italian Renaissance literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134718" start="40000" end="40019" title="Elizabethan theatre" label="Elizabethan theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="40064" end="40083" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q28975" start="40097" end="40116" title="Christopher Marlowe" label="Christopher Marlowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352055" start="40130" end="40144" title="Edmund Spenser" label="Edmund Spenser"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="40162" end="40173" title="Thomas More" label="Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q315509" start="40195" end="40208" title="Philip Sidney" label="Philip Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326885" start="40222" end="40247" title="English Renaissance music" label="English Renaissance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q207789" start="40300" end="40313" title="Thomas Tallis" label="Thomas Tallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q315353" start="40327" end="40340" title="John Taverner" label="John Taverner"/>
<link wikidata="Q208375" start="40358" end="40370" title="William Byrd" label="William Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365000" start="40384" end="40408" title="Elizabethan architecture" label="Elizabethan architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247618" start="40428" end="40441" title="prodigy house" label="prodigy house"/>
<link wikidata="Q295929" start="40481" end="40492" title="Inigo Jones" label="Inigo Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q264649" start="40521" end="40543" title="Palladian architecture" label="Palladian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q37388" start="40572" end="40585" title="Francis Bacon" label="Francis Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q214078" start="40699" end="40720" title="Scientific Revolution" label="Scientific Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="40926" end="40935" title="historian" label="historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q310791" start="40936" end="40950" title="Jules Michelet" label="Jules Michelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="41046" end="41065" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q134452" start="41102" end="41114" title="Charles VIII of France" label="Charles VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="41256" end="41267" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="41269" end="41278" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="41323" end="41340" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q131018" start="41401" end="41418" title="François Rabelais" label="François Rabelais"/>
<link wikidata="Q49752" start="41420" end="41437" title="Pierre de Ronsard" label="Pierre de Ronsard"/>
<link wikidata="Q18420" start="41439" end="41456" title="Joachim du Bellay" label="Joachim du Bellay"/>
<link wikidata="Q41568" start="41462" end="41481" title="Michel de Montaigne" label="Michel de Montaigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q378800" start="41500" end="41511" title="Jean Clouet" label="Jean Clouet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660965" start="41535" end="41546" title="Jean Mouton" label="Jean Mouton"/>
<link wikidata="Q131552" start="41627" end="41652" title="Catherine de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Catherine de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q312612" start="41686" end="41725" title="Lorenzo de&amp;#x27; Medici, Duke of Urbino" label="Lorenzo de&amp;#x27; Medici, Duke of Urbino"/>
<link wikidata="Q272509" start="41730" end="41766" title="Madeleine de La Tour d&amp;#x27;Auvergne" label="Madeleine de La Tour d&amp;#x27;Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="41776" end="41794" title="Henry II of France" label="Henry II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q229208" start="41835" end="41841" title="Claude of France" label="Claude"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="41901" end="41924" title="French Wars of Religion" label="French Wars of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41425" start="42021" end="42027" title="ballet" label="ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="42164" end="42171" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="42180" end="42193" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580" start="42282" end="42296" title="Albrecht Dürer" label="Albrecht Dürer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204939" start="42389" end="42397" title="Renaissance humanism in Northern Europe" label="humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455000" start="42486" end="42504" title="German Renaissance" label="German Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="42553" end="42565" title="Gothic style" label="Gothic style"/>
<link wikidata="Q150726" start="42666" end="42678" title="Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Maximilian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="42682" end="42690" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="42757" end="42774" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="42833" end="42840" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q213523" start="42962" end="42974" title="Quattrocento" label="Quattrocento"/>
<link wikidata="Q46313" start="43525" end="43539" title="Buda Castle" label="Castle in Buda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317190" start="43566" end="43570" title="Tata Castle" label="Tata"/>
<link wikidata="Q57124" start="43590" end="43599" title="Sigismund, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Sigismund"/>
<link wikidata="Q540415" start="43640" end="43651" title="Pippo Spano" label="Pippo Spano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43736" end="43757" title="Masolino da Pannicale" label="Masolino da Pannicale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="44062" end="44072" title="Florence" label="Florentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193478" start="44206" end="44210" title="Buda" label="Buda"/>
<link wikidata="Q549965" start="44296" end="44307" title="Vitéz János" label="Vitéz János"/>
<link wikidata="Q171353" start="44323" end="44332" title="Esztergom" label="Esztergom"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="44486" end="44492" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="44512" end="44523" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q188634" start="44530" end="44547" title="Matthias Corvinus" label="Matthias Corvinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q236886" start="44682" end="44700" title="Beatrice of Naples" label="Beatrice of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q193478" start="44702" end="44706" title="Buda" label="Buda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="44789" end="44793" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q266482" start="44860" end="44875" title="Antonio Bonfini" label="Antonio Bonfini"/>
<link wikidata="Q360094" start="44906" end="44921" title="Janus Pannonius" label="Janus Pannonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q653993" start="44923" end="44934" title="András Hess" label="András Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q688736" start="45014" end="45036" title="Bibliotheca Corviniana" label="Bibliotheca Corviniana"/>
<link wikidata="Q213678" start="45215" end="45230" title="Vatican Library" label="Vatican Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q548097" start="45612" end="45620" title="Visegrád" label="Visegrád"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332212" start="45662" end="45676" title="hanging garden" label="hanging garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350110" start="45809" end="45825" title="Chimenti Camicia" label="Chimenti Camicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668864" start="45844" end="45860" title="Giovanni Dalmata" label="Giovanni Dalmata"/>
<link wikidata="Q675619" start="46001" end="46020" title="Benedetto da Majano" label="Benedetto da Majano"/>
<link wikidata="Q296265" start="46038" end="46053" title="Filippino Lippi" label="Filippino Lippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5681" start="46058" end="46073" title="Andrea Mantegna" label="Andrea Mantegna"/>
<link wikidata="Q548256" start="46197" end="46218" title="Aristotele Fioravanti" label="Aristotele Fioravanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="46318" end="46329" title="Gothic architecture" label="Late Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="46344" end="46355" title="Franciscans" label="Franciscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q81581" start="46370" end="46376" title="Szeged" label="Szeged"/>
<link wikidata="Q846687" start="46401" end="46409" title="Order of Saint Paul the First Hermit" label="Paulines"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="46450" end="46467" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056854" start="46481" end="46488" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1301–1526)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q926743" start="46580" end="46587" title="Madonna (art)" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q264271" start="46790" end="46804" title="Pietro Ranzano" label="Pietro Ranzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q21207262" start="46829" end="46846" title="Francesco Bandini" label="Francesco Bandini"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="46942" end="46954" title="Neoplatonism" label="Neoplatonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16853506" start="47163" end="47179" title="Martius Galeotti" label="Martius Galeotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q76365" start="47378" end="47400" title="Johannes Regiomontanus" label="Johannes Regiomontanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q539261" start="47405" end="47418" title="Marcin Bylica" label="Marcin Bylica"/>
<link wikidata="Q164992" start="47472" end="47481" title="astrolabe" label="astrolabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425895" start="47487" end="47502" title="celestial globe" label="celestial globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="47569" end="47589" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q379599" start="47661" end="47675" title="Bálint Balassi" label="Bálint Balassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q897167" start="47684" end="47707" title="Sebestyén Tinódi Lantos" label="Sebestyén Tinódi Lantos"/>
<link wikidata="Q788956" start="47716" end="47730" title="Bálint Bakfark" label="Bálint Bakfark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161159" start="47760" end="47769" title="Master MS" label="Master MS"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="47947" end="47953" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="48064" end="48073" title="Anatomy" label="anatomist"/>
<link wikidata="Q170267" start="48074" end="48090" title="Andreas Vesalius" label="Andreas Vesalius"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="48107" end="48118" title="cartography" label="cartography"/>
<link wikidata="Q6353" start="48120" end="48137" title="Gerardus Mercator" label="Gerardus Mercator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632089" start="48192" end="48230" title="Dutch and Flemish Renaissance painting" label="Dutch and Flemish Renaissance painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q130531" start="48263" end="48279" title="Hieronymus Bosch" label="Hieronymus Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q43270" start="48315" end="48340" title="Pieter Brueghel the Elder" label="Pieter Brueghel the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q201405" start="48709" end="48714" title="Renaissance music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007658" start="48746" end="48763" title="Burgundian School" label="Burgundian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q179465" start="48823" end="48832" title="polyphony" label="polyphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q185858" start="48840" end="48853" title="Franco-Flemish School" label="Netherlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="48966" end="48971" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q26473" start="49001" end="49016" title="Gregorian Chant" label="Gregorian Chant"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="49113" end="49121" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q179277" start="49122" end="49154" title="Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina" label="Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q612039" start="49290" end="49305" title="Venetian School (music)" label="Venetian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="49359" end="49366" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q106837" start="49424" end="49440" title="Saxo Grammaticus" label="Saxo Grammaticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q756617" start="49446" end="49452" title="Danish Realm" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q154041" start="49464" end="49476" title="Frederick II of Denmark" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q153586" start="49481" end="49493" title="Christian IV of Denmark" label="Christian IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q189358" start="49585" end="49593" title="Kronborg" label="Kronborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q206101" start="49595" end="49604" title="Rosenborg Castle" label="Rosenborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q326528" start="49609" end="49615" title="Børsen" label="Børsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36620" start="49635" end="49646" title="Tycho Brahe" label="Tycho Brahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q201486" start="49700" end="49714" title="modern science" label="modern science"/>
<link wikidata="Q214078" start="49742" end="49763" title="Scientific Revolution" label="Scientific Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580" start="50132" end="50146" title="Albrecht Dürer" label="Albrecht Dürer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43270" start="50168" end="50192" title="Pieter Bruegel the Elder" label="Pieter Bruegel the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q443153" start="50334" end="50341" title="Flemish Primitives" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q364350" start="50351" end="50357" title="Hubert van Eyck" label="Hubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q102272" start="50362" end="50374" title="Jan van Eyck" label="Jan van Eyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q174705" start="50389" end="50401" title="oil painting" label="oil painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="50719" end="50734" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante Alighieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485791" start="51139" end="51149" title="Polish Golden Age" label="Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759877" start="51153" end="51167" title="Polish culture" label="Polish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q194355" start="51182" end="51202" title="Jagiellonian dynasty" label="Jagiellonian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="51208" end="51225" title="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="51250" end="51280" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q722544" start="51412" end="51431" title="Filippo Buonaccorsi" label="Filippo Buonaccorsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q53451" start="51495" end="51508" title="John I Albert" label="John I Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q569156" start="51531" end="51551" title="Francesco Fiorentino" label="Francesco Fiorentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q229434" start="51673" end="51684" title="Bona Sforza" label="Bona Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="51688" end="51693" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54056" start="51717" end="51728" title="Sigismund I the Old" label="Sigismund I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411476" start="52072" end="52104" title="Kresy" label="eastern and southern borderlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750805" start="52155" end="52164" title="Mannerist architecture and sculpture in Poland" label="Mannerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q758057" start="52274" end="52280" title="Attic (architecture)" label="attics"/>
<link wikidata="Q328092" start="52291" end="52298" title="cornice" label="cornice"/>
<link wikidata="Q175112" start="52318" end="52326" title="pilaster" label="pilaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q692327" start="52380" end="52397" title="Polish literature" label="Polish literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q458235" start="52436" end="52447" title="Mikołaj Rey" label="Mikołaj Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q59737" start="52452" end="52467" title="Jan Kochanowski" label="Jan Kochanowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="52477" end="52492" title="Polish language" label="Polish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="52510" end="52523" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q189441" start="52558" end="52581" title="Jagiellonian University" label="Jagiellonian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="52696" end="52715" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q60625" start="52720" end="52733" title="Conrad Celtes" label="Conrad Celtes"/>
<link wikidata="Q672420" start="52772" end="52782" title="University of Königsberg" label="Königsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q658192" start="52791" end="52798" title="Vilnius University" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q797934" start="52811" end="52817" title="Zamoyski Academy" label="Zamość"/>
<link wikidata="Q584205" start="52903" end="52917" title="Nontrinitarianism" label="Nontrinitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q749576" start="52918" end="52933" title="Polish Brethren" label="Polish Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="53069" end="53077" title="szlachta" label="szlachta"/>
<link wikidata="Q501844" start="53089" end="53097" title="Magnates of Poland and Lithuania" label="magnates"/>
<link wikidata="Q978929" start="53158" end="53172" title="Golden Liberty" label="Golden Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="53193" end="53204" title="Monarchy" label="monarchical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184037" start="53205" end="53215" title="Absolutism (European history)" label="absolutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="53302" end="53310" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="53581" end="53587" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q435718" start="53733" end="53744" title="Pedro Nunes" label="Pedro Nunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352529" start="53746" end="53760" title="João de Castro" label="João de Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q330740" start="53762" end="53776" title="Abraham Zacuto" label="Abraham Zacuto"/>
<link wikidata="Q44838" start="53782" end="53795" title="Martin Behaim" label="Martin Behaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q282356" start="53811" end="53823" title="Pedro Reinel" label="Pedro Reinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049421" start="53825" end="53835" title="Lopo Homem" label="Lopo Homem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320176" start="53837" end="53850" title="Estêvão Gomes" label="Estêvão Gomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q116680865" start="53856" end="53869" title="Diogo Ribeiro (cartographer)" label="Diogo Ribeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735555" start="53925" end="53935" title="Tomé Pires" label="Tomé Pires"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493994" start="53951" end="53965" title="Garcia de Orta" label="Garcia de Orta"/>
<link wikidata="Q333372" start="54088" end="54103" title="Carolus Clusius" label="Carolus Clusius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778604" start="54147" end="54158" title="spice trade" label="spice trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q751878" start="54242" end="54251" title="Manueline" label="Manueline"/>
<link wikidata="Q139015" start="54312" end="54326" title="Nuno Gonçalves" label="Nuno Gonçalves"/>
<link wikidata="Q724514" start="54328" end="54342" title="Gregório Lopes" label="Gregório Lopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357253" start="54348" end="54363" title="Vasco Fernandes (artist)" label="Vasco Fernandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366752" start="54375" end="54391" title="Pedro de Escobar" label="Pedro de Escobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q951647" start="54396" end="54407" title="Duarte Lobo" label="Duarte Lobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778937" start="54447" end="54467" title="Cancioneiro de Elvas" label="Cancioneiro de Elvas"/>
<link wikidata="Q590" start="54485" end="54499" title="Luís de Camões" label="Luís de Camões"/>
<link wikidata="Q781898" start="54563" end="54574" title="Os Lusíadas" label="Os Lusíadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q186872" start="54582" end="54595" title="Sá de Miranda" label="Sá de Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q822857" start="54634" end="54651" title="Bernardim Ribeiro" label="Bernardim Ribeiro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54662" end="54678" title="Pastoral#Pastoral romances" label="pastoral romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q360383" start="54695" end="54706" title="Gil Vicente" label="Gil Vicente"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072723" start="54768" end="54785" title="Travel literature" label="Travel literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q703704" start="54809" end="54823" title="João de Barros" label="João de Barros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397271" start="54825" end="54851" title="Fernão Lopes de Castanheda" label="Fernão Lopes de Castanheda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857742" start="54853" end="54867" title="António Galvão" label="António Galvão"/>
<link wikidata="Q665235" start="54869" end="54883" title="Gaspar Correia" label="Gaspar Correia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150753" start="54885" end="54899" title="Duarte Barbosa" label="Duarte Barbosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q363923" start="54905" end="54924" title="Fernão Mendes Pinto" label="Fernão Mendes Pinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q47674" start="55080" end="55096" title="Amerigo Vespucci" label="Amerigo Vespucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="55113" end="55122" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379683" start="55142" end="55182" title="Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187661" start="55279" end="55299" title="Francisco de Holanda" label="Francisco de Holanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q268083" start="55301" end="55317" title="André de Resende" label="André de Resende"/>
<link wikidata="Q567913" start="55323" end="55337" title="Damião de Góis" label="Damião de Góis"/>
<link wikidata="Q191231" start="55413" end="55421" title="Manuel I of Portugal" label="Manuel I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279229" start="55423" end="55439" title="Diogo de Gouveia" label="Diogo de Gouveia"/>
<link wikidata="Q523544" start="55444" end="55460" title="André de Gouveia" label="André de Gouveia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393765" start="55548" end="55555" title="Factory (trading post)" label="factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="55559" end="55566" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="55593" end="55604" title="Thomas More" label="Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580" start="55609" end="55623" title="Albrecht Dürer" label="Albrecht Dürer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742589" start="55691" end="55708" title="Dutch Renaissance" label="Dutch Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q661566" start="55713" end="55723" title="Dutch Golden Age" label="Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q15138579" start="55795" end="55817" title="Persecution of Jews and Muslims by Manuel I of Portugal" label="expelled from Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="55928" end="55943" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8818" start="55960" end="55968" title="Valencia (city in Spain)" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q465675" start="56050" end="56062" title="Ausiàs March" label="Ausiàs March"/>
<link wikidata="Q363836" start="56067" end="56083" title="Joanot Martorell" label="Joanot Martorell"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="56092" end="56108" title="Crown of Castile" label="Crown of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q28779" start="56220" end="56265" title="Íñigo López de Mendoza, marqués de Santillana" label="Íñigo López de Mendoza, marqués de Santillana"/>
<link wikidata="Q389233" start="56364" end="56378" title="Jorge Manrique" label="Jorge Manrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q353841" start="56380" end="56397" title="Fernando de Rojas" label="Fernando de Rojas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191258" start="56399" end="56414" title="Juan del Encina" label="Juan del Encina"/>
<link wikidata="Q375056" start="56416" end="56437" title="Juan Boscán Almogáver" label="Juan Boscán Almogáver"/>
<link wikidata="Q311405" start="56443" end="56463" title="Garcilaso de la Vega (poet)" label="Garcilaso de la Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682" start="56512" end="56531" title="Miguel de Cervantes" label="Miguel de Cervantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q938926" start="56539" end="56550" title="masterpiece" label="masterpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q480" start="56557" end="56568" title="Don Quixote" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q316357" start="56719" end="56734" title="Juan Luis Vives" label="Juan Luis Vives"/>
<link wikidata="Q380804" start="56747" end="56765" title="Antonio de Nebrija" label="Antonio de Nebrija"/>
<link wikidata="Q462274" start="56788" end="56802" title="Pedro Mexía" label="Pedro de Mexía"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982460" start="56829" end="56845" title="Luisa de Medrano" label="Luisa de Medrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q308963" start="57013" end="57036" title="University of Salamanca" label="University of Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q450246" start="57130" end="57142" title="Luis de León" label="Luis de León"/>
<link wikidata="Q174880" start="57144" end="57159" title="Teresa of Ávila" label="Teresa of Ávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q190388" start="57165" end="57182" title="John of the Cross" label="John of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="57237" end="57246" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q334711" start="57285" end="57310" title="Inca Garcilaso de la Vega" label="Inca Garcilaso de la Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q207416" start="57315" end="57337" title="Bartolomé de las Casas" label="Bartolomé de las Casas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573283" start="57383" end="57413" title="Spanish Renaissance literature" label="Spanish Renaissance literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q123050140" start="57494" end="57520" title="Tomás Fernández de Medrano" label="Tomás Fernández de Medrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q301" start="57541" end="57549" title="El Greco" label="El Greco"/>
<link wikidata="Q215128" start="57572" end="57594" title="Tomás Luis de Victoria" label="Tomás Luis de Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q356953" start="57599" end="57617" title="Antonio de Cabezón" label="Antonio de Cabezón"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312467" start="57648" end="57670" title="Renaissance in Croatia" label="Renaissance in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312468" start="57673" end="57696" title="Renaissance in Scotland" label="Renaissance in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q128027" start="57765" end="57779" title="Giorgio Vasari" label="Giorgio Vasari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645493" start="57852" end="57876" title="Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects" label="The Lives of the Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q46825" start="57993" end="58003" title="Gothic art" label="Gothic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="58071" end="58083" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="58097" end="58103" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15790" start="58128" end="58135" title="Cimabue" label="Cimabue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814" start="58152" end="58158" title="Giotto" label="Giotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="58481" end="58490" title="historian" label="historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q310791" start="58491" end="58505" title="Jules Michelet" label="Jules Michelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="58828" end="58836" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="58840" end="58850" title="Copernicus" label="Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="58854" end="58861" title="Galileo" label="Galileo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="59070" end="59080" title="democracy" label="democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="59108" end="59118" title="Republicanism" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="59246" end="59251" title="Switzerland" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q59945" start="59262" end="59278" title="Jacob Burckhardt" label="Jacob Burckhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839282" start="59304" end="59348" title="The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy" label="The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814" start="59422" end="59428" title="Giotto" label="Giotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="59433" end="59445" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="59561" end="59574" title="individualism" label="individuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="59714" end="59733" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="59917" end="59950" title="University of California Berkeley" label="University of California Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="60200" end="60210" title="modern age" label="modern age"/>
<link wikidata="Q472246" start="60577" end="60599" title="Machiavellianism (politics)" label="Machiavellian politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="60605" end="60621" title="French Wars of Religion" label="Wars of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q237599" start="60635" end="60641" title="House of Borgia" label="Borgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634345" start="60642" end="60647" title="List of popes from the Borgia family" label="Popes"/>
<link wikidata="Q188494" start="60669" end="60679" title="witch-hunt" label="witch-hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q238526" start="60776" end="60786" title="golden age" label="golden age"/>
<link wikidata="Q190004" start="61073" end="61091" title="Historical materialism" label="Marxist historians"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="61258" end="61267" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="61275" end="61285" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="61302" end="61311" title="bourgeois" label="bourgeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q276280" start="61360" end="61374" title="Johan Huizinga" label="Johan Huizinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599259" start="61500" end="61529" title="The Autumn of the Middle Ages" label="The Autumn of the Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q212685" start="61601" end="61617" title="High Middle Ages" label="High Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="61659" end="61673" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248221" start="61895" end="61900" title="Neo-Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24952707" start="61974" end="61988" title="Neo-Latin studies" label="recent studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q176494" start="62049" end="62067" title="economic recession" label="economic recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316061" start="62080" end="62093" title="George Sarton" label="George Sarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q357483" start="62098" end="62112" title="Lynn Thorndike" label="Lynn Thorndike"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="62135" end="62145" title="Science" label="scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205183" start="62228" end="62238" title="Joan Kelly" label="Joan Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q217192" start="62544" end="62553" title="Dark Ages (historiography)" label="Dark Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483107" start="62650" end="62662" title="Early Modern Europe" label="early modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q50637" start="63062" end="63075" title="Art history" label="art historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q57656" start="63076" end="63090" title="Erwin Panofsky" label="Erwin Panofsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="63216" end="63235" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424764" start="63737" end="63752" title="Medieval renaissances" label="Medieval period"/>
<link wikidata="Q973349" start="63754" end="63772" title="Charles H. Haskins" label="Charles H. Haskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q755709" start="63817" end="63848" title="Renaissance of the 12th century" label="Renaissance of the 12th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q157123" start="63885" end="63908" title="Carolingian Renaissance" label="Carolingian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399604" start="63939" end="63959" title="Ottonian Renaissance" label="Ottonian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424763" start="63992" end="64011" title="Timurid Renaissance" label="Timurid Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="64037" end="64055" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="Islamic Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400430" start="64121" end="64143" title="Macedonian Renaissance" label="Macedonian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="64260" end="64272" title="Modern era" label="Modern times"/>
<link wikidata="Q817169" start="64333" end="64351" title="Bengal Renaissance" label="Bengal Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12983501" start="64353" end="64370" title="Tamil Renaissance" label="Tamil Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994341" start="64372" end="64395" title="Nepal Bhasa renaissance" label="Nepal Bhasa renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520921" start="64397" end="64405" title="al-Nahda" label="al-Nahda"/>
<link wikidata="Q829895" start="64413" end="64431" title="Harlem Renaissance" label="Harlem Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q906232" start="64488" end="64506" title="Disney Renaissance" label="Disney Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431758" start="64667" end="64692" title="San Francisco Renaissance" label="San Francisco Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="64759" end="64772" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q25333073" start="64815" end="64844" title="Index of Renaissance articles" label="Index of Renaissance articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112776" start="64847" end="64873" title="Outline of the Renaissance" label="Outline of the Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355785" start="64876" end="64903" title="List of Renaissance figures" label="List of Renaissance figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102710" start="64906" end="64936" title="List of Renaissance structures" label="List of Renaissance structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935987" start="64939" end="64956" title="Roman Renaissance" label="Roman Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420751" start="64959" end="64979" title="Venetian Renaissance" label="Venetian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q59945" start="65067" end="65084" title="Jacob Burckhardt" label="Burckhardt, Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526575" start="65269" end="65284" title="Vincent Cronin" label="Cronin, Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="65496" end="65499" title="OUP" label="OUP"/>
<link wikidata="Q112383994" start="66673" end="66690" title="Margaret L. King" label="King, Margaret L."/>
<link wikidata="Q335484" start="67613" end="67624" title="A. L. Rowse" label="Rowse, A.L."/>
<link wikidata="Q3149655" start="70236" end="70247" title="In Our Time (radio series)" label="In Our Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="70257" end="70268" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q259513" start="70393" end="70428" title="Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552227" start="70461" end="70492" title="Society for Renaissance Studies" label="Society for Renaissance Studies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25533" wikidata="Q633573" url="?curid=25533" title="Rheged">
<text>Rheged () was one of the kingdoms of the &quot;Hen Ogledd&quot; (&quot;Old North&quot;), the Brittonic-speaking region of what is now Northern England and southern Scotland, during the post-Roman era and Early Middle Ages. It is recorded in several poetic and bardic sources, although its borders are not described in any of them. Archaeological work from 2012 onwards suggests that its stronghold was located in what is now Galloway in Scotland rather than, as was previously speculated, being in Cumbria. Rheged possibly extended into Lancashire and other parts of northern England. In some sources, Rheged is intimately associated with the king Urien Rheged and his family. Its inhabitants spoke Cumbric, a Brittonic dialect closely related to Old Welsh.

== Etymology ==
The origin of the name &quot;Rheged&quot; has been described as &quot;problematic&quot;. One Brittonic-language solution is that the name may be a compound of &quot;rö-&quot;, a prefix meaning &quot;great&quot;, and &quot;cę:d&quot; meaning &quot;wood, forest&quot; (c.f. Welsh &quot;coed&quot;) although the expected form in Welsh would be &quot;*Rhygoed&quot;. If association of the name with &quot;cę:d&quot; is correct, the prefix may be &quot;rag-&quot;, meaning &quot;before, adjacent to, opposite&quot;. Derivation from the element &quot;reg&quot;, which with the suffix &quot;-ed&quot; has connotations of &quot;generosity&quot;, is another possibility.

==Location==
The name Rheged appears regularly as an epithet of Urien (a late 6th-century king of Rheged) in a number of early Welsh poems and royal genealogies. His victories over the Anglian chieftains of Bernicia in the second half of the 6th century are recorded by Nennius and celebrated by the bard Taliesin, who calls him &quot;Ruler of Rheged&quot;. He is thus placed squarely in the North of Britain and perhaps specifically in Westmorland when referred to as &quot;Ruler of Llwyfenydd&quot; (identified with the Lyvennet Valley). Later legend associates Urien with the city of Carlisle (the Roman Luguvalium), only twenty-five miles away; Higham suggests that Rheged was &quot;broadly conterminous with the earlier &quot;Civitas Carvetiorum&quot;, the Roman administrative unit based on Carlisle&quot;. Although it is possible that Rheged was merely a stronghold, it was not uncommon for sub-Roman monarchs to use their kingdom&#x27;s name as an epithet. 

Place-name evidence, e.g., Dunragit (possibly &quot;Fort of Rheged&quot;) suggests that, at least in one period of its history, Rheged included Dumfries and Galloway. Recent archaeological excavations at Trusty&#x27;s Hill, a vitrified fort near Gatehouse of Fleet, and the analysis of its artefacts in the context of other sites and their artefacts have led to claims that the kingdom was centred on Galloway early in the 7th century.

Interpretations of another place-name, with even less certainty, indicate that Rheged could also have reached as far south as Rochdale in Greater Manchester, recorded in the Domesday Book as &quot;Recedham&quot;. The River Roch on which Rochdale stands was recorded in the 13th century as &quot;Rached&quot; or &quot;Rachet&quot;. Such names may derive from Old English &quot;reced&quot; &quot;hall or house&quot;. However, no other place names originating from this Old English element exist, which makes this derivation unlikely. If they are not of English origin, these place-names may incorporate the element &#x27;Rheged&#x27; precisely because they lay on or near its borders. Certainly Urien&#x27;s kingdom stretched eastward at one time, as he was also &quot;Ruler of Catraeth&quot; (Catterick in North Yorkshire).

It is accepted by most scholars, therefore, that Rheged was a kingdom covering a large part of modern Cumbria as well as areas of Dumfries and Galloway and extended, for some of its history, into present day Yorkshire.

==Kings of Rheged==
The traditional royal genealogy of Urien and his successors traces their ancestry back to Coel Hen (considered by some to be the origins of the Old King Cole of folk tradition), who is considered by many to be a mythical figure; if he has some historicity, he may have ruled a considerable part of the North in the early 5th century. All of those listed below may have ruled in Rheged, but only three of their number can be verified from external sources:

* Meirchion Gul, father of Cynfarch
* Cynfarch Oer (Cynfarch the Dismal), also known as Cynfarch fab Meirchion and Cynfarch Gul, father of Urien
* Urien Rheged, (c. 550 – 590), about whom survive eight songs of Taliesin
* Owain, also celebrated for having fought the Bernicians; son of Urien

There are two possible later kings of Rheged:

*Rhun, said to have been a son of Urien. He is recorded in Welsh sources as having baptised Edwin of Northumbria, however, he may merely have stood sponsor at the baptism, thus becoming Edwin&#x27;s godfather.
*Royth (Rhaith - meaning &#x27;Justice&#x27; in Welsh), son of Rhun, and possibly the last king of Rheged.

==Southern Rheged==
A second royal genealogy exists for a line, perhaps of kings, descended from Cynfarch Oer&#x27;s brother: Elidir Lydanwyn. According to &quot;Bonedd Gwŷr y Gogledd&quot; Elidir&#x27;s son, Llywarch Hen, was a ruler in North Britain in the 6th century. He was driven from his territory by princely in-fighting after Urien&#x27;s death and was perhaps in old age associated with Powys. However, it is possible, because of internal inconsistencies, that the poetry connected to Powys was associated with Llywarch&#x27;s name at a later, probably 9th century, date. Llywarch is referred to in some poems as king of South Rheged, and in others as king of Argoed, suggesting that the two regions were the same. Searching for Llywarch&#x27;s kingdom has led some historians to propose that Rheged may have been divided between sons, resulting in northern and southern successor states. The connections of the family of Llywarch and Urien with Powys has suggested to some, on grounds of proximity, that the area of modern Lancashire may have been their original home.

==End of Rheged==
After Bernicia united with Deira to become the kingdom of Northumbria, Rheged was annexed by Northumbria, some time before AD 730. There was a royal marriage between Prince (later King) Oswiu of Northumbria and the Rhegedian princess Rieinmelth, granddaughter of Rum (Rhun), probably in 638, so it is possible that it was a peaceful takeover, both kingdoms being inherited by the same man.

After Rheged was incorporated into Northumbria, the old Cumbric language was gradually replaced by Old English, Cumbric surviving only in remote upland communities. Around the year 900, after the power of Northumbria was destroyed by Viking incursions and settlement, large areas west of the Pennines fell without apparent warfare under the control of the British Kingdom of Strathclyde, with Leeds recorded as being on the border between the Britons and the Norse Kingdom of York. This may have represented the political assertion of lingering British culture in the region. The area of Cumbria remained under the control of Strathclyde until the early 11th century when Strathclyde itself was absorbed into the Scottish kingdom. The name of the people, whose modern Welsh form is has, however, survived in the name of Cumberland and now Cumbria; it probably derives from an old Celtic word *&quot;Kombroges&quot; meaning &quot;fellow countrymen&quot;.

==Discovery of a lost stronghold of Rheged==
Previously, Rheged was assumed to have been centred somewhere in Cumbria, northwest England. However, in 2012 archaeologists found evidence at Trusty&#x27;s Hill near the town of Gatehouse of Fleet, in Galloway, southwest Scotland, suggesting that the site may in fact have been Rheged&#x27;s capital . The discovery was announced to the public in January 2017 and the site is still under excavation.

One of the lead researchers, Ronan Toolis, stated that their findings revealed structural ruins atop the hill. These originally belonged to a fortification system with a timber-reinforced stone rampart where the main fortification was supplemented by smaller defensive works along the low-lying slopes. According to Toolis, this suggests the presence of a royal stronghold of the period: &quot;This is a type of fort that has been recognized in Scotland as a form of high status secular settlement of the early medieval period. The evidence makes a compelling case for Galloway being the core of the kingdom of Rheged.&quot;

==Genetic legacy==
According to the University of Oxford&#x27;s &quot;People of the British Isles&quot; project, the original population of Rheged has left a distinct genetic heritage amongst the people of Cumbria. The research compared the DNA of over 2000 people across the British Isles whose grandparents were all born within of each other, and found a number of cases, including Rheged, where genetic clusters of people matched the location of historical kingdoms (other examples included Bernicia and Elmet).

==Notes==
:but see: Clarkson, T. J., The Men of the North: The Britons of Southern Scotland, John Donald, 2010, p. 71: &quot;Archaeologists are extremely sceptical that this was a site occupied in Early Historic times, still less that it was a royal residence. Such scepticism raises serious doubts about the usual derivation of the place-name Dunragit which may in fact be a red herring. It has been suggested that the second element could be Gaelic &quot;reichet&quot; rather than Old Welsh Reget, and that the place was so named by the Gall Gaidhil, &#x27;foreign Gaels&#x27;, who colonised Galloway in the Viking period.&quot; For Gaelic &quot;re(i)chet&quot;, cf. the Old Irish place name &quot;Mag Roichet/Rechet&quot; (Modern Irish &quot;Maigh Reichead&quot;), now Morett, country Laois, Ireland.

==References==
==Sources and further reading==
*
*
*
*
*

==Further reading==
*
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q633573" start="0" end="6" title="Rheged" label="Rheged"/>
<link wikidata="Q547241" start="47" end="57" title="Hen Ogledd" label="Hen Ogledd"/>
<link wikidata="Q156877" start="93" end="102" title="Brittonic languages" label="Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788657" start="134" end="150" title="Northern England" label="Northern England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="164" end="172" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q977566" start="185" end="199" title="Sub Roman Britain" label="post-Roman era"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="204" end="221" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q215144" start="260" end="264" title="bard" label="bard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342092" start="425" end="433" title="Galloway" label="Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="437" end="445" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23066" start="498" end="505" title="Cumbria" label="Cumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="537" end="547" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263208" start="648" end="660" title="Urien" label="Urien Rheged"/>
<link wikidata="Q35965" start="699" end="706" title="Cumbric" label="Cumbric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266723" start="747" end="756" title="Old Welsh" label="Old Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="868" end="877" title="Common Brittonic" label="Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="1047" end="1052" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q207869" start="1491" end="1498" title="epithet" label="epithet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263208" start="1502" end="1507" title="Urien" label="Urien"/>
<link wikidata="Q104238" start="1623" end="1630" title="Angles (tribe)" label="Anglian"/>
<link wikidata="Q623751" start="1645" end="1653" title="Bernicia" label="Bernicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132065" start="1708" end="1715" title="Nennius" label="Nennius"/>
<link wikidata="Q357835" start="1743" end="1751" title="Taliesin" label="Taliesin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23326" start="1875" end="1886" title="Westmorland" label="Westmorland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337614" start="1960" end="1975" title="River Lyvennet" label="Lyvennet Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q192896" start="2025" end="2033" title="Carlisle, Cumbria" label="Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="2039" end="2044" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876046" start="2045" end="2055" title="Luguvalium" label="Luguvalium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046170" start="2163" end="2194" title="Carvetii" label="&amp;quot;Civitas Carvetiorum&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="2405" end="2415" title="Toponymy" label="Place-name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402372" start="2432" end="2440" title="Dunragit" label="Dunragit"/>
<link wikidata="Q126514" start="2549" end="2570" title="Dumfries and Galloway" label="Dumfries and Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q26822233" start="2609" end="2627" title="Trusty&amp;#x27;s Hill" label="Trusty&amp;#x27;s Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327990" start="2631" end="2645" title="vitrified fort" label="vitrified fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q996643" start="2651" end="2669" title="Gatehouse of Fleet" label="Gatehouse of Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q474605" start="2968" end="2976" title="Rochdale" label="Rochdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q23099" start="2980" end="2998" title="Greater Manchester" label="Greater Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="3016" end="3029" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337770" start="3059" end="3069" title="River Roch" label="River Roch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403266" start="3618" end="3626" title="Catraeth" label="Catraeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024102" start="3634" end="3643" title="Catterick, North Yorkshire" label="Catterick"/>
<link wikidata="Q23086" start="3647" end="3662" title="North Yorkshire" label="North Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23066" start="3768" end="3775" title="Cumbria" label="Cumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304442" start="3996" end="4004" title="Coel Hen" label="Coel Hen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304442" start="4054" end="4063" title="King Cole" label="King Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q776228" start="4365" end="4378" title="Meirchion Gul" label="Meirchion Gul"/>
<link wikidata="Q633573" start="4401" end="4413" title="Cynfarch Oer" label="Cynfarch Oer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263208" start="4510" end="4522" title="Urien" label="Urien Rheged"/>
<link wikidata="Q357835" start="4574" end="4582" title="Taliesin" label="Taliesin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486268" start="4585" end="4590" title="Owain mab Urien" label="Owain"/>
<link wikidata="Q623751" start="4630" end="4638" title="Bernicia" label="Bernicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110785432" start="4694" end="4700" title="House of Rheged" label="Rheged"/>
<link wikidata="Q348955" start="4795" end="4815" title="Edwin of Northumbria" label="Edwin of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q223973" start="4902" end="4911" title="Godparent" label="godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286825" start="5183" end="5204" title="Bonedd Gwŷr y Gogledd" label="Bonedd Gwŷr y Gogledd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434699" start="5230" end="5242" title="Llywarch Hen" label="Llywarch Hen"/>
<link wikidata="Q769782" start="5418" end="5423" title="Kingdom of Powys" label="Powys"/>
<link wikidata="Q156150" start="5516" end="5521" title="Powys" label="Powys"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="6055" end="6065" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q506008" start="6147" end="6152" title="Deira (kingdom)" label="Deira"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="6178" end="6189" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q468847" start="6306" end="6326" title="Oswiu of Northumbria" label="Oswiu of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q59661332" start="6354" end="6364" title="Rhiainfellt" label="Rieinmelth"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="6546" end="6557" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q35965" start="6567" end="6583" title="Cumbric language" label="Cumbric language"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="6610" end="6621" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35647" start="6803" end="6811" title="Pennines" label="Pennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q225890" start="6875" end="6897" title="Kingdom of Strathclyde" label="Kingdom of Strathclyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="6904" end="6909" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="6987" end="6991" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q23066" start="7099" end="7106" title="Cumbria" label="Cumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q23360" start="7331" end="7341" title="Cumberland" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23066" start="7350" end="7357" title="Cumbria" label="Cumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q26822233" start="7654" end="7672" title="Trusty&amp;#x27;s Hill" label="Trusty&amp;#x27;s Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q996643" start="7690" end="7708" title="Gatehouse of Fleet" label="Gatehouse of Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="8575" end="8595" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="8780" end="8783" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q623751" start="9033" end="9041" title="Bernicia" label="Bernicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333032" start="9046" end="9051" title="Elmet" label="Elmet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25534" wikidata="Q7913" url="?curid=25534" title="Romanian language">
<text>Romanian (obsolete spelling: Roumanian; , or , ) is the official and main language of Romania and Moldova. Romanian is part of the Eastern Romance sub-branch of Romance languages, a linguistic group that evolved from several dialects of Vulgar Latin which separated from the Western Romance languages in the course of the period from the 5th to the 8th centuries. To distinguish it within the Eastern Romance languages, in comparative linguistics it is called &quot;Daco-Romanian&quot; as opposed to its closest relatives, Aromanian, Megleno-Romanian, and Istro-Romanian. It is also spoken as a minority language by stable communities in the countries surrounding Romania (Bulgaria, Hungary, Serbia and Ukraine), and by the large Romanian diaspora. In total, it is spoken by 25 million people as a first language.

Romanian was also known as &quot;Moldovan&quot; in Moldova, although the Constitutional Court of Moldova ruled in 2013 that &quot;the official language of Moldova is Romanian&quot;. On 16 March 2023, the Moldovan Parliament approved a law on referring to the national language as Romanian in all legislative texts and the constitution. On 22 March, the president of Moldova, Maia Sandu, promulgated the law.

==Overview==

The history of the Romanian language started in the Roman provinces north of the Jireček Line in Classical antiquity but there are 3 main hypotheses about its exact territory: the autochthony thesis (it developed in left-Danube Dacia only), the discontinuation thesis (it developed in right-Danube provinces only), and the &quot;as-well-as&quot; thesis that supports the language development on both sides of the Danube. Between the 6th and 8th century, following the accumulated tendencies inherited from the vernacular spoken in this large area and, to a much smaller degree, the influences from native dialects, and in the context of a lessened power of the Roman central authority the language evolved into Common Romanian. This proto-language then came into close contact with the Slavic languages and subsequently divided into Aromanian, Megleno-Romanian, Istro-Romanian, and Daco-Romanian. Due to limited attestation between the 6th and 16th century, entire stages from its history are re-constructed by researchers, often with proposed relative chronologies and loose limits.

From the 12th or 13th century, official documents and religious texts were written in Old Church Slavonic, a language that had a similar role to Medieval Latin in Western Europe. The oldest dated text in Romanian is a letter written in 1521 with Cyrillic letters, and until late 18th century, including during the development of printing, the same alphabet was used. The period after 1780, starting with the writing of its first grammar books, represents the modern age of the language, during which time the Latin alphabet became official, the literary language was standardized, and a large number of words from Modern Latin and other Romance languages entered the lexis.

In the process of language evolution from fewer than 2500 attested words from Late Antiquity to a lexicon of over 150,000 words in its contemporary form, Romanian showed a high degree of lexical permeability, reflecting contact with Thraco-Dacian, Slavic languages (including Old Slavic, Serbian, Bulgarian, Ukrainian, and Russian), Greek, Hungarian, German, Turkish, and to languages that served as cultural models during and after the Age of Enlightenment, in particular French. This lexical permeability is continuing today with the introduction of English words.

Yet while the overall lexis was enriched with foreign words and internal constructs, in accordance with the history and development of the society and the diversification in semantic fields, the fundamental lexicon—the core vocabulary used in everyday conversation—remains governed by inherited elements from the Latin spoken in the Roman provinces bordering Danube, without which no coherent sentence can be made.

== History ==
=== Common Romanian ===
Romanian descended from the Vulgar Latin spoken in the Roman provinces of Southeastern Europe north of the Jireček Line (a hypothetical boundary between the dominance of Latin and Greek influences).

Most scholars agree that two major dialects developed from Common Romanian by the 10th century. Daco-Romanian (the official language of Romania and Moldova) and Istro-Romanian (a language spoken by no more than 2,000 people in Istria) descended from the northern dialect. Two other languages, Aromanian and Megleno-Romanian, developed from the southern version of Common Romanian. These two languages are now spoken in lands to the south of the Jireček Line.

Of the features that individualize Common Romanian, inherited from Latin or subsequently developed, of particular importance are:
* appearance of the ă vowel;
* growth of the plural inflectional ending -uri for the neuter gender;
* analytic present conditional (ex: Daco-Romanian &quot;aș cânta&quot;);
* analytic future with an auxiliary derived from Latin volo (ex: Aromanian &quot;va s-cântu&quot;);
* enclisis of the definite article (ex. Istro-Romanian &quot;câre – cârele&quot;);
* nominal declension with two case forms in the singular feminine.

=== Old Romanian ===
The use of the denomination &quot;Romanian&quot; () for the language and use of the demonym &quot;Romanians&quot; () for speakers of this language predates the foundation of the modern Romanian state. Romanians always used the general term / or regional terms like (or ), or to designate themselves. Both the name of or for the Romanian language and the self-designation are attested as early as the 16th century, by various foreign travelers into the Carpathian Romance-speaking space, as well as in other historical documents written in Romanian at that time such as (&quot;The Chronicles of the land of Moldova&quot;) by Grigore Ureche.

The few allusions to the use of Romanian in writing as well as common words, anthroponyms, and toponyms preserved in the Old Church Slavonic religious writings and chancellery documents, attested prior to the 16th century, along with the analysis of graphemes show that the writing of Romanian with the Cyrillic alphabet started in the second half of the 15th century. 

The oldest extant document in Romanian precisely dated is Neacșu&#x27;s letter (1521) and was written using the Romanian Cyrillic alphabet, which was used until the late 19th century. The letter is the oldest testimony of Romanian epistolary style and uses a prevalent lexis of Latin origin. However, dating by watermarks has shown the Hurmuzaki Psalter is a copy from around the turn of the 16th century. The slow process of Romanian establishing itself as an official language, used in the public sphere, in literature and ecclesiastically, began in the late 15th century and ended in the early decades of the 18th century, by which time Romanian had begun to be regularly used by the Church. The oldest Romanian texts of a literary nature are religious manuscripts (, ), translations of essential Christian texts. These are considered either propagandistic results of confessional rivalries, for instance between Lutheranism and Calvinism, or as initiatives by Romanian monks stationed at Peri Monastery in Maramureș to distance themselves from the influence of the Mukacheve eparchy in Ukraine.

The language spoken during this period had a phonological system of seven vowels and twenty-nine consonants. Particular to Old Romanian are the distribution of /z/, as the allophone of /dz/ from Common Romanian, in the Wallachian and south-east Transylvanian varieties, the presence of palatal sonorants /ʎ/ and /ɲ/, nowadays preserved only regionally in Banat and Oltenia, and the beginning of devoicing of asyllabic [u] after consonants. Text analysis revealed words that are now lost from modern vocabulary or used only in local varieties. These words were of various provenience for example: Latin (&quot;cure&quot; - to run, &quot;mâneca&quot;- to leave), Old Church Slavonic (&quot;drăghicame&quot; - gem, precious stone, &quot;prilăsti&quot; - to trick, to cheat), Hungarian (&quot;bizăntui&quot; - to bear witness).

=== Modern Romanian ===
The modern age of Romanian starts in 1780 with the printing in Vienna of a very important grammar book titled &quot;Elementa linguae daco-romanae sive valachicae&quot;. The author of the book, Samuil Micu-Klein, and the revisor, Gheorghe Șincai, both members of the Transylvanian School, chose to use Latin as the language of the text and presented the phonetical and grammatical features of Romanian in comparison to its ancestor. The Modern age of Romanian language can be further divided into three phases: pre-modern or modernizing between 1780 and 1830, modern phase between 1831 and 1880, and contemporary from 1880 onwards.

==== Pre-modern period ====
Beginning with the printing in 1780 of &quot;Elementa linguae daco-romanae sive valachicae&quot;, the pre-modern phase was characterized by the publishing of school textbooks, appearance of first normative works in Romanian, numerous translations, and the beginning of a conscious stage of re-latinization of the language. Notable contributions, besides that of the Transylvanian School, are the activities of Gheorghe Lazăr, founder of the first Romanian school, and Ion Heliade Rădulescu. The end of this period is marked by the first printing of magazines and newspapers in Romanian, in particular Curierul Românesc and Albina Românească.

==== Modern period ====
Starting from 1831 and lasting until 1880 the modern phase is characterized by the development of literary styles: scientific, administrative, and belletristic. It quickly reached a high point with the printing of Dacia Literară, a journal founded by Mihail Kogălniceanu and representing a literary society, which together with other publications like and spread the ideas of Romantic nationalism and later contributed to the formation of other societies that took part in the Revolutions of 1848. Their members and those that shared their views are collectively known in Romania as &quot;of &#x27;48&quot;(), a name that was extended to the literature and writers around this time such as Vasile Alecsandri, Grigore Alexandrescu, Nicolae Bălcescu, Timotei Cipariu.

Between 1830 and 1860 &quot;transitional alphabets&quot; were used, adding Latin letters to the Romanian Cyrillic alphabet. The Latin alphabet became official at different dates in Wallachia and Transylvania - 1860, and Moldova -1862.

Following the unification of Moldavia and Wallachia further studies on the language were made, culminating with the founding of on 1 April 1866 on the initiative of C. A. Rosetti, an academic society that had the purpose of standardizing the orthography, formalizing the grammar and (via a dictionary) vocabulary of the language, and promoting literary and scientific publications. This institution later became the Romanian Academy.

==== Contemporary period ====
The third phase of the modern age of Romanian language, starting from 1880 and continuing to this day, is characterized by the prevalence of the supradialectal form of the language, standardized with the express contribution of the school system and Romanian Academy, bringing a close to the process of literary language modernization and development of literary styles. It is distinguished by the activity of Romanian literature classics in its early decades: Mihai Eminescu, Ion Luca Caragiale, Ion Creangă, Ioan Slavici.

The current orthography, with minor reforms to this day and using Latin letters, was fully implemented in 1881, regulated by the Romanian Academy on a fundamentally phonological principle, with few morpho-syntactic exceptions.

==== Modern history of Romanian in Bessarabia ====
The first Romanian grammar was published in Vienna in 1780. Following the annexation of Bessarabia by Russia in 1812, Moldavian was established as an official language in the governmental institutions of Bessarabia, used along with Russian,
The publishing works established by Archbishop Gavril Bănulescu-Bodoni were able to produce books and liturgical works in Moldavian between 1815 and 1820.

Bessarabia during the 1812–1918 era witnessed the gradual development of bilingualism. Russian continued to develop as the official language of privilege, whereas Romanian remained the principal vernacular.

The period from 1905 to 1917 was one of increasing linguistic conflict spurred by an increase in Romanian nationalism. In 1905 and 1906, the Bessarabian asked for the re-introduction of Romanian in schools as a &quot;compulsory language&quot;, and the &quot;liberty to teach in the mother language (Romanian language)&quot;. At the same time, Romanian-language newspapers and journals began to appear, such as (1906), (1907), (1907), (1908), (1913), (1913). From 1913, the synod permitted that &quot;the churches in Bessarabia use the Romanian language&quot;. Romanian finally became the official language with the Constitution of 1923.

=== Historical grammar ===
Romanian has preserved a part of the Latin declension, but whereas Latin had six cases, from a morphological viewpoint, Romanian has only three: the nominative/accusative, genitive/dative, and marginally the vocative. Romanian nouns also preserve the neuter gender, although instead of functioning as a separate gender with its own forms in adjectives, the Romanian neuter became a mixture of masculine and feminine. The verb morphology of Romanian has shown the same move towards a compound perfect and future tense as the other Romance languages. Compared with the other Romance languages, during its evolution, Romanian simplified the original Latin tense system.

== Geographic distribution ==

Romanian is spoken mostly in Central, South-Eastern, and Eastern Europe, although speakers of the language can be found all over the world, mostly due to emigration of Romanian nationals and the return of immigrants to Romania back to their original countries. Romanian speakers account for 0.5% of the world&#x27;s population, and 4% of the Romance-speaking population of the world.

Romanian is the single official and national language in Romania and Moldova, although it shares the official status at regional level with other languages in the Moldovan autonomies of Gagauzia and Transnistria. Romanian is also an official language of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina in Serbia along with five other languages. Romanian minorities are encountered in Serbia (Timok Valley), Ukraine (Chernivtsi and Odesa oblasts), and Hungary (Gyula). Large immigrant communities are found in Italy, Spain, France, and Portugal.

In 1995, the largest Romanian-speaking community in the Middle East was found in Israel, where Romanian was spoken by 5% of the population. Romanian is also spoken as a second language by people from Arabic-speaking countries who have studied in Romania. It is estimated that almost half a million Middle Eastern Arabs studied in Romania during the 1980s. Small Romanian-speaking communities are to be found in Kazakhstan and Russia. Romanian is also spoken within communities of Romanian and Moldovan immigrants in the United States, Canada and Australia, although they do not make up a large homogeneous community statewide.

=== Legal status ===
==== In Romania ====
According to the Constitution of Romania of 1991, as revised in 2003, Romanian is the official language of the Republic.

Romania mandates the use of Romanian in official government publications, public education and legal contracts. Advertisements as well as other public messages must bear a translation of foreign words, while trade signs and logos shall be written predominantly in Romanian.

The Romanian Language Institute (Institutul Limbii Române), established by the Ministry of Education of Romania, promotes Romanian and supports people willing to study the language, working together with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs&#x27; Department for Romanians Abroad.

Since 2013, the Romanian Language Day is celebrated on every 31 August.

==== In Moldova ====

Romanian is the official language of the Republic of Moldova. The 1991 Declaration of Independence named the official language Romanian, and the Constitution of Moldova as originally adopted in 1994 named the state language of the country Moldovan. In December 2013, a decision of the Constitutional Court of Moldova ruled that the Declaration of Independence took precedence over the Constitution and the state language should be called Romanian. In 2023, the Moldovan parliament passed a law officially adopting the designation &quot;Romanian&quot; in all legal instruments, implementing the 2013 court decision.

Scholars agree that Moldovan and Romanian are the same language, with the glottonym &quot;Moldovan&quot; used in certain political contexts. It has been the sole official language since the adoption of the Law on State Language of the Moldavian SSR in 1989. This law mandates the use of Moldovan in all the political, economic, cultural and social spheres, as well as asserting the existence of a &quot;linguistic Moldo-Romanian identity&quot;. It is also used in schools, mass media, education and in the colloquial speech and writing. Outside the political arena the language is most often called &quot;Romanian&quot;. In the breakaway territory of Transnistria, it is co-official with Ukrainian and Russian.

In the 2014 census, out of the 2,804,801 people living in Moldova, 24% (652,394) stated Romanian as their most common language, whereas 56% stated Moldovan. While in the urban centers speakers are split evenly between the two names (with the capital Chișinău showing a strong preference for the name &quot;Romanian&quot;, i.e. 3:2), in the countryside hardly a quarter of Romanian/Moldovan speakers indicated Romanian as their native language. Unofficial results of this census first showed a stronger preference for the name Romanian, however the initial reports were later dismissed by the Institute for Statistics, which led to speculations in the media regarding the forgery of the census results.

==== In Serbia ====
===== Vojvodina =====
The Constitution of the Republic of Serbia determines that in the regions of the Republic of Serbia inhabited by national minorities, their own languages and scripts shall be officially used as well, in the manner established by law.

The Statute of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina determines that, together with the Serbian language and the Cyrillic script, and the Latin script as stipulated by the law, the Croat, Hungarian, Slovak, Romanian and Rusyn languages and their scripts, as well as languages and scripts of other nationalities, shall simultaneously be officially used in the work of the bodies of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina, in the manner established by the law. The bodies of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina are: the Assembly, the Executive Council and the provincial administrative bodies.

The Romanian language and script are officially used in eight municipalities: Alibunar, Bela Crkva (&quot;Biserica Albă&quot;), Žitište (&quot;Sângeorgiu de Bega&quot;), Zrenjanin (&quot;Becicherecu Mare&quot;), Kovačica (&quot;Covăcița&quot;), Kovin (&quot;Cuvin&quot;), Plandište (&quot;Plandiște&quot;) and Sečanj (&quot;Seceani&quot;). In the municipality of Vršac (&quot;Vârșeț&quot;), Romanian is official only in the villages of Vojvodinci (&quot;Voivodinț&quot;), Markovac (&quot;Marcovăț&quot;), Straža (&quot;Straja&quot;), Mali Žam (&quot;Jamu Mic&quot;), Malo Središte (&quot;Srediștea Mică&quot;), Mesić (&quot;Mesici&quot;), Jablanka (&quot;Iablanca&quot;), Sočica (&quot;Sălcița&quot;), Ritiševo (&quot;Râtișor&quot;), Orešac (&quot;Oreșaț&quot;) and Kuštilj (&quot;Coștei&quot;).

In the 2002 Census, the last carried out in Serbia, 1.5% of Vojvodinians stated Romanian as their native language.

===== Timok Valley =====
The Vlachs of Serbia are considered to speak Romanian as well.

==== Regional language status in Ukraine ====
In parts of Ukraine where Romanians constitute a significant share of the local population (districts in Chernivtsi, Odesa and Zakarpattia oblasts) Romanian is taught in schools as a primary language and there are Romanian-language newspapers, TV, and radio broadcasting.
The University of Chernivtsi in western Ukraine trains teachers for Romanian schools in the fields of Romanian philology, mathematics and physics.

In Hertsa Raion of Ukraine as well as in other villages of Chernivtsi Oblast and Zakarpattia Oblast, Romanian has been declared a &quot;regional language&quot; alongside Ukrainian as per the 2012 legislation on languages in Ukraine.

==== In other countries and organizations ====
Romanian is an official or administrative language in various communities and organisations, such as the Latin Union and the European Union. Romanian is also one of the five languages in which religious services are performed in the autonomous monastic state of Mount Athos, spoken in the monastic communities of Prodromos and Lakkoskiti. In the unrecognised state of Transnistria, Moldovan is one of the official languages. However, unlike all other dialects of Romanian, this variety of Moldovan is written in Cyrillic script.
=== As a second and foreign language ===
Romanian is taught in some areas that have Romanian minority communities, such as Vojvodina in Serbia, Bulgaria, Ukraine and Hungary. The Romanian Cultural Institute (ICR) has since 1992 organised summer courses in Romanian for language teachers. There are also non-Romanians who study Romanian as a foreign language, for example the Nicolae Bălcescu High-school in Gyula, Hungary.

Romanian is taught as a foreign language in tertiary institutions, mostly in European countries such as Germany, France and Italy, and the Netherlands, as well as in the United States. Overall, it is taught as a foreign language in 43 countries around the world.

=== Popular culture ===
Romanian has become popular in other countries through movies and songs performed in the Romanian language. Examples of Romanian acts that had a great success in non-Romanophone countries are the bands O-Zone (with their No. 1 single Dragostea Din Tei, also known as &quot;Numa Numa,&quot; across the world in 2003–2004), Akcent (popular in the Netherlands, Poland and other European countries), Activ (successful in some Eastern European countries), DJ Project (popular as clubbing music) SunStroke Project (known by viral video &quot;Epic Sax Guy&quot;) and Alexandra Stan (worldwide no.1 hit with &quot;Mr. Saxobeat&quot;) and Inna as well as high-rated movies like &quot;4 Months, 3 Weeks and 2 Days&quot;, &quot;The Death of Mr. Lazarescu&quot;, &quot;12:08 East of Bucharest&quot; or &quot;California Dreamin&#x27;&quot; (all of them with awards at the Cannes Film Festival).

Also some artists wrote songs dedicated to the Romanian language. The multi-platinum pop trio O-Zone (originally from Moldova) released a song called (&quot;I won&#x27;t forsake our language&quot;). The final verse of this song, , is translated in English as &quot;I won&#x27;t forsake our language, our Romanian language&quot;. Also, the Moldovan musicians Doina and Ion Aldea Teodorovici performed a song called &quot;The Romanian language&quot;.

=== Dialects ===
Romanian is also called Daco-Romanian in comparative linguistics to distinguish from the other dialects of Common Romanian: Aromanian, Megleno-Romanian, and Istro-Romanian. The origin of the term &quot;Daco-Romanian&quot; can be traced back to the first printed book of Romanian grammar in 1780, by Samuil Micu and Gheorghe Șincai. There, the Romanian dialect spoken north of the Danube is called to emphasize its origin and its area of use, which includes the former Roman province of Dacia, although it is spoken also south of the Danube, in Dobruja, the Timok Valley and northern Bulgaria.

This article deals with the Romanian (i.e. Daco-Romanian) language, and thus only its dialectal variations are discussed here. The differences between the regional varieties are small, limited to regular phonetic changes, few grammar aspects, and lexical particularities. There is a single written and spoken standard (literary) Romanian language used by all speakers, regardless of region. Like most natural languages, Romanian dialects are part of a dialect continuum. The dialects of Romanian are also referred to as &#x27;sub-dialects&#x27; and are distinguished primarily by phonetic differences. Romanians themselves speak of the differences as &#x27;accents&#x27; or &#x27;speeches&#x27; (in Romanian: or ).

Depending on the criteria used for classifying these dialects, fewer or more are found, ranging from 2 to 20, although the most widespread approaches give a number of five dialects. These are grouped into two main types, southern and northern, further divided as follows:
* The southern type has only one member:
** the Wallachian dialect, spoken in the southern part of Romania, in the historical regions of Muntenia, Oltenia and the southern part of Northern Dobruja, but also extending in the southern parts of Transylvania.
* The northern type consists of several dialects:
** the Moldavian dialect, spoken in the historical region of Moldavia, now split among Romania, the Republic of Moldova, and Ukraine (Bukovina and Bessarabia), as well as northern part of Northern Dobruja;
** the Banat dialect, spoken in the historical region of Banat, including parts of Serbia;
** a group of finely divided and transition-like Transylvanian varieties, among which two are most often distinguished, those of Crișana and Maramureș.

Over the last century, however, regional accents have been weakened due to mass communication and greater mobility.

Some argots and speech forms have also arisen from the Romanian language. Examples are the Gumuțeasca, spoken in Mărgău, and the Totoiana, an inverted &quot;version&quot; of Romanian spoken in Totoi.

== Classification ==
=== Romance language ===
Romanian is a Romance language, belonging to the Italic branch of the Indo-European language family, having much in common with languages such as Italian, Spanish, French and Portuguese.

Compared with the other Romance languages, the closest relative of Romanian is Italian. Romanian has had a greater share of foreign influence than some other Romance languages such as Italian in terms of vocabulary and other aspects. A 1949 study by the Italian-American linguist Mario Pei, analyzing the degree to which seven Romance languages diverged from Vulgar Latin with respect to their accent vocalization, yielded the following measurements of divergence (with higher percentages indicating greater divergence from the stressed vowels of Vulgar Latin): 

* Sardinian: 8%
* Italian: 12%
* Spanish: 20%
* Romanian: 23.5%
* Occitan: 25%
* Portuguese: 31%
* French: 44%

The study emphasized, however, that it represented only &quot;a very elementary, incomplete and tentative demonstration&quot; of how statistical methods could measure linguistic change, assigned &quot;frankly arbitrary&quot; point values to various types of change, and did not compare languages in the sample with respect to any characteristics or forms of divergence other than stressed vowels, among other caveats. 

The lexical similarity of Romanian with Italian has been estimated at 77%, followed by French at 75%, Sardinian 74%, Catalan 73%, Portuguese and Rhaeto-Romance 72%, Spanish 71%.

The Romanian vocabulary became predominantly influenced by French and, to a lesser extent, Italian in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.

=== Balkan language area ===
While most of Romanian grammar and morphology are based on Latin, there are some features that are shared only with other languages of the Balkans and not found in other Romance languages. The shared features of Romanian and the other languages of the Balkan language area (Bulgarian, Macedonian, Albanian, Greek, and Serbo-Croatian) include a suffixed definite article, the syncretism of genitive and dative case and the formation of the future and the alternation of infinitive with subjunctive constructions. According to a well-established scholarly theory, most Balkanisms could be traced back to the development of the Balkan Romance languages; these features were adopted by other languages due to language shift.

=== Slavic influence ===

Slavic influence on Romanian is especially noticeable in its vocabulary, with words of Slavic origin constituting about 10–15% of modern Romanian lexicon, and with further influences in its phonetics, morphology and syntax. The greater part of its Slavic vocabulary comes from Old Church Slavonic, which was the official written language of Wallachia and Moldavia from the 14th to the 18th century (although not understood by most people), as well as the liturgical language of the Romanian Orthodox Church. As a result, much Romanian vocabulary dealing with religion, ritual, and hierarchy is Slavic. The number of high-frequency Slavic-derived words is also believed to indicate contact or cohabitation with South Slavic tribes from around the 6th century, though it is disputed where this took place (see Origin of the Romanians). Words borrowed in this way tend to be more vernacular (compare &quot;&quot;, &quot;to end&quot;, with &quot;&quot;, &quot;to commit&quot;). It has also been argued that Slavic borrowing was a key factor in the development of (&quot;î&quot; and &quot;â&quot;) as a separate phoneme.

=== Other influences ===
Even before the 19th century, Romanian came in contact with several other languages. Notable examples of lexical borrowings include:
* German: &quot;cartof&quot; &lt; &quot;Kartoffel&quot; &quot;potato&quot;, &quot;bere&quot; &lt; &quot;Bier&quot; &quot;beer&quot;, &quot;șurub&quot; &lt; &quot;Schraube&quot; &quot;screw&quot;, &quot;turn&quot; &lt; &quot;Turm&quot; &quot;tower&quot;, &quot;ramă&quot; &lt; &quot;Rahmen&quot; &quot;frame&quot;, &quot;muștiuc&quot; &lt; &quot;Mundstück&quot; &quot;mouth piece&quot;, &quot;bormașină&quot; &lt; &quot;Bohrmaschine&quot; &quot;drilling machine&quot;, &quot;cremșnit&quot; &lt; &quot;Kremschnitte&quot; &quot;cream slice&quot;, &quot;șvaițer&quot; &lt; &quot;Schweizer&quot; &quot;Swiss cheese&quot;, &quot;șlep&quot; &lt; &quot;Schleppkahn&quot; &quot;barge&quot;, &quot;șpriț&quot; &lt; &quot;Spritzer&quot; &quot;wine with soda water&quot;, &quot;abțibild&quot; &lt; &quot;Abziehbild&quot; &quot;decal picture&quot;, &quot;șnițel&quot; &lt; &quot;(Wiener) Schnitzel&quot; &quot;a battered cutlet&quot;, &quot;șmecher&quot; &lt; &quot;Schmecker&quot; &quot;taster (not interested in buying)&quot;,&quot; șuncă&quot; &lt; dialectal &quot;Schunke&quot; (&quot;Schinken&quot;) &quot;ham&quot;, &quot;punct&quot; &lt; &quot;Punkt&quot; &quot;point&quot;, &quot;maistru&quot; &lt; &quot;Meister&quot; &quot;master&quot;, &quot;rundă&quot; &lt; &quot;Runde&quot; &quot;round&quot;.
Furthermore, during the Habsburg and, later on, Austrian rule of Banat, Transylvania, and Bukovina, a large number of words were borrowed from Austrian High German, in particular in fields such as the military, administration, social welfare, economy, etc. Subsequently, German terms have been taken out of science and technics, like: &quot;șină&quot; &lt; &quot;Schiene&quot; &quot;rail&quot;, &quot;știft&quot; &lt; &quot;Stift&quot; &quot;peg&quot;, &quot;liță&quot; &lt; &quot;Litze&quot; &quot;braid&quot;, &quot;șindrilă&quot; &lt; &quot;Schindel&quot; &quot;shingle&quot;, &quot;ștanță&quot; &lt; &quot;Stanze&quot; &quot;punch&quot;, &quot;șaibă&quot; &lt; &quot;Scheibe&quot; &quot;washer&quot;, &quot;ștangă&quot; &lt; &quot;Stange&quot; &quot;crossbar&quot;, &quot;țiglă&quot; &lt; &quot;Ziegel&quot; &quot;tile&quot;, &quot;șmirghel&quot; &lt; &quot;Schmirgelpapier&quot; &quot;emery paper&quot;;
* Greek: &quot;folos&quot; &lt; &quot;ófelos&quot; &quot;use&quot;, &quot;buzunar&quot; &lt; &quot;buzunára&quot; &quot;pocket&quot;, &quot;proaspăt&quot; &lt; &quot;prósfatos&quot; &quot;fresh&quot;, &quot;cutie&quot; &lt; &quot;cution&quot; &quot;box&quot;, &quot;portocale&quot; &lt; &quot;portokalia&quot; &quot;oranges&quot;. While Latin borrowed words of Greek origin, Romanian obtained Greek loanwords on its own. Greek entered Romanian through the &quot;apoikiai&quot; (colonies) and &quot;emporia&quot; (trade stations) founded in and around Dobruja, through the presence of Byzantine Empire in north of the Danube, through Bulgarian during Bulgarian Empires that converted Romanians to Orthodox Christianity, and after the Greek Civil War, when thousands of Greeks fled Greece.
* Hungarian: &quot;a cheltui&quot; &lt; &quot;költeni&quot; &quot;to spend&quot;, &quot;a făgădui&quot; &lt; &quot;fogadni&quot; &quot;to promise&quot;, &quot;a mântui&quot; &lt; &quot;menteni&quot; &quot;to save&quot;, &quot;oraș&quot; &lt; &quot;város&quot; &quot;city&quot;;
* Turkish: &quot;papuc&quot; &lt; &quot;pabuç&quot; &quot;slipper&quot;, &quot;ciorbă&quot; &lt; &quot;çorba&quot; &quot;wholemeal soup, sour soup&quot;, &quot;bacșiș&quot; &lt; &quot;bahşiş&quot; &quot;tip&quot; (ultimately from Persian &quot;baksheesh&quot;);
* Additionally, the Romani language has provided a series of slang words to Romanian such as: &quot;mișto&quot; &quot;good, beautiful, cool&quot; &lt; &quot;mišto&quot;, &quot;gagică&quot; &quot;girlie, girlfriend&quot; &lt; &quot;gadji&quot;, &quot;a hali&quot; &quot;to devour&quot; &lt; &quot;halo&quot;, &quot;mandea&quot; &quot;yours truly&quot; &lt; &quot;mande&quot;, &quot;a mangli&quot; &quot;to pilfer&quot; &lt; &quot;manglo&quot;.

=== French, Italian, and English loanwords ===

Since the 19th century, many literary or learned words were borrowed from the other Romance languages, especially from French and Italian (for example: &quot;desk, office&quot;, &quot;airplane&quot;, &quot;exploit&quot;). It was estimated that about 38% of words in Romanian are of French and/or Italian origin (in many cases both languages); and adding this to Romanian&#x27;s native stock, about 75%–85% of Romanian words can be traced to Latin. The use of these Romanianized French and Italian learned loans has tended to increase at the expense of previous loanwords, many of which have become rare or fallen out of use. As second or third languages, French and Italian themselves are better known in Romania than in Romania&#x27;s neighbors. Along with the switch to the Latin alphabet in Moldova, the re-latinization of the vocabulary has tended to reinforce the Latin character of the language.

In the process of lexical modernization, much of the native Latin stock have acquired doublets from other Romance languages, thus forming a further and more modern and literary lexical layer. Typically, the native word is a noun and the learned loan is an adjective. Some examples of doublets:

In the 20th century, an increasing number of English words have been borrowed (such as: &lt; jam; &lt; interview; &lt; match; &lt; manager; &lt; football; / &lt; sandwich; &lt; business; &lt; cake; &lt; WC; &lt; tramway). These words are assigned grammatical gender in Romanian and handled according to Romanian rules; thus &quot;the manager&quot; is . Some borrowings, for example in the computer field, appear to have awkward (perhaps contrived and ludicrous) &#x27;Romanisation,&#x27; such as which is the plural of the Internet term &quot;cookie&quot;; normally, the hyphen isn&#x27;t used for plural endings and definite articles.

In some cases, there are multiple variants of loanwords, such as / (masculine) and / (neuter).

=== Lexis ===


A 1988 statistic by Marius Sala is based on 2,581 words chosen on the criteria of frequency, semantic richness and productivity, which also contain words formed on the territory of the Romanian language. This statistic gives the percentages below:

* 30.33% – words inherited from Latin;
* 15.26% – academic loanwords from Latin;
* 22.12% – French loans;
* 9.18% – loans from Old Church Slavonic;
* 3.95% – loans from Italian;
* 3.91% – words formed in Romanian;
* 2.71% – words of uncertain origin;
* 2.6% – loans from Bulgarian;
* 2.47% – loans from German (including Austrian High German);
* 1.7% – loans from Greek;
* 1.43% – loans from Hungarian;
* 1.12% – loans from Russian;
* 0.96% – words inherited from the Thraco-Dacian substratum;
* 0.85% – loans from Serbian;
* 0.73% – loans from Turkish

If the analysis is restricted to a core vocabulary of 2,500 frequent, semantically rich and productive words, then the Latin inheritance comes first, followed by Romance and classical Latin neologisms, whereas the Slavic borrowings come third.

Although they are rarely used nowadays, the Romanian calendar used to have the traditional Romanian month names, unique to the language.

The longest word in Romanian is , with 44 letters, but the longest one admitted by the &quot;Dicționarul explicativ al limbii române&quot; (&quot;Explanatory Dictionary of the Romanian Language&quot;, DEX) is , with 25 letters.

== Grammar ==
Romanian nouns are characterized by gender (feminine, masculine, and neuter), and declined by number (singular and plural) and case (nominative/accusative, dative/genitive and vocative). The articles, as well as most adjectives and pronouns, agree in gender, number and case with the noun they modify.

Romanian is the only major Romance language where definite articles are enclitic: that is, attached to the end of the noun (as in The Scandinavian Languages, Bulgarian and Albanian), instead of in front (proclitic). They were formed, as in other Romance languages, from the Latin demonstrative pronouns.

As in all Romance languages, Romanian verbs are highly inflected for person, number, tense, mood, and voice. The usual word order in sentences is subject–verb–object (SVO). Romanian has four verbal conjugations which further split into ten conjugation patterns. Romanian verbs are conjugated for five moods (indicative, conditional/optative, imperative, subjunctive, and presumptive) and four non-finite forms (infinitive, gerund, supine, and participle).

== Phonology ==
Romanian has seven vowels: , , , , , and . Additionally, and may appear in some borrowed words. Arguably, the diphthongs and are also part of the phoneme set. There are twenty-two consonants. The two approximants and can appear before or after any vowel, creating a large number of glide-vowel sequences which are, strictly speaking, not diphthongs.

In final positions after consonants, a short can be deleted, surfacing only as the palatalization of the preceding consonant (e.g., ). Similarly, a deleted may prompt labialization of a preceding consonant, though this has ceased to carry any morphological meaning.

=== Phonetic changes ===
Owing to its isolation from the other Romance languages, the phonetic evolution of Romanian was quite different, but the language does share a few changes with Italian, such as → (Lat. clarus → Rom. chiàr, Ital. chiaro, Lat. clamare → Rom. chemare, Ital. chiamare) and → (Lat. *glacia (glacies) → Rom. ghéață, Ital. ghiaccia, ghiaccio, Lat. *ungla (ungula) → Rom. unghie, Ital. unghia), although this did not go as far as it did in Italian with other similar clusters (Rom. plàce, Ital. piace).

Another similarity with Italian is the change from or to or (Lat. pax, pacem → Rom. and Ital. pace, Lat. dulcem → Rom. dulce, Ital. dolce, Lat. circus → Rom. cerc, Ital. circo) and or to or (Lat. gelu → Rom. gèr, Ital. gelo, Lat. marginem → Rom. and Ital. margine, Lat. gemere → Rom. gèm (gemere), Ital. gemere).

There are also a few changes shared with Dalmatian, such as (probably phonetically ) → (Lat. cognatus → Rom. cumnat, Dalm. comnut) and → in some situations (Lat. coxa → Rom. cópsă, Dalm. copsa).

Among the notable phonetic changes are:
* diphthongization of e and o → ea and oa, before ă (or e as well, in the case of o) in the next syllable:
:* Lat. cera → Rom. céră (wax)
:* Lat. sole → Rom. sóre (sun)
* iotation → in the beginning of the word
:* Lat. herba → Rom. ĭarbă (grass, herb)
* velar → labial before alveolar consonants and (e.g. ngu → mb):
:* Lat. octo → Rom. opt (eight)
:* Lat. lingua → Rom. lìmbă (tongue, language)
:* Lat. signum → Rom. sèmn (sign)
:* Lat. coxa → Rom. cópsă (thigh)
* rhotacism → between vowels
:* Lat. caelum → Rom. cèr (sky)
* Alveolars assibilated to when before short or long 
:* Lat. deus → Rom. ḑèŭ → zèŭ (god)
:* Lat. tenem → Rom. ține (hold)

Romanian has entirely lost Latin (qu), turning it either into (Lat. quattuor → Rom. &quot;pàtru&quot;, &quot;four&quot;; cf. It. &quot;quattro&quot;) or (Lat. quando → Rom. &quot;când&quot;, &quot;when&quot;; Lat. quale → Rom. &quot;càre&quot;, &quot;which&quot;).

== Writing system ==
The first written record about a Romance language spoken in the Middle Ages in the Balkans is from 587. A Vlach muleteer accompanying the Byzantine army noticed that the load was falling from one of the animals and shouted to a companion &quot;Torna, torna, fratre!&quot; (meaning &quot;Return, return, brother!&quot;). Theophanes Confessor recorded it as part of a 6th-century military expedition by Comentiolus and Priscus against the Avars and Slovenes.

The oldest surviving written text in Romanian is a letter from late June 1521, in which Neacșu of Câmpulung wrote to the mayor of Brașov about an imminent attack of the Turks. It was written using the Cyrillic alphabet, like most early Romanian writings. The earliest surviving writing in Latin script was a late 16th-century Transylvanian text which was written with the Hungarian alphabet conventions.

In the 18th century, Transylvanian scholars noted the Latin origin of Romanian and adapted the Latin alphabet to the Romanian language, using some orthographic rules from Italian, recognized as Romanian&#x27;s closest relative. The Cyrillic alphabet remained in (gradually decreasing) use until 1860, when Romanian writing was first officially regulated.

In the Soviet Republic of Moldova, the Russian-derived Moldovan Cyrillic alphabet was used until 1989, when the Romanian Latin alphabet was introduced; in the breakaway territory of Transnistria the Cyrillic alphabet remains in use.
=== Romanian alphabet ===

The Romanian alphabet is as follows:

K, Q, W and Y, not part of the native alphabet; they were officially introduced in the Romanian alphabet in 1982 and are mostly used to write loanwords like &quot;kilogram&quot;, &quot;quasar&quot;, &quot;watt&quot;, and &quot;yoga&quot;.

The Romanian alphabet is based on the Latin script with five additional letters , , , , . Formerly, there were as many as 12 additional letters, but some of them were abolished in subsequent reforms. Also, until the early 20th century, a breve marker was used, which survives only in ă.

Today the Romanian alphabet is largely phonemic. However, the letters &quot;â&quot; and &quot;î&quot; both represent the same close central unrounded vowel . &quot;Â&quot; is used only inside words; &quot;î&quot; is used at the beginning or the end of non-compound words and in the middle of compound words. Another exception from a completely phonetic writing system is the fact that vowels and their respective semivowels are not distinguished in writing. In dictionaries the distinction is marked by separating the entry word into syllables for words containing a hiatus.

Stressed vowels also are not marked in writing, except very rarely in cases where by misplacing the stress a word might change its meaning and if the meaning is not obvious from the context. For example, &quot;trei copíi&quot; means &quot;three children&quot; while &quot;trei cópii&quot; means &quot;three copies&quot;.

=== Pronunciation ===

* is not silent like in other Romance languages such as Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, Catalan and French, but represents the phoneme , except in the digraphs /k/ and /g/ (see below)
* represents , as in French, Catalan or Portuguese (the sound spelled with &quot;s&quot; in the English words &quot;vision, pleasure, treasure&quot;).
* There are two letters with a comma below, Ș and Ț, which represent the sounds and . However, the allographs with a cedilla instead of a comma, &quot;Ş&quot; and &quot;Ţ&quot;, became widespread when pre-Unicode and early Unicode character sets did not include the standard form.
* represents the schwa, .
* and both represent the sound . In rapid speech (for example in the name of the country) the sound may sound similar to a casual listener to the short schwa sound (in fact, Aromanian does merge the two, writing them ) but careful speakers will distinguish the sound. The nearest equivalent is the vowel in the last syllable of the word &quot;roses&quot; for some English dialects which distinguish it from &quot;Rosa&#x27;s&quot; or the second syllable of the word &quot;rhythm&quot;. It is also roughly equivalent to European Portuguese , the Polish or the Russian .
* The letter &quot;e&quot; generally represents the mid front unrounded vowel , somewhat like in the English word &quot;set&quot;. However, the letter is pronounced as ([j] sounds like &#x27;y&#x27; in &#x27;you&#x27;) when it is the first letter of any form of the verb &quot;to be&quot;, or of a personal pronoun, for instance &quot;is&quot; and &quot;he&quot;. This addition of the semivowel does not occur in more recent loans and their derivatives, such as &quot;era&quot;, &quot;electric&quot; etc. Some words (such as &quot;hare&quot;, formerly spelled ) are now written with the initial to indicate the semivowel.
* represents either the phoneme sequence as in = expression, or as in = example, as in English.
* As in Italian, the letters and represent the affricates and before and , and and elsewhere. When and are followed by vowels and (or their corresponding semivowels or the final ) the digraphs and are used instead of and , as shown in the table below. Unlike Italian, however, Romanian uses and to write and before a central vowel instead of and .

=== Punctuation and capitalization ===
Uses of punctuation peculiar to Romanian are:
* Quotation marks use one of the Polish quotation formats, specifically „quote «inside» quote”, that is, „…” for a normal quotation, and «…» for a quotation inside a quotation.
* Proper quotations which span multiple paragraphs do not start each paragraph with quotation marks; quotation marks are placed only at the beginning and the end of the entire quotation, regardless of how many paragraphs it contains.
* Dialogues use quotation dashes.
* The Oxford comma before &quot;and&quot; is considered incorrect (&quot;red, yellow and blue&quot; is the proper format).
* Punctuation signs which follow a text in parentheses always follow the final bracket.
* In titles, only the first letter of the first word is capitalized, the rest of the title using sentence capitalization (with all its rules: proper names are capitalized as usual, etc.).
* Names of months and days are not capitalized ( &quot;January&quot;, &quot;Thursday&quot;).
* Adjectives derived from proper names are not capitalized ( &quot;Germany&quot;, but &quot;German&quot;).

=== Academy spelling recommendations ===
In 1993, new spelling rules were proposed by the Romanian Academy. In 2000, the Moldovan Academy recommended adopting the same spelling rules, and in 2010 the Academy launched a schedule for the transition to the new rules that was intended to be completed by publications in 2011.

On 17 October 2016, the Moldovan minister of education signed Order No. 872, adopting the revised spelling rules as recommended by the Moldovan Academy of Sciences, and giving the following two school years as a transition period. Thus the spelling used by institutions under Moldova&#x27;s ministry of education has been brought in line with the Romanian Academy&#x27;s 1993 recommendation. This order, however, did not apply to other government institutions, and Law 3462 of 1989 (which provided for the means of transliterating Cyrillic to Latin) has not been amended to reflect the ministry of education&#x27;s changes either; thus, most Moldovan government institutions, along with most Moldovans, prefer to use the spelling adopted in 1989 (when the use of Latin script became official).

=== Examples of Romanian text ===
: &quot;All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.&quot;
::&quot;(Universal Declaration of Human Rights)&quot;

The sentence in contemporary Romanian. Words inherited directly from Latin are highlighted:
: Toate ființele umane se nasc libere și egale în demnitate și în drepturi. Ele sunt înzestrate cu rațiune și conștiință și trebuie să se comporte unele față de altele în spiritul fraternității.

The same sentence, with French and Italian loanwords highlighted instead:
: Toate ființele umane se nasc libere și egale în demnitate și în drepturi. Ele sunt înzestrate cu rațiune și conștiință și trebuie să se comporte unele față de altele în spiritul fraternității.

The sentence rewritten to exclude French and Italian loanwords. Slavic loanwords are highlighted:
: Toate ființele omenești se nasc slobode și deopotrivă în destoinicie și în drepturi. Ele sunt înzestrate cu înțelegere și cuget și trebuie să se poarte unele față de altele în duh de frățietate.

The sentence rewritten to exclude all loanwords. The meaning is unchanged:
: Toate ființele omenești se nasc nesupuse și asemenea în prețuire și în drepturi. Ele sunt înzestrate cu înțelegere și cuget și se cuvine să se poarte unele față de altele frățește.

== See also ==

* Legacy of the Roman Empire
* Neacșu&#x27;s letter
* Eastern Romance languages
* Romanian lexis
* Romanian phonology
* Romanian grammar
* Romanian literature
* Romanian Cyrillic alphabet
* Romanian transitional alphabet
* Tărtăria tablets
* Moldova–Romania relations
*Romanian dialects
* Controversy over ethnic and linguistic identity in Moldova

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==
* SAMPA for Romanian
* Romanian Reference Grammar, by Dana Cojocaru, University of Bucharest (183 pages) – 4.6 MB – pdf
* USA Foreign Service Institute (FSI) Romanian basic course
* Romanian basic lexicon at the Global Lexicostatistical Database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="0" end="8" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="29" end="38" title="Romanian language" label="Roumanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="86" end="93" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="98" end="105" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q147576" start="131" end="146" title="Eastern Romance languages" label="Eastern Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="161" end="178" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q37560" start="237" end="249" title="Vulgar Latin" label="Vulgar Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q112608" start="275" end="290" title="Italo-Western languages" label="Western Romance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="466" end="479" title="#Dialects" label="Daco-Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q29316" start="523" end="532" title="Aromanian language" label="Aromanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13358" start="534" end="550" title="Megleno-Romanian language" label="Megleno-Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33622" start="556" end="570" title="Istro-Romanian language" label="Istro-Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q61566" start="595" end="612" title="minority language" label="minority language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553479" start="673" end="681" title="Romanians in Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q836699" start="683" end="690" title="Romanians in Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015980" start="692" end="698" title="Romanians in Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025325" start="703" end="710" title="Romanians in Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091237" start="730" end="747" title="Romanian diaspora" label="Romanian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="798" end="812" title="first language" label="first language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36392" start="848" end="856" title="Moldovan language" label="Moldovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231512" start="888" end="919" title="Constitutional Court of Moldova" label="Constitutional Court of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q555809" start="1019" end="1038" title="Moldovan Parliament" label="Moldovan Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q15071069" start="1190" end="1200" title="Maia Sandu" label="Maia Sandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="1290" end="1304" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q843264" start="1319" end="1331" title="Jireček Line" label="Jireček Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="1335" end="1354" title="Classical antiquity" label="Classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330426" start="1836" end="1851" title="Substrate in Romanian" label="native dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q301691" start="1949" end="1964" title="Common Romanian" label="Common Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q206577" start="1971" end="1985" title="proto-language" label="proto-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q632976" start="2024" end="2040" title="Slavic migrations to Southeastern Europe" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q29316" start="2071" end="2080" title="Aromanian language" label="Aromanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13358" start="2082" end="2098" title="Megleno-Romanian language" label="Megleno-Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33622" start="2100" end="2114" title="Istro-Romanian language" label="Istro-Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35499" start="2409" end="2428" title="Old Church Slavonic" label="Old Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="2468" end="2482" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q253139" start="2539" end="2547" title="Neacșu&amp;#x27;s letter" label="a letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="2569" end="2585" title="Cyrillic script" label="Cyrillic letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="2832" end="2846" title="Latin script" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248221" start="2937" end="2949" title="Neo-Latin" label="Modern Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="2960" end="2977" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="3076" end="3090" title="Late antiquity" label="Late Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362627" start="3096" end="3103" title="Romanian lexis" label="lexicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217537" start="3231" end="3244" title="Thraco-Dacian" label="Thraco-Dacian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="3246" end="3262" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35499" start="3274" end="3284" title="Old Church Slavonic" label="Old Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="3286" end="3293" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="3295" end="3304" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="3306" end="3315" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="3321" end="3328" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="3331" end="3336" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="3338" end="3347" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="3349" end="3355" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="3357" end="3364" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="3435" end="3455" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="3471" end="3477" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="3550" end="3557" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499736" start="3790" end="3800" title="vocabulary" label="vocabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3879" end="3884" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="3899" end="3904" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="3925" end="3931" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q37560" start="4048" end="4060" title="Vulgar Latin" label="Vulgar Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="4075" end="4089" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="4094" end="4113" title="Southeastern Europe" label="Southeastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q843264" start="4127" end="4139" title="Jireček Line" label="Jireček Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q33622" start="4381" end="4395" title="Istro-Romanian language" label="Istro-Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="4447" end="4453" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q29316" start="4513" end="4522" title="Aromanian language" label="Aromanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13358" start="4527" end="4543" title="Megleno-Romanian language" label="Megleno-Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q843264" start="4665" end="4677" title="Jireček Line" label="Jireček Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q592030" start="5879" end="5893" title="Grigore Ureche" label="Grigore Ureche"/>
<link wikidata="Q253139" start="6325" end="6345" title="Neacșu&amp;#x27;s letter" label="Neacșu&amp;#x27;s letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q727635" start="6379" end="6405" title="Romanian Cyrillic alphabet" label="Romanian Cyrillic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q43065" start="6578" end="6587" title="watermark" label="watermark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6603" end="6620" title="Hurmuzaki Psalter" label="Hurmuzaki Psalter"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="7183" end="7194" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="7199" end="7208" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053994" start="7259" end="7273" title="Săpânța" label="Peri Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975458" start="7277" end="7286" title="Maramureș" label="Maramureș"/>
<link wikidata="Q146456" start="7336" end="7345" title="Mukacheve" label="Mukacheve"/>
<link wikidata="Q11732757" start="7490" end="7502" title="Old Romanian" label="Old Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q301691" start="7562" end="7577" title="Common Romanian" label="Common Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="7722" end="7727" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q208629" start="7732" end="7739" title="Oltenia" label="Oltenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q115856882" start="8332" end="8377" title="Elementa linguae daco-romanae sive valachicae" label="Elementa linguae daco-romanae sive valachicae"/>
<link wikidata="Q653549" start="8409" end="8426" title="Samuil Micu-Klein" label="Samuil Micu-Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q774046" start="8445" end="8460" title="Gheorghe Șincai" label="Gheorghe Șincai"/>
<link wikidata="Q990355" start="8482" end="8502" title="Transylvanian School" label="Transylvanian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="8517" end="8522" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q471104" start="8569" end="8579" title="Romanian phonology" label="phonetical"/>
<link wikidata="Q187098" start="8584" end="8595" title="Romanian grammar" label="grammatical"/>
<link wikidata="Q107151277" start="9166" end="9181" title="Re-latinization of Romanian" label="re-latinization"/>
<link wikidata="Q990355" start="9242" end="9262" title="Transylvanian School" label="Transylvanian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q952971" start="9286" end="9300" title="Gheorghe Lazăr" label="Gheorghe Lazăr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071370" start="9344" end="9365" title="Ion Heliade Rădulescu" label="Ion Heliade Rădulescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12726101" start="9477" end="9494" title="Curierul Românesc" label="Curierul Românesc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889425" start="9499" end="9516" title="Albina Românească" label="Albina Românească"/>
<link wikidata="Q268416" start="9690" end="9702" title="belletristic" label="belletristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918444" start="9757" end="9771" title="Dacia Literară" label="Dacia Literară"/>
<link wikidata="Q319759" start="9794" end="9813" title="Mihail Kogălniceanu" label="Mihail Kogălniceanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q263985" start="9919" end="9939" title="Romantic nationalism" label="Romantic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="10020" end="10039" title="Revolutions of 1848" label="Revolutions of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q352004" start="10233" end="10250" title="Vasile Alecsandri" label="Vasile Alecsandri"/>
<link wikidata="Q937570" start="10252" end="10272" title="Grigore Alexandrescu" label="Grigore Alexandrescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q513394" start="10274" end="10290" title="Nicolae Bălcescu" label="Nicolae Bălcescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q897286" start="10292" end="10307" title="Timotei Cipariu" label="Timotei Cipariu"/>
<link wikidata="Q727635" start="10406" end="10432" title="Romanian Cyrillic alphabet" label="Romanian Cyrillic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031312" start="10560" end="10597" title="unification of Moldavia and Wallachia" label="unification of Moldavia and Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092785" start="10711" end="10724" title="C. A. Rosetti" label="C. A. Rosetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q901677" start="10962" end="10978" title="Romanian Academy" label="Romanian Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184935" start="11472" end="11486" title="Mihai Eminescu" label="Mihai Eminescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q315132" start="11488" end="11506" title="Ion Luca Caragiale" label="Ion Luca Caragiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q204810" start="11508" end="11519" title="Ion Creangă (writer)" label="Ion Creangă"/>
<link wikidata="Q961107" start="11521" end="11533" title="Ioan Slavici" label="Ioan Slavici"/>
<link wikidata="Q187098" start="11825" end="11841" title="Romanian grammar" label="Romanian grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q849286" start="11889" end="11923" title="Treaty of Bucharest (1812)" label="annexation of Bessarabia by Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="12019" end="12029" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392518" start="12103" end="12126" title="Gavril Bănulescu-Bodoni" label="Gavril Bănulescu-Bodoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="12285" end="12297" title="bilingualism" label="bilingualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="12936" end="12946" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995243" start="13035" end="13055" title="1923 Constitution of Romania" label="Constitution of 1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q188078" start="13128" end="13138" title="declension" label="declension"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="13152" end="13157" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q128234" start="13166" end="13170" title="Grammatical case" label="case"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="13234" end="13244" title="nominative" label="nominative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146078" start="13245" end="13255" title="accusative" label="accusative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="13257" end="13265" title="genitive" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q145599" start="13266" end="13272" title="dative case" label="dative"/>
<link wikidata="Q185077" start="13293" end="13301" title="vocative" label="vocative"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="13343" end="13349" title="Grammatical gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="13506" end="13510" title="verb" label="verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q625420" start="13577" end="13584" title="perfect (grammar)" label="perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q501405" start="13589" end="13601" title="future tense" label="future tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="13658" end="13675" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="13738" end="13743" title="Grammatical tense" label="tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="13813" end="13820" title="Central Europe" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="13822" end="13835" title="Southeast Europe" label="South-Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="13841" end="13855" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q164819" start="14355" end="14363" title="Gagauzia" label="Gagauzia"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="14368" end="14380" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="14427" end="14459" title="Vojvodina" label="Autonomous Province of Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855882" start="14550" end="14562" title="Timok Valley" label="Timok Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q168856" start="14574" end="14584" title="Chernivtsi Oblast" label="Chernivtsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171852" start="14589" end="14594" title="Odesa Oblast" label="Odesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q171308" start="14595" end="14601" title="oblast" label="oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q214938" start="14618" end="14623" title="Gyula, Hungary" label="Gyula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291330" start="15391" end="15414" title="Constitution of Romania" label="Constitution of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q15041766" start="16063" end="16084" title="Romanian Language Day" label="Romanian Language Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830" start="16108" end="16117" title="31 August" label="31 August"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895819" start="16213" end="16240" title="Moldovan Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q113450299" start="16287" end="16310" title="Constitution of Moldova" label="Constitution of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q36392" start="16381" end="16389" title="Moldovan language" label="Moldovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231512" start="16427" end="16458" title="Constitutional Court of Moldova" label="Constitutional Court of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274360" start="16832" end="16841" title="-onym" label="glottonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q170895" start="16993" end="17006" title="Moldavian SSR" label="Moldavian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="17446" end="17455" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739149" start="17477" end="17488" title="2014 Moldovan Census" label="2014 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="17720" end="17728" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287641" start="18219" end="18257" title="Constitution of the Republic of Serbia" label="Constitution of the Republic of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="18492" end="18501" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="18537" end="18553" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="18630" end="18635" title="Croatian language" label="Croat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="18637" end="18646" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="18648" end="18654" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q26245" start="18669" end="18683" title="Rusyn language" label="Rusyn language"/>
<link wikidata="Q648863" start="19119" end="19127" title="Alibunar" label="Alibunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q541470" start="19129" end="19139" title="Bela Crkva, Banat" label="Bela Crkva"/>
<link wikidata="Q394134" start="19169" end="19176" title="Žitište" label="Žitište"/>
<link wikidata="Q201125" start="19211" end="19220" title="Zrenjanin" label="Zrenjanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q771826" start="19253" end="19261" title="Kovačica" label="Kovačica"/>
<link wikidata="Q617416" start="19286" end="19291" title="Kovin" label="Kovin"/>
<link wikidata="Q775090" start="19313" end="19322" title="Plandište" label="Plandište"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084852" start="19351" end="19357" title="Sečanj" label="Sečanj"/>
<link wikidata="Q209329" start="19404" end="19409" title="Vršac" label="Vršac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194858" start="19477" end="19487" title="Vojvodinci" label="Vojvodinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q681158" start="19513" end="19521" title="Markovac (Vršac)" label="Markovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q732354" start="19546" end="19552" title="Straža, Vršac" label="Straža"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091309" start="19575" end="19583" title="Mali Žam" label="Mali Žam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112223" start="19608" end="19621" title="Malo Središte" label="Malo Središte"/>
<link wikidata="Q430770" start="19652" end="19657" title="Mesić (Vršac)" label="Mesić"/>
<link wikidata="Q279460" start="19680" end="19688" title="Jablanka" label="Jablanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063479" start="19713" end="19719" title="Sočica" label="Sočica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091378" start="19743" end="19751" title="Ritiševo" label="Ritiševo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038215" start="19775" end="19781" title="Orešac (Vršac)" label="Orešac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091353" start="19807" end="19814" title="Kuštilj" label="Kuštilj"/>
<link wikidata="Q126010" start="19983" end="19999" title="Vlachs of Serbia" label="Vlachs of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025325" start="20115" end="20124" title="Romanians in Ukraine" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q168856" start="20194" end="20204" title="Chernivtsi Oblast" label="Chernivtsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171852" start="20206" end="20211" title="Odesa Oblast" label="Odesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q170213" start="20216" end="20227" title="Zakarpattia Oblast" label="Zakarpattia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171308" start="20228" end="20234" title="oblast" label="oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551183" start="20365" end="20389" title="University of Chernivtsi" label="University of Chernivtsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2128886" start="20512" end="20524" title="Hertsa Raion" label="Hertsa Raion"/>
<link wikidata="Q168856" start="20568" end="20585" title="Chernivtsi Oblast" label="Chernivtsi Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q170213" start="20590" end="20608" title="Zakarpattia Oblast" label="Zakarpattia Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184821" start="20705" end="20740" title="legislation on languages in Ukraine" label="legislation on languages in Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q123209" start="20895" end="20906" title="Latin Union" label="Latin Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="20915" end="20929" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q130321" start="21052" end="21063" title="Mount Athos" label="Mount Athos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091460" start="21103" end="21112" title="Prodromos (Mount Athos)" label="Prodromos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479725" start="21117" end="21127" title="Lakkoskiti" label="Lakkoskiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="21158" end="21170" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q570411" start="21263" end="21317" title="Moldovan Cyrillic alphabet" label="this variety of Moldovan is written in Cyrillic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="21442" end="21451" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740485" start="21498" end="21525" title="Romanian Cultural Institute" label="Romanian Cultural Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q214938" start="21726" end="21731" title="Gyula, Hungary" label="Gyula"/>
<link wikidata="Q150352" start="21767" end="21783" title="foreign language" label="foreign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562" start="22233" end="22239" title="O-Zone" label="O-Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q161407" start="22265" end="22282" title="Dragostea Din Tei" label="Dragostea Din Tei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396344" start="22304" end="22313" title="Numa Numa (video)" label="Numa Numa"/>
<link wikidata="Q416934" start="22353" end="22359" title="Akcent" label="Akcent"/>
<link wikidata="Q343900" start="22427" end="22432" title="Activ (band)" label="Activ"/>
<link wikidata="Q669865" start="22482" end="22492" title="DJ Project" label="DJ Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q683473" start="22521" end="22538" title="SunStroke Project" label="SunStroke Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672585" start="22567" end="22579" title="Run Away (SunStroke Project and Olia Tira song)" label="Epic Sax Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453" start="22591" end="22605" title="Alexandra Stan" label="Alexandra Stan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508133" start="22637" end="22649" title="Mr. Saxobeat" label="Mr. Saxobeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12349" start="22661" end="22665" title="Inna (singer)" label="Inna"/>
<link wikidata="Q238245" start="22706" end="22734" title="4 Months, 3 Weeks and 2 Days" label="4 Months, 3 Weeks and 2 Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197442" start="22748" end="22774" title="The Death of Mr. Lazarescu" label="The Death of Mr. Lazarescu"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22788" end="22811" title="12:08 East of Bucharest" label="12:08 East of Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933985" start="22827" end="22851" title="California Dreamin&amp;#x27; (film)" label="California Dreamin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="22890" end="22910" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562" start="23008" end="23014" title="O-Zone" label="O-Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17496771" start="23272" end="23303" title="Doina and Ion Aldea Teodorovici" label="Doina and Ion Aldea Teodorovici"/>
<link wikidata="Q301691" start="23488" end="23503" title="Common Romanian" label="Common Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q29316" start="23505" end="23514" title="Aromanian language" label="Aromanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13358" start="23516" end="23532" title="Megleno-Romanian language" label="Megleno-Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33622" start="23538" end="23552" title="Istro-Romanian language" label="Istro-Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q653549" start="23680" end="23691" title="Samuil Micu" label="Samuil Micu"/>
<link wikidata="Q774046" start="23696" end="23711" title="Gheorghe Șincai" label="Gheorghe Șincai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="23761" end="23767" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="23849" end="23854" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q173082" start="23867" end="23872" title="Dacia" label="Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="23925" end="23932" title="Dobruja" label="Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855882" start="23938" end="23950" title="Timok Valley" label="Timok Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q215844" start="24427" end="24444" title="dialect continuum" label="dialect continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25975639" start="25011" end="25029" title="Wallachian dialect" label="Wallachian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q207388" start="25100" end="25108" title="Muntenia" label="Muntenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208629" start="25110" end="25117" title="Oltenia" label="Oltenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673270" start="25143" end="25159" title="Northern Dobruja" label="Northern Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="25205" end="25217" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895759" start="25276" end="25293" title="Moldavian dialect" label="Moldavian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="25330" end="25338" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="25403" end="25411" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="25416" end="25426" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673270" start="25457" end="25473" title="Northern Dobruja" label="Northern Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853970" start="25482" end="25495" title="Banat Romanian dialect" label="Banat dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="25532" end="25537" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q18537505" start="25615" end="25638" title="Transylvanian varieties of Romanian" label="Transylvanian varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186975" start="25695" end="25702" title="Crișana dialect" label="Crișana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754756" start="25707" end="25716" title="Maramureș dialect" label="Maramureș"/>
<link wikidata="Q33005" start="25841" end="25846" title="argot" label="argot"/>
<link wikidata="Q106463806" start="25927" end="25937" title="Gumuțeasca" label="Gumuțeasca"/>
<link wikidata="Q16426214" start="25949" end="25955" title="Mărgău" label="Mărgău"/>
<link wikidata="Q106471940" start="25965" end="25973" title="Totoiana" label="Totoiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16425356" start="26029" end="26034" title="Totoi" label="Totoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131848" start="26132" end="26145" title="Italic languages" label="Italic branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="26153" end="26182" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q282523" start="26551" end="26560" title="Mario Pei" label="Mario Pei"/>
<link wikidata="Q33976" start="26837" end="26846" title="Sardinian language" label="Sardinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="26901" end="26908" title="Occitan language" label="Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4257687" start="27371" end="27389" title="lexical similarity" label="lexical similarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q515593" start="27512" end="27526" title="Rhaeto-Romance languages" label="Rhaeto-Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="27863" end="27870" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q637288" start="27976" end="27996" title="balkan sprachbund" label="Balkan language area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="27998" end="28007" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="28009" end="28019" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="28021" end="28029" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="28042" end="28056" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q103184" start="28077" end="28093" title="Article (grammar)" label="definite article"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004759" start="28099" end="28109" title="syncretism (linguistics)" label="syncretism"/>
<link wikidata="Q266961" start="28429" end="28443" title="language shift" label="language shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q35499" start="28749" end="28768" title="Old Church Slavonic" label="Old Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="28813" end="28822" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="28827" end="28835" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q839470" start="28927" end="28946" title="Sacred language" label="liturgical language"/>
<link wikidata="Q181901" start="28954" end="28978" title="Romanian Orthodox Church" label="Romanian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q273824" start="29182" end="29194" title="South Slavs" label="South Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062762" start="29280" end="29303" title="Origin of the Romanians" label="Origin of the Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="29579" end="29586" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="29749" end="29755" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="31065" end="31073" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="31089" end="31097" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="31106" end="31111" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="31113" end="31125" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="31131" end="31139" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q306626" start="31184" end="31204" title="Austrian German" label="Austrian High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="31952" end="31957" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q828047" start="32412" end="32419" title="apoikia" label="apoikia"/>
<link wikidata="Q655593" start="32448" end="32455" title="Emporium (antiquity)" label="emporia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="32501" end="32508" title="Dobruja" label="Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="32534" end="32550" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="32567" end="32573" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="32583" end="32592" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="32740" end="32749" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="33018" end="33025" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q305459" start="33260" end="33269" title="baksheesh" label="baksheesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q13201" start="33298" end="33313" title="Romani language" label="Romani language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143834" start="33509" end="33514" title="Gadjo (non-Romani)" label="gadji"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="34779" end="34796" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q253854" start="35998" end="36003" title="Classical Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="36025" end="36034" title="loanwords" label="loanwords"/>
<link wikidata="Q253854" start="36040" end="36045" title="Classical Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="36058" end="36064" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q35499" start="36093" end="36112" title="Old Church Slavonic" label="Old Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="36135" end="36142" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="36237" end="36246" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="36269" end="36275" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q306626" start="36287" end="36307" title="Austrian German" label="Austrian High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="36330" end="36335" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="36358" end="36367" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="36390" end="36397" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217537" start="36434" end="36447" title="Classification of Thracian" label="Thraco-Dacian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="36481" end="36488" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="36511" end="36518" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362642" start="36809" end="36826" title="Romanian calendar" label="Romanian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q85976916" start="36907" end="36931" title="longest word in Romanian" label="longest word in Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044008" start="36996" end="37035" title="Dicționarul explicativ al limbii române" label="Dicționarul explicativ al limbii române"/>
<link wikidata="Q188078" start="37228" end="37236" title="Declension" label="declined"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="37279" end="37289" title="nominative case" label="nominative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146078" start="37290" end="37300" title="accusative case" label="accusative"/>
<link wikidata="Q145599" start="37302" end="37308" title="dative case" label="dative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="37309" end="37317" title="genitive case" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q185077" start="37322" end="37330" title="vocative case" label="vocative"/>
<link wikidata="Q829903" start="37388" end="37393" title="agreement (linguistics)" label="agree"/>
<link wikidata="Q103184" start="37499" end="37516" title="Article (grammar)" label="definite articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q213458" start="37521" end="37529" title="enclitic" label="enclitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q106085" start="37579" end="37605" title="North Germanic languages" label="The Scandinavian Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="37607" end="37616" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="37621" end="37629" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q213458" start="37653" end="37662" title="proclitic" label="proclitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362670" start="37783" end="37797" title="Romanian verbs" label="Romanian verbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q651641" start="37900" end="37919" title="subject–verb–object" label="subject–verb–object"/>
<link wikidata="Q474628" start="37952" end="37964" title="Grammatical conjugation" label="conjugations"/>
<link wikidata="Q184932" start="38055" end="38060" title="mood (linguistics)" label="moods"/>
<link wikidata="Q11997264" start="38062" end="38072" title="indicative mood" label="indicative"/>
<link wikidata="Q625581" start="38074" end="38085" title="conditional mood" label="conditional"/>
<link wikidata="Q527205" start="38086" end="38094" title="optative mood" label="optative"/>
<link wikidata="Q22716" start="38096" end="38106" title="imperative mood" label="imperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q473746" start="38108" end="38119" title="subjunctive mood" label="subjunctive"/>
<link wikidata="Q362703" start="38125" end="38136" title="presumptive mood" label="presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q179230" start="38165" end="38175" title="infinitive" label="infinitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923028" start="38177" end="38183" title="gerund" label="gerund"/>
<link wikidata="Q548470" start="38185" end="38191" title="supine" label="supine"/>
<link wikidata="Q814722" start="38197" end="38207" title="participle" label="participle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="38246" end="38251" title="vowel" label="vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="38307" end="38321" title="Loanword" label="borrowed words"/>
<link wikidata="Q51606" start="38427" end="38438" title="Approximant consonant" label="approximant"/>
<link wikidata="Q102532" start="38565" end="38574" title="diphthong" label="diphthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808790" start="38661" end="38675" title="Palatalization (phonetics)" label="palatalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147016" start="38745" end="38758" title="labialization" label="labialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q35527" start="39721" end="39730" title="Dalmatian language" label="Dalmatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252743" start="40087" end="40095" title="iotation" label="iotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q27794621" start="40382" end="40391" title="Rhotacism (sound change)" label="rhotacism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="40885" end="40901" title="Romance language" label="Romance language"/>
<link wikidata="Q297584" start="41172" end="41192" title="Theophanes Confessor" label="Theophanes Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q716400" start="41253" end="41264" title="Comentiolus" label="Comentiolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q311731" start="41269" end="41276" title="Priscus" label="Priscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q736296" start="41408" end="41417" title="Câmpulung" label="Câmpulung"/>
<link wikidata="Q82174" start="41440" end="41446" title="Brașov" label="Brașov"/>
<link wikidata="Q727635" start="41511" end="41528" title="Romanian Cyrillic alphabet" label="Cyrillic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="41636" end="41648" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q935857" start="41682" end="41700" title="Hungarian alphabet" label="Hungarian alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="41736" end="41748" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="41810" end="41824" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3886299" start="41886" end="41893" title="Italian alphabet" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q170895" start="42078" end="42104" title="Moldavian SSR" label="Soviet Republic of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q570411" start="42126" end="42152" title="Moldovan Cyrillic alphabet" label="Moldovan Cyrillic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="42647" end="42659" title="Latin script" label="Latin script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033526" start="42936" end="42944" title="Phonemic orthography" label="phonemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q598968" start="43023" end="43052" title="close central unrounded vowel" label="close central unrounded vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="43282" end="43287" title="vowel" label="vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q757410" start="43310" end="43319" title="semivowel" label="semivowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="43431" end="43439" title="syllable" label="syllable"/>
<link wikidata="Q750663" start="43464" end="43470" title="Hiatus (linguistics)" label="hiatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q396845" start="44195" end="44196" title="Ș" label="Ș"/>
<link wikidata="Q423402" start="44201" end="44202" title="Ț" label="Ț"/>
<link wikidata="Q387915" start="44302" end="44303" title="Ş" label="Ş"/>
<link wikidata="Q181122" start="44320" end="44321" title="Ţ" label="Ţ"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="44356" end="44363" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q184759" start="44382" end="44396" title="character sets" label="character sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154123" start="44449" end="44454" title="schwa" label="schwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154123" start="44610" end="44615" title="schwa" label="schwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q29316" start="44632" end="44641" title="Aromanian language" label="Aromanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q734206" start="45079" end="45098" title="Mid front" label="mid front unrounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q757410" start="45899" end="45908" title="semivowel" label="semivowel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46212" end="46236" title="Quotation mark, non-English usage#Polish" label="Polish quotation formats"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46606" end="46622" title="Quotation mark, non-English usage#Quotation dash" label="quotation dashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4150071" start="46630" end="46642" title="serial comma" label="Oxford comma"/>
<link wikidata="Q901677" start="47314" end="47330" title="Romanian Academy" label="Romanian Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="48571" end="48608" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="48948" end="48957" title="loanwords" label="loanwords"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517330" start="49748" end="49774" title="Legacy of the Roman Empire" label="Legacy of the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q253139" start="49777" end="49797" title="Neacșu&amp;#x27;s letter" label="Neacșu&amp;#x27;s letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q147576" start="49800" end="49825" title="Eastern Romance languages" label="Eastern Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362627" start="49828" end="49842" title="Romanian lexis" label="Romanian lexis"/>
<link wikidata="Q471104" start="49845" end="49863" title="Romanian phonology" label="Romanian phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q187098" start="49866" end="49882" title="Romanian grammar" label="Romanian grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077256" start="49885" end="49904" title="Romanian literature" label="Romanian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q727635" start="49907" end="49933" title="Romanian Cyrillic alphabet" label="Romanian Cyrillic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q28726332" start="49936" end="49966" title="Romanian transitional alphabet" label="Romanian transitional alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q20798993" start="49969" end="49985" title="Tărtăria tablets" label="Tărtăria tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895855" start="49988" end="50013" title="Moldova–Romania relations" label="Moldova–Romania relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q471107" start="50015" end="50032" title="Romanian dialects" label="Romanian dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038479" start="50035" end="50093" title="Controversy over ethnic and linguistic identity in Moldova" label="Controversy over ethnic and linguistic identity in Moldova"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25536" wikidata="Q7270" url="?curid=25536" title="Republic">
<text>A republic, based on the Latin phrase &quot;res publica&quot; (&#x27;public affair&#x27; or &#x27;people&#x27;s affair&#x27;), is a state in which political power rests with the public (people) through their representatives—in contrast to a monarchy. Although a republic is most often a single sovereign state, subnational state entities that have governments that are republican in nature may be referred to as republics.

Representation in a republic may or may not be freely elected by the general citizenry. In many historical republics, representation has been based on personal status and the role of elections has been limited. This remains true today; among the 159 states that use &quot;republic&quot; in their official names , and other states formally constituted as republics, are states that narrowly constrain both the right of representation and the process of election.

The term developed its modern meaning in reference to the constitution of the ancient Roman Republic, lasting from the overthrow of the kings in 509 BC to the establishment of the Empire in 27 BC. This constitution was characterized by a Senate composed of wealthy aristocrats wielding significant influence; several popular assemblies of all free citizens, possessing the power to elect magistrates from the populace and pass laws; and a series of magistracies with varying types of civil and political authority.

== Etymology ==

The term originates from the Latin translation of Greek word &quot;politeia&quot;. Cicero, among other Latin writers, translated &quot;politeia&quot; into Latin as &quot;res publica&quot;, and it was in turn translated by Renaissance scholars as &quot;republic&quot; (or similar terms in various European languages). The term can literally be translated as &#x27;public matter&#x27;. It was used by Roman writers to refer to the state and government, even during the period of the Roman Empire.

The term &quot;politeia&quot; can be translated as form of government, polity, or regime, and it does not necessarily imply any specific type of regime as the modern word &quot;republic&quot; sometimes does. One of Plato&#x27;s major works on political philosophy, usually known in English as &quot;The Republic&quot;, was titled &quot;Politeia&quot;. However, apart from the title, modern translations are generally used. Aristotle was apparently the first classical writer to state that the term &quot;politeia&quot; can be used to refer more specifically to one type of &quot;politeia&quot;, asserting in Book III of his &quot;Politics&quot;: &quot;When the citizens at large govern for the public good, it is called by the name common to all governments (&quot;to koinon onoma pasōn tōn politeiōn&quot;), government (&quot;politeia&quot;)&quot;. In later Latin works the term &quot;republic&quot; can also be used in a general way to refer to any regime, or to refer specifically to governments which work for the public good.

In medieval Northern Italy, a number of city states had commune or signoria based governments. In the late Middle Ages, writers such as Giovanni Villani described these states using terms such as &quot;libertas populi&quot;, a free people. The terminology changed in the 15th century as the renewed interest in the writings of Ancient Rome caused writers to prefer classical terminology. To describe non-monarchical states, writers (most importantly, Leonardo Bruni) adopted the Latin phrase &quot;res publica&quot;.

While Bruni and Machiavelli used the term to describe the states of Northern Italy, which were not monarchies, the term &quot;res publica&quot; has a set of interrelated meanings in the original Latin. In subsequent centuries, the English word &quot;commonwealth&quot; came to be used as a translation of &quot;res publica&quot;, and its use in English was comparable to how the Romans used the term &quot;res publica&quot;. Notably, during The Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell the word &quot;commonwealth&quot; was the most common term to call the new monarchless state, but the word &quot;republic&quot; was also in common use.

== History ==
While the philosophical terminology developed in classical Greece and Rome, as already noted by Aristotle there was already a long history of city states with a wide variety of constitutions, not only in Greece but also in the Middle East. After the classical period, during the Middle Ages, many free cities developed again, such as Venice.

Since the Age of Revolution the term &quot;republic&quot; has described a system of government in which the source of authority for the government is a constitution and the legitimacy of its officials derives from the consent of the people rather than heredity or divine right.
=== Classical republics ===

The modern type of republic itself is different from any type of state found in the classical world. Nevertheless, there are a number of states of the classical era that are today still called republics. This includes ancient Athens and the Roman Republic. While the structure and governance of these states was different from that of any modern republic, there is debate about the extent to which classical, medieval, and modern republics form a historical continuum. J. G. A. Pocock has argued that a distinct republican tradition stretches from the classical world to the present. Other scholars disagree. Paul Rahe, for instance, argues that the classical republics had a form of government with few links to those in any modern country.

The political philosophy of the classical republics has influenced republican thought throughout the subsequent centuries. Philosophers and politicians advocating republics, such as Machiavelli, Montesquieu, Adams, and Madison, relied heavily on classical Greek and Roman sources which described various types of regimes.

Aristotle&#x27;s &quot;Politics&quot; discusses various forms of government. One form Aristotle named &quot;politeia&quot;, which consisted of a mixture of the other forms, oligarchy and democracy. He argued that this was one of the ideal forms of government. Polybius expanded on many of these ideas, again focusing on the idea of mixed government and differentiated basic forms of government between &quot;benign&quot; monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy, and the &quot;malignant&quot; tyranny, oligarchy, and ochlocracy. The most important Roman work in this tradition is Cicero&#x27;s &quot;De re publica&quot;.

Over time, the classical republics became empires or were conquered by empires. Most of the Greek republics were annexed to the Macedonian Empire of Alexander. The Roman Republic expanded dramatically, conquering the other states of the Mediterranean that could be considered republics, such as Carthage. The Roman Republic itself then became the Roman Empire.

=== Other ancient republics ===
The term &quot;republic&quot; is not commonly used to refer to pre-classical city-states, especially if outside Europe and the area which was under Graeco-Roman influence. However some early states outside Europe had governments that are sometimes today considered similar to republics.

In the ancient Near East, a number of cities of the Eastern Mediterranean achieved collective rule. Republic city-states flourished in Phoenicia along the Levantine coast starting from the 11th century BC. In ancient Phoenicia, the concept of Shophet was very similar to a Roman consul. Under Persian rule (539–332 BC), Phoenician city-states such as Tyre abolished the king system and adopted &quot;a system of the suffetes (judges), who remained in power for short mandates of 6 years&quot;. Arwad has been cited as one of the earliest known examples of a republic, in which the people, rather than a monarch, are described as sovereign. The Israelite confederation of the era of the Judges
before the United Monarchy has also been considered a type of republic. The system of government of the Igbo people in what is now Nigeria has been described as &quot;direct and participatory democracy&quot;.

===Indian subcontinent===

Early republican institutions come from the independent s means &#x27;tribe&#x27; and  means &#x27;assembly&#x27;which may have existed as early as the 6th century BC and persisted in some areas until the 4th century AD in India. The evidence for this is scattered, however, and no pure historical source exists for that period. Diodorus, a Greek historian who wrote two centuries after the time of Alexander the Great&#x27;s invasion of India (now Pakistan and northwest India) mentions, without offering any detail, that independent and democratic states existed in India. Modern scholars note the word &quot;democracy&quot; at the time of the 3rd century BC and later suffered from degradation and could mean any autonomous state, no matter how aristocratic in nature.
Key characteristics of the seem to include a &quot;gaṇa mukhya&quot; (chief), and a deliberative assembly. The assembly met regularly. It discussed all major state decisions. At least in some states, attendance was open to all free men. This body also had full financial, administrative, and judicial authority. Other officers, who rarely receive any mention, obeyed the decisions of the assembly. Elected by the , the chief apparently always belonged to a family of the noble class of &quot;Kshatriya Varna&quot;. The chief coordinated his activities with the assembly; in some states, he did so with a council of other nobles. The Licchavis had a primary governing body of 7,077 &quot;gaṇa mukhyas&quot;, the heads of the most important families. On the other hand, the Shakyas, Koliyas, Mallakas, and Licchavis, during the period around Gautama Buddha, had the assembly open to all men, rich and poor. Early republics or , such as Mallakas, centered in the city of Kusinagara, and the Vajjika (or Vṛjika) League, centered in the city of Vaishali, existed as early as the 6th century BC and persisted in some areas until the 4th century AD. The most famous clan amongst the ruling confederate clans of the Vajji Mahajanapada were the Licchavis. The Empire of Magadha included republican communities such as the community of Rajakumara. Villages had their own assemblies under their local chiefs called &quot;gramakas&quot;. Their administrations were divided into executive, judicial, and military functions.

Scholars differ over how best to describe these governments, and the vague, sporadic quality of the evidence allows for wide disagreements. Some emphasize the central role of the assemblies and thus tout them as democracies; other scholars focus on the upper-class domination of the leadership and possible control of the assembly and see an aristocracy. Despite the assembly&#x27;s obvious power, it has not yet been established whether the composition and participation were truly popular. This is reflected in the &quot;Arthashastra&quot;, an ancient handbook for monarchs on how to rule efficiently. It contains a chapter on how to deal with the &quot;s&quot;, which includes injunctions on manipulating the noble leaders, yet it does not mention how to influence the mass of the citizens, indicating that the are more of an aristocratic republic, than democracy.

=== Icelandic Commonwealth ===
The Icelandic Commonwealth was established in 930 AD by refugees from Norway who had fled the unification of that country under King Harald Fairhair. The Commonwealth consisted of a number of clans run by chieftains, and the Althing was a combination of parliament and supreme court where disputes appealed from lower courts were settled, laws were decided, and decisions of national importance were taken. One such example was the Christianisation of Iceland in 1000, where the Althing decreed that all Icelanders must be baptized into Christianity, and forbade celebration of pagan rituals. Contrary to most states, the Icelandic Commonwealth had no official leader.

In the early 13th century, the Age of the Sturlungs, the Commonwealth began to suffer from long conflicts between warring clans. This, combined with pressure from the Norwegian king Haakon IV for the Icelanders to rejoin the Norwegian &quot;family&quot;, led the Icelandic chieftains to accept Haakon IV as king by the signing of the &quot;Gamli sáttmáli&quot; (&quot;Old Covenant&quot;) in 1262. This effectively brought the Commonwealth to an end. The Althing, however, is still Iceland&#x27;s parliament, almost 800 years later.

=== Mercantile republics ===
In Europe new republics appeared in the late Middle Ages when a number of small states embraced republican systems of government. These were generally small, but wealthy, trading states, like the Mediterranean maritime republics and the Hanseatic League, in which the merchant class had risen to prominence. Knud Haakonssen has noted that, by the Renaissance, Europe was divided with those states controlled by a landed elite being monarchies and those controlled by a commercial elite being republics.

Italy was the most densely populated area of Europe, and also one with the weakest central government. Many of the towns thus gained considerable independence and adopted commune forms of government. Completely free of feudal control, the Italian city-states expanded, gaining control of the rural hinterland. The two most powerful were the Republic of Venice and its rival the Republic of Genoa. Each were large trading ports, and further expanded by using naval power to control large parts of the Mediterranean. It was in Italy that an ideology advocating for republics first developed. Writers such as Bartholomew of Lucca, Brunetto Latini, Marsilius of Padua, and Leonardo Bruni saw the medieval city-states as heirs to the legacy of Greece and Rome.

Across Europe a wealthy merchant class developed in the important trading cities. Despite their wealth they had little power in the feudal system dominated by the rural land owners, and across Europe began to advocate for their own privileges and powers. The more centralized states, such as France and England, granted limited city charters.

In the more loosely governed Holy Roman Empire, 51 of the largest towns became free imperial cities. While still under the dominion of the Holy Roman Emperor most power was held locally and many adopted republican forms of government. The same rights to imperial immediacy were secured by the major trading cities of Switzerland. The towns and villages of alpine Switzerland had, courtesy of geography, also been largely excluded from central control. Unlike Italy and Germany, much of the rural area was thus not controlled by feudal barons, but by independent farmers who also used communal forms of government. When the Habsburgs tried to reassert control over the region both rural farmers and town merchants joined the rebellion. The Swiss were victorious, and the Swiss Confederacy was proclaimed, and Switzerland has retained a republican form of government to the present.

Two Russian cities with a powerful merchant class—Novgorod and Pskov—also adopted republican forms of government in 12th and 13th centuries, respectively, which ended when the republics were conquered by Muscovy/Russia at the end of 15th – beginning of 16th century.

Following the collapse of the Seljuk Sultanate of Rum and establishment of the Turkish Anatolian Beyliks, the Ahiler merchant fraternities established a state centered on Ankara that is sometimes compared to the Italian mercantile republics.

The dominant form of government for these early republics was control by a limited council of elite patricians. In those areas that held elections, property qualifications or guild membership limited both who could vote and who could run. In many states no direct elections were held and council members were hereditary or appointed by the existing council. This left the great majority of the population without political power, and riots and revolts by the lower classes were common. The late Middle Ages saw more than 200 such risings in the towns of the Holy Roman Empire. Similar revolts occurred in Italy, notably the Ciompi Revolt in Florence.

=== Calvinist republics ===

While the classical writers had been the primary ideological source for the republics of Italy, in Northern Europe, the Protestant Reformation would be used as justification for establishing new republics. Most important was Calvinist theology, which developed in the Swiss Confederacy, one of the largest and most powerful of the medieval republics. John Calvin did not call for the abolition of monarchy, but he advanced the doctrine that the faithful had the duty to overthrow irreligious monarchs. Advocacy for republics appeared in the writings of the Huguenots during the French Wars of Religion.

Calvinism played an important role in the republican revolts in England and the Netherlands. Like the city-states of Italy and the Hanseatic League, both were important trading centres, with a large merchant class prospering from the trade with the New World. Large parts of the population of both areas also embraced Calvinism. During the Dutch Revolt (beginning in 1566), the Dutch Republic emerged from rejection of Spanish Habsburg rule. However, the country did not adopt the republican form of government immediately: in the formal declaration of independence (Act of Abjuration, 1581), the throne of king Philip was only declared vacant, and the Dutch magistrates asked the Duke of Anjou, queen Elizabeth of England and prince William of Orange, one after another, to replace Philip. It took until 1588 before the Estates (the &quot;Staten&quot;, the representative assembly at the time) decided to vest the sovereignty of the country in themselves.

In 1641 the English Civil War began. Spearheaded by the Puritans and funded by the merchants of London, the revolt was a success, and King Charles I was executed. In England James Harrington, Algernon Sidney, and John Milton became some of the first writers to argue for rejecting monarchy and embracing a republican form of government. The English Commonwealth was short-lived, and the monarchy was soon restored. The Dutch Republic continued in name until 1795, but by the mid-18th century the stadtholder had become a &quot;de facto&quot; monarch. Calvinists were also some of the earliest settlers of the British and Dutch colonies of North America.

=== Liberal republics ===

Along with these initial republican revolts, early modern Europe also saw a great increase in monarchical power. The era of absolute monarchy replaced the limited and decentralized monarchies that had existed in most of the Middle Ages. It also saw a reaction against the total control of the monarch as a series of writers created the ideology known as liberalism.

Most of these Enlightenment thinkers were far more interested in ideas of constitutional monarchy than in republics. The Cromwell regime had discredited republicanism, and most thinkers felt that republics ended in either anarchy or tyranny. Thus philosophers like Voltaire opposed absolutism while at the same time being strongly pro-monarchy.

Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Montesquieu praised republics, and looked on the city-states of Greece as a model. However, both also felt that a state like France, with 20 million people, would be impossible to govern as a republic. Rousseau admired the republican experiment in Corsica (1755–1769) and described his ideal political structure of small, self-governing communes. Montesquieu felt that a city-state should ideally be a republic, but maintained that a limited monarchy was better suited to a state with a larger territory.

The American Revolution began as a rejection only of the authority of the British Parliament over the colonies, not of the monarchy. The failure of the British monarch to protect the colonies from what they considered the infringement of their rights to representative government, the monarch&#x27;s branding of those requesting redress as traitors, and his support for sending combat troops to demonstrate authority resulted in widespread perception of the British monarchy as tyrannical.

With the United States Declaration of Independence the leaders of the revolt firmly rejected the monarchy and embraced republicanism. The leaders of the revolution were well-versed in the writings of the French liberal thinkers, and also in the history of the classical republics. John Adams had notably written a book on republics throughout history. In addition, the widely distributed and popularly read-aloud tract &quot;Common Sense&quot;, by Thomas Paine, succinctly and eloquently laid out the case for republican ideals and independence to the larger public. The Constitution of the United States, which went into effect in 1789, created a relatively strong federal republic to replace the relatively weak confederation under the first attempt at a national government with the Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union ratified in 1781. The first ten amendments to the Constitution called the United States Bill of Rights, guaranteed certain natural rights fundamental to republican ideals that justified the Revolution.

The French Revolution was also not republican at its outset. Only after the Flight to Varennes removed most of the remaining sympathy for the king was a republic declared and Louis XVI sent to the guillotine. The stunning success of France in the French Revolutionary Wars saw republics spread by force of arms across much of Europe as a series of client republics were set up across the continent. The rise of Napoleon saw the end of the French First Republic and her Sister Republics, each replaced by &quot;popular monarchies&quot;. Throughout the Napoleonic period, the victors extinguished many of the oldest republics on the continent, including the Republic of Venice, the Republic of Genoa, and the Dutch Republic. They were eventually transformed into monarchies or absorbed into neighboring monarchies.

Outside Europe, another group of republics was created as the Napoleonic Wars allowed the states of Latin America to gain their independence. Liberal ideology had only a limited impact on these new republics. The main impetus was the local European-descended Creole population in conflict with the Peninsulares—governors sent from overseas. The majority of the population in most of Latin America was of either African or Amerindian descent, and the Creole elite had little interest in giving these groups power and broad-based popular sovereignty. Simón Bolívar, both the main instigator of the revolts and one of its most important theorists, was sympathetic to liberal ideals but felt that Latin America lacked the social cohesion for such a system to function and advocated autocracy as necessary.

In Mexico, this autocracy briefly took the form of a monarchy in the First Mexican Empire. Due to the Peninsular War, the Portuguese court was relocated to Brazil in 1808. Brazil gained independence as a monarchy on September 7, 1822, and the Empire of Brazil lasted until 1889. In many other Latin American states various forms of autocratic republic existed until most were liberalized at the end of the 20th century.
The French Second Republic was created in 1848 but abolished by Napoleon III who proclaimed himself Emperor in 1852. The French Third Republic was established in 1870 when a civil revolutionary committee refused to accept Napoleon III&#x27;s surrender during the Franco-Prussian War. Spain briefly became the First Spanish Republic in 1873–74, but the monarchy was soon restored. By the start of the 20th century France, Switzerland and San Marino remained the only republics in Europe. This changed when, after the 1908 Lisbon Regicide, the 5 October 1910 revolution established the Portuguese Republic.
In East Asia, China had seen considerable anti-Qing sentiment during the 19th century, and a number of protest movements developed calling for constitutional monarchy. The most important leader of these efforts was Sun Yat-sen, whose Three Principles of the People combined American, European, and Chinese ideas. Under his leadership, the Republic of China was proclaimed on January 1, 1912.

Republican ideas were spreading, especially in Asia. The United States began to have considerable influence in East Asia in the later part of the 19th century, with Protestant missionaries playing a central role. The liberal and republican writers of the West also exerted influence. These combined with native Confucian inspired political philosophy that had long argued that the populace had the right to reject unjust governments that had lost the Mandate of Heaven.

During this period, two short-lived republics were proclaimed in East Asia; the Republic of Formosa and the First Philippine Republic.

Republicanism expanded significantly in the aftermath of World War I when several of the largest European empires collapsed: the Russian Empire (1917), German Empire (1918), Austro-Hungarian Empire (1918), and Ottoman Empire (1922) were all replaced by republics. New states gained independence during this turmoil, and many of these, such as Ireland, Poland, Finland and Czechoslovakia, chose republican forms of government. Following Greece&#x27;s defeat in the Greco-Turkish War (1919–22), the monarchy was briefly replaced by the Second Hellenic Republic (1924–35). In 1931, the proclamation of the Second Spanish Republic (1931–39) resulted in the Spanish Civil War leading to the establishment of a Francoist regime.
The aftermath of World War II left Italy with a destroyed economy, a divided society, and anger against the monarchy for its endorsement of the Fascist regime. These frustrations contributed to a revival of the Italian republican movement. King Umberto II was pressured to call the 1946 Italian institutional referendum to decide whether Italy should remain a monarchy or become a republic. The supporters of the republic chose the effigy of the &quot;Italia turrita&quot;, the national personification of Italy, as their unitary symbol to be used in the electoral campaign and on the referendum ballot on the institutional form of the State, in contrast to the Savoy coat of arms, which represented the monarchy. On June 2, 1946 the republican side won 54.3% of the vote and Italy officially became a republic, a day celebrated since as &quot;Festa della Repubblica&quot;. Italy has a written democratic constitution, resulting from the work of a Constituent Assembly formed by the representatives of all the anti-fascist forces that contributed to the defeat of Nazi and Fascist forces during the liberation of Italy.

=== Decolonization ===
In the years following World War II, most of the remaining European colonies gained their independence, and most became republics. The two largest colonial powers were France and the United Kingdom. Republican France encouraged the establishment of republics in its former colonies. The United Kingdom attempted to follow the model it had for its earlier settler colonies of creating independent Commonwealth realms still linked under the same monarch. While most of the settler colonies and the smaller states in the Caribbean and the Pacific retained this system, it was rejected by the newly independent countries in Africa and Asia, which revised their constitutions and became republics instead.

Britain followed a different model in the Middle East; it installed local monarchies in several colonies and mandates including Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Bahrain, Oman, Yemen and Libya. In subsequent decades revolutions and coups overthrew a number of monarchs and installed republics. Several monarchies remain, and the Middle East is the only part of the world where several large states are ruled by monarchs with almost complete political control.

=== Socialist republics ===

In the wake of the First World War, the Russian monarchy fell during the Russian Revolution. The Russian Provisional Government was established in its place on the lines of a liberal republic, but this was overthrown by the Bolsheviks who went on to establish the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR). This was the first republic established under Marxist–Leninist ideology. Communism was wholly opposed to monarchy and became an important element of many republican movements during the 20th century. The Russian Revolution spread into Mongolia and overthrew its theocratic monarchy in 1924. In the aftermath of the Second World War, the communists gradually gained control of Romania, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, Hungary and Albania, ensuring that the states were reestablished as socialist republics rather than monarchies.

Communism also intermingled with other ideologies. It was embraced by many national liberation movements during decolonization. In Vietnam, communist republicans pushed aside the Nguyễn dynasty, and monarchies in neighbouring Laos and Cambodia were overthrown by communist movements in the 1970s. Arab socialism contributed to a series of revolts and coups that saw the monarchies of Egypt, Iraq, Libya, and Yemen ousted. In Africa, Marxism–Leninism and African socialism led to the end of monarchy and the proclamation of republics in states such as Burundi and Ethiopia.

==Constitution==
A republic does not necessarily have a constitution but is often constitutional in the sense of constitutionalism, meaning that it is constituted by a set of institutions which provide a separation of powers. The term constitutional republic is a way to highlight an emphasis on the separation of powers in a given republic, as with constitutional monarchy or absolute monarchy highlighting the absolute autocratic character of a monarchy.

== Head of state ==
=== Structure ===
With no monarch, most modern republics use the title president for the head of state. Originally used to refer to the presiding officer of a committee or governing body in Great Britain the usage was also applied to political leaders, including the leaders of some of the Thirteen Colonies (originally Virginia in 1608); in full, the &quot;President of the Council&quot;. The first republic to adopt the title was the United States of America. Keeping its usage as the head of a committee the President of the Continental Congress was the leader of the original congress. When the new constitution was written the title of President of the United States was conferred on the head of the new executive branch.

If the head of state of a republic is also the head of government, this is called a presidential system. There are a number of forms of presidential government. A full-presidential system has a president with substantial authority and a central political role.

In other states the legislature is dominant and the presidential role is almost purely ceremonial and apolitical, such as in Germany, Italy, India, and Trinidad and Tobago. These states are parliamentary republics and operate similarly to constitutional monarchies with parliamentary systems where the power of the monarch is also greatly circumscribed. In parliamentary systems the head of government, most often titled prime minister, exercises the most real political power. Semi-presidential systems have a president as an active head of state with important powers, but they also have a prime minister as a head of government with important powers.

The rules for appointing the president and the leader of the government, in some republics permit the appointment of a president and a prime minister who have opposing political convictions: in France, when the members of the ruling cabinet and the president come from opposing political factions, this situation is called cohabitation.

In some countries, like Bosnia and Herzegovina, San Marino, and Switzerland, the head of state is not a single person but a committee (council) of several persons holding that office. The Roman Republic had two consuls, elected for a one-year term by the &quot;comitia centuriata&quot;, consisting of all adult, freeborn males who could prove citizenship.

=== Elections ===
In democracies, presidents are elected, either directly by the people or indirectly by a parliament or council. Typically in presidential and semi-presidential systems the president is directly elected by the people or is indirectly elected as done in the United States. In that country, the president is officially elected by an electoral college, chosen by the States. All U.S. States have chosen electors by popular election since 1832. The indirect election of the president through the electoral college conforms to the concept of the republic as one with a system of indirect election. In the opinion of some, direct election confers legitimacy upon the president and gives the office much of its political power. However, this concept of legitimacy differs from that expressed in the United States Constitution which established the legitimacy of the United States president as resulting from the signing of the Constitution by nine states. The idea that direct election is required for legitimacy also contradicts the spirit of the Great Compromise, whose actual result was manifest in the clause that provides voters in smaller states with more representation in presidential selection than those in large states; for example citizens of Wyoming in 2016 had 3.6 times as much electoral vote representation as citizens of California.

In states with a parliamentary system, the president is usually elected by the parliament. This indirect election subordinates the president to the parliament, and also gives the president limited legitimacy and turns most presidential powers into reserve powers that can only be exercised under rare circumstances. There are exceptions where elected presidents have only ceremonial powers, such as in Ireland.

=== Ambiguities ===
The distinction between a republic and a monarchy is not always clear. The constitutional monarchies of the former British Empire and Western Europe today have almost all real political power vested in the elected representatives, with the monarchs only holding either theoretical powers, no powers or rarely used reserve powers. Real legitimacy for political decisions comes from the elected representatives and is derived from the will of the people. While hereditary monarchies remain in place, political power is derived from the people as in a republic. These states are thus sometimes referred to as crowned republics.

Terms such as &quot;liberal republic&quot; are also used to describe all of the modern liberal democracies.

There are also self-proclaimed republics that act similarly to absolute monarchies with absolute power vested in the leader and passed down from father to son. North Korea and Syria are two notable examples where a son has inherited political control. Neither of these states are officially monarchies. There is no constitutional requirement that power be passed down within one family, but it has occurred in practice.

There are also elective monarchies where ultimate power is vested in a monarch, but the monarch is chosen by some manner of election. A current example of such a state is Malaysia where the Yang di-Pertuan Agong is elected every five years by the Conference of Rulers composed of the nine hereditary rulers of the Malay states, and the Vatican City-State, where the pope is selected by cardinal-electors, currently all cardinals under the age of 80. While rare today, elective monarchs were common in the past. The Holy Roman Empire is an important example, where each new emperor was chosen by a group of electors. Islamic states also rarely employed primogeniture, instead relying on various forms of election to choose a monarch&#x27;s successor.

The Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth had an elective monarchy, with a wide suffrage of some 500,000 nobles. The system, known as the Golden Liberty, had developed as a method for powerful landowners to control the crown. The proponents of this system looked to classical examples, and the writings of the Italian Renaissance, and called their elective monarchy a &quot;rzeczpospolita&quot;, based on &quot;res publica&quot;.

== Sub-national republics ==
In general being a republic also implies sovereignty as for the state to be ruled by the people it cannot be controlled by a foreign power. There are important exceptions to this, for example, republics in the Soviet Union were member states which had to meet three criteria to be named republics:

# be on the periphery of the Soviet Union so as to be able to take advantage of their theoretical right to secede;
# be economically strong enough to be self-sufficient upon secession; and
# be named after at least one million people of the ethnic group which should make up the majority population of said republic.

It is sometimes argued that the former Soviet Union was also a supra-national republic, based on the claim that the member states were different nation states.

The Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was a federal entity composed of six republics (Socialist Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, and Slovenia). Each republic had its parliament, government, institute of citizenship, constitution, etc., but certain functions were delegated to the federation (army, monetary matters). Each republic also had a right of self-determination according to the conclusions of the second session of the AVNOJ and according to the federal constitution.
In Switzerland, all cantons can be considered to have a republican form of government, with constitutions, legislatures, executives and courts; many of them being originally sovereign states. As a consequence, several Romance-speaking cantons are still officially referred to as republics, reflecting their history and will of independence within the Swiss Confederation. Notable examples are the Republic and Canton of Geneva and the Republic and Canton of Ticino.
States of the United States are required, like the federal government, to be republican in form, with final authority resting with the people. This was required because the states were intended to create and enforce most domestic laws, with the exception of areas delegated to the federal government and prohibited to the states. The founders of the country intended most domestic laws to be handled by the states. Requiring the states to be a republic in form was seen as protecting the citizens&#x27; rights and preventing a state from becoming a dictatorship or monarchy, and reflected unwillingness on the part of the original 13 states (all independent republics) to unite with other states that were not republics. Additionally, this requirement ensured that only other republics could join the union.

In the example of the United States, the original 13 British colonies became independent states after the American Revolution, each having a republican form of government. These independent states initially formed a loose confederation called the United States and then later formed the current United States by ratifying the current U.S. Constitution, creating a union that was a republic. Any state joining the union later was also required to be a republic.

== Other meanings ==
===Archaic meaning===
Before the 17th Century, the term &#x27;republic&#x27; could be used to refer to states of any form of government as long as it was not a tyrannical regime. French philosopher Jean Bodin&#x27;s definition of the republic was &quot;the rightly ordered government of a number of families, and of those things which are their common concern, by a sovereign power.&quot; Oligarchies and monarchies could also be included as they were also organised toward &#x27;public&#x27; shared interests. In medieval texts, &#x27;republic&#x27; was used to refer to the body of shared interest with the king at its head. For instance, the Holy Roman Empire was also known as the &quot;Sancta Respublica Romana&quot;, the Holy Roman Republic. The Byzantine Empire also continued calling itself &quot;the Roman Republic&quot; as the Byzantines did not regard monarchy as a contradiction to republicanism. Instead, republics were defined as any state based on popular sovereignty and whose institutions were based on shared values.

=== Democracy vs. republic debate ===

In a republic state, power is held by the people through elected representatives. The head of state is typically elected or nominated by representatives. In a democratic state, power is wielded by the people of the state, typically through a mixture of elected representatives and direct voting, but in theory could happen purely by Direct democracy without elected representatives acting as proxies. Many states are considered a mixture of both ideals, such as a Representative democracy or Democratic republic.

The term democracy is sometimes used interchangeably with the term republic, while others have made sharp distinctions between the two for millennia. &quot;Montesquieu, founder of the modern constitutional state, repeated in his The Spirit of the Laws of 1748 the insight that Aristotle had expressed two millennia earlier, &#x27;Voting by lot is in the nature of democracy; voting by choice is in the nature of aristocracy. Additional critics of elections include Rousseau, Robespierre, and Marat, who said of the new French Republic, &quot;What use is it to us, that we have broken the aristocracy of the nobles, if that is replaced by the aristocracy of the rich?&quot;

=== Political philosophy ===
The term &quot;republic&quot; originated from the writers of the Renaissance as a descriptive term for states that were not monarchies. These writers, such as Machiavelli, also wrote important prescriptive works describing how such governments should function. These ideas of how a government and society should be structured is the basis for an ideology known as classical republicanism or civic humanism. This ideology is based on the Roman Republic and the city states of Ancient Greece and focuses on ideals such as civic virtue, rule of law and mixed government.

This understanding of a republic as a form of government distinct from a liberal democracy is one of the main theses of the Cambridge School of historical analysis. This grew out of the work of J. G. A. Pocock who in 1975 argued that a series of scholars had expressed a consistent set of republican ideals. These writers included Machiavelli, Milton, Montesquieu and the founders of the United States of America.

Pocock argued that this was an ideology with a history and principles distinct from liberalism. These ideas were embraced by a number of different writers, including Quentin Skinner, Philip Pettit and Cass Sunstein. These subsequent writers have further explored the history of the idea, and also outlined how a modern republic should function.

=== United States ===
A distinct set of definitions of the term &quot;republic&quot; evolved in the United States, where the term is often equated with &quot;representative democracy.&quot; This narrower understanding of the term was originally developed by James Madison and notably employed in Federalist Paper No. 10. This meaning was widely adopted early in the history of the United States, including in Noah Webster&#x27;s dictionary of 1828. It was a novel meaning to the term; representative democracy was not an idea mentioned by Machiavelli and did not exist in the classical republics. There is also evidence that contemporaries of Madison considered the meaning of &quot;republic&quot; to reflect the broader definition found elsewhere, as is the case with a quotation of Benjamin Franklin taken from the notes of James McHenry where the question is put forth, &quot;a Republic or a Monarchy?&quot;.

The term republic does not appear in the Declaration of Independence, but it does appear in Article IV of the Constitution, which &quot;guarantee[s] to every State in this Union a Republican form of Government.&quot; What exactly the writers of the constitution felt this should mean is uncertain. The Supreme Court, in &quot;Luther v. Borden&quot; (1849), declared that the definition of &quot;republic&quot; was a &quot;political question&quot; in which it would not intervene. In two later cases, it did establish a basic definition. In &quot;United States v. Cruikshank&quot; (1875), the court ruled that the &quot;equal rights of citizens&quot; were inherent to the idea of a republic.

However, the term republic is not synonymous with the republican form. The republican form is defined as one in which the powers of sovereignty are vested in the people and are exercised by the people, either directly, or through representatives chosen by the people, to whom those powers are specially delegated.

Beyond these basic definitions, the word republic has a number of other connotations. W. Paul Adams observes that republic is most often used in the United States as a synonym for &quot;state&quot; or &quot;government,&quot; but with more positive connotations than either of those terms. Republicanism is often referred to as the founding ideology of the United States. Traditionally scholars believed this American republicanism was a derivation of the classical liberal ideologies of John Locke and others developed in Europe.

In the 1960s and 1970s, Bernard Bailyn began to argue that republicanism was just as, or even more important than liberalism in the creation of the United States. This issue is still much disputed and scholars like Isaac Kramnick completely reject this view.

== See also ==
* Free state
* Primus inter pares
* List of republics
* Index: Republics
* Guarantee Clause of the U.S. Constitution

== References ==

==Further reading==

* Martin van Gelderen &amp; Quentin Skinner, eds., &quot;Republicanism: A Shared European Heritage&quot;, v. 1, &quot;Republicanism and Constitutionalism in Early Modern Europe&quot;, Cambridge: Cambridge U.P., 2002
* Martin van Gelderen &amp; Quentin Skinner, eds., &quot;Republicanism: A Shared European Heritage&quot;, v. 2, &quot;The Values of Republicanism in Early Modern Europe&quot;, Cambridge: Cambridge U.P., 2002
* Willi Paul Adams, &quot;Republicanism in Political Rhetoric before 1776&quot;, &quot;Political Science Quarterly&quot; 85(1970), pp. 397–421.
* Joyce Appleby, &quot;Republicanism in Old and New Contexts&quot;, in &quot;William &amp; Mary Quarterly&quot;, 3rd series, 43 (January, 1986), pp. 3–34.
* Joyce Appleby, ed., &quot;Republicanism&quot; issue of &quot;American Quarterly&quot; 37 (Fall, 1985).
* Sarah Barber, &quot;Regicide and Republicanism: Politics and Ethics in the English Republic, 1646–1649&quot;, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1998. 
* Gisela Bock, Quentin Skinner &amp; Maurizio Viroli, eds., &quot;Machiavelli and Republicanism&quot;, Cambridge: Cambridge U.P., 1990.
* Eric Gojosso, &quot;Le concept de république en France (XVIe – XVIIIe siècle)&quot;, Aix/Marseille, 1998, pp. 205–45.
* James Hankins, &quot;Exclusivist Republicanism and the Non-Monarchical Republic&quot;, &quot;Political Theory&quot; 38.4 (August 2010), 452–82.
* Frédéric Monera, &quot;L&#x27;idée de République et la jurisprudence du Conseil constitutionnel&quot; – Paris: L.G.D.J., 2004 Fnac, LGDJ.fr
* Philip Pettit, &quot;Republicanism: A Theory of Freedom and Government&quot;, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997, pp. x and 304.
* J. G. A. Pocock, &quot;The Machiavellian Moment: Florentine Political Thought and the Atlantic Republican Tradition&quot;, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1975 
* J. G. A. Pocock, &quot;Between Gog and Magog: The Republican Thesis and the Ideologia Americana&quot;, &quot;Journal of the History of Ideas&quot; 48 (1987), p. 341
* J. G. A. Pocock, &quot;&quot;The Machiavellian Moment&quot; Revisited: A Study in History and Ideology&quot; &quot;Journal of Modern History&quot; 53 (1981) 
* Paul A. Rahe, &quot;Republics Ancient and Modern: Classical Republicanism and the American Revolution&quot;, 3 v., Chapel Hill: U. of North Carolina Press 1992, 1994.
* Jagdish P. Sharma, &quot;Republics in ancient India, c. 1500 B.C.–500 B.C.&quot;, 1968
* David Wootton, ed., &quot;Republicanism, Liberty, and Commercial Society, 1649–1776&quot; (The Making of Modern Freedom series), Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1994.

== External links ==
*
*
*Everdell, William R. Everdell. &quot;From State to Freestate: The Meaning of the Word Republic from Jean Bodin to John Adams&quot;. (7th ISECS, Budapest, 7/31/87). &quot;Valley Forge Journal&quot;. June 1991.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="2" end="10" title="Republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="25" end="30" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994847" start="44" end="55" title="res publica" label="res publica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="132" end="137" title="State (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="147" end="162" title="Power (social and political)" label="political power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388316" start="178" end="184" title="public" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472587" start="186" end="192" title="people" label="people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532278" start="208" end="223" title="Representative assembly" label="representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="241" end="249" title="monarchy" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="294" end="309" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q56061" start="311" end="328" title="subnational state" label="subnational state"/>
<link wikidata="Q943264" start="670" end="673" title="List of countries by system of government" label="159"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="973" end="987" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931679" start="1006" end="1028" title="Overthrow of the Roman monarchy" label="overthrow of the kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="1036" end="1038" title="Anno Domini" label="BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="1067" end="1073" title="Roman Empire" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576746" start="1089" end="1101" title="Constitution of the Roman Republic" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="1125" end="1131" title="Roman Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="1152" end="1163" title="Aristocracy" label="aristocrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q623086" start="1212" end="1222" title="Roman assemblies" label="assemblies"/>
<link wikidata="Q27518" start="1326" end="1348" title="Cursus honorum" label="series of magistracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1470" end="1475" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q547921" start="1487" end="1495" title="politeia" label="politeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="1503" end="1509" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994847" start="1590" end="1601" title="res publica" label="res publica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="1901" end="1913" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="1967" end="1985" title="government" label="form of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063239" start="1987" end="1993" title="polity" label="polity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589178" start="1998" end="2004" title="regime" label="regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="2131" end="2136" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q123397" start="2215" end="2227" title="The Republic (Plato)" label="The Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="2339" end="2348" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q69539" start="2546" end="2554" title="Politics (Aristotle)" label="Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="2960" end="2974" title="Northern Italy" label="Northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107861" start="3004" end="3011" title="Medieval commune" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q914425" start="3015" end="3023" title="signoria" label="signoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q704179" start="3084" end="3100" title="Giovanni Villani" label="Giovanni Villani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="3275" end="3287" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q314488" start="3399" end="3413" title="Leonardo Bruni" label="Leonardo Bruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994847" start="3446" end="3457" title="res publica" label="res publica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="3482" end="3493" title="Machiavelli" label="Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578692" start="3716" end="3728" title="commonwealth" label="commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987351" start="3907" end="3923" title="The Protectorate" label="The Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="3927" end="3942" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q843745" start="4159" end="4175" title="classical Greece" label="classical Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="4180" end="4184" title="Roman Republic" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="4206" end="4215" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="4337" end="4348" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="4389" end="4400" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="4444" end="4450" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691908" start="4463" end="4480" title="Age of Revolution" label="Age of Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="4705" end="4713" title="heredity" label="heredity"/>
<link wikidata="Q839452" start="4717" end="4729" title="divine right of kings" label="divine right"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="4911" end="4924" title="classical era" label="classical era"/>
<link wikidata="Q844930" start="4986" end="4992" title="Classical Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="5001" end="5015" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336397" start="5229" end="5244" title="J. G. A. Pocock" label="J. G. A. Pocock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="5685" end="5696" title="Niccolò Machiavelli" label="Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="5698" end="5709" title="Montesquieu" label="Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="5711" end="5716" title="John Adams" label="Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="5722" end="5729" title="James Madison" label="Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="5826" end="5835" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q69539" start="5849" end="5857" title="Politics (Aristotle)" label="Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="5999" end="6008" title="oligarchy" label="oligarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="6013" end="6022" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131169" start="6086" end="6094" title="Polybius" label="Polybius"/>
<link wikidata="Q361916" start="6158" end="6174" title="mixed government" label="mixed government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="6247" end="6255" title="monarchy" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="6257" end="6268" title="aristocracy" label="aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180095" start="6315" end="6322" title="tyranny" label="tyranny"/>
<link wikidata="Q191031" start="6339" end="6349" title="ochlocracy" label="ochlocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q656161" start="6422" end="6435" title="De re publica" label="De re publica"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="6572" end="6589" title="Macedonian Empire" label="Macedonian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="6593" end="6602" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="6739" end="6747" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q269678" start="7133" end="7150" title="ancient Near East" label="ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301962" start="7178" end="7199" title="Eastern Mediterranean" label="Eastern Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="7261" end="7270" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="7281" end="7287" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500489" start="7369" end="7376" title="Shophet" label="Shophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489757" start="7399" end="7411" title="Consul" label="Roman consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="7419" end="7431" title="Persia" label="Persian rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="7477" end="7481" title="Tyre, Lebanon" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500489" start="7542" end="7550" title="Shophet" label="suffetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q377802" start="7620" end="7625" title="Arwad" label="Arwad"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="7770" end="7779" title="Israelite" label="Israelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q621421" start="7812" end="7818" title="Biblical judges" label="Judges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185305" start="7830" end="7845" title="United Monarchy" label="United Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7923" end="7934" title="Igbo people#Traditional society" label="Igbo people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435215" start="7950" end="7957" title="Nigerian history" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11296108" start="8112" end="8112" title="Gaṇasaṅgha" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q632279" start="8113" end="8113" title="gana" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q193944" start="8142" end="8142" title="sangha" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="8385" end="8393" title="Diodorus" label="Diodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="8455" end="8474" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q242360" start="9320" end="9329" title="Kshatriya" label="Kshatriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303998" start="9330" end="9335" title="Varna (Hinduism)" label="Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376731" start="9461" end="9470" title="Licchavi (tribe)" label="Licchavis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062748" start="9600" end="9606" title="Shakya" label="Shakya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6427280" start="9609" end="9615" title="Koliya" label="Koliya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376303" start="9618" end="9625" title="Malla (tribe)" label="Mallaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376731" start="9632" end="9640" title="Licchavi (tribe)" label="Licchavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="9668" end="9682" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Gautama Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q11296108" start="9752" end="9752" title="Gaṇasaṅgha" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q825673" start="9796" end="9806" title="Kusinagara" label="Kusinagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q605199" start="9816" end="9823" title="Vajjika League" label="Vajjika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509463" start="9868" end="9876" title="Vaishali (ancient city)" label="Vaishali"/>
<link wikidata="Q846025" start="10042" end="10054" title="Mahajanapadas" label="Mahajanapada"/>
<link wikidata="Q234009" start="10079" end="10096" title="Magadha (Mahajanapada)" label="Empire of Magadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="10682" end="10693" title="aristocracy" label="aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q323133" start="10863" end="10875" title="Arthashastra" label="Arthashastra"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="11310" end="11316" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q206123" start="11373" end="11388" title="Harald Fairhair" label="Harald Fairhair"/>
<link wikidata="Q131279" start="11465" end="11472" title="Althing" label="Althing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965816" start="11672" end="11699" title="Christianisation of Iceland" label="Christianisation of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314899" start="11941" end="11961" title="Age of the Sturlungs" label="Age of the Sturlungs"/>
<link wikidata="Q316039" start="12092" end="12101" title="Haakon IV of Norway" label="Haakon IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717020" start="12278" end="12290" title="Old Covenant (Iceland)" label="Old Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q62825" start="12682" end="12700" title="maritime republics" label="maritime republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="12709" end="12725" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="12819" end="12830" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="13317" end="13335" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="13354" end="13371" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410332" start="13582" end="13602" title="Bartholomew of Lucca" label="Bartholomew of Lucca"/>
<link wikidata="Q366328" start="13604" end="13619" title="Brunetto Latini" label="Brunetto Latini"/>
<link wikidata="Q315357" start="13621" end="13639" title="Marsilius of Padua" label="Marsilius of Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="13865" end="13878" title="feudalism" label="feudal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="14106" end="14123" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q57318" start="14156" end="14176" title="free imperial city" label="free imperial cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="14216" end="14234" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="14440" end="14451" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="14700" end="14709" title="Habsburgs" label="Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q124216" start="14816" end="14821" title="Swiss people" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q435583" start="14847" end="14864" title="Swiss Confederacy" label="Swiss Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q151536" start="15009" end="15017" title="Novgorod Republic" label="Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q317078" start="15022" end="15027" title="Pskov Republic" label="Pskov"/>
<link wikidata="Q170770" start="15163" end="15170" title="Grand Duchy of Moscow" label="Muscovy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186096" start="15171" end="15177" title="Tsardom of Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q975405" start="15257" end="15280" title="Seljuk Sultanate of Rum" label="Seljuk Sultanate of Rum"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="15306" end="15313" title="Turkey" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q853309" start="15314" end="15331" title="Anatolian Beyliks" label="Anatolian Beyliks"/>
<link wikidata="Q400290" start="15337" end="15343" title="Ahiler" label="Ahiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640" start="15398" end="15404" title="Ankara" label="Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="15570" end="15580" title="Patrician (ancient Rome)" label="patricians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092673" start="16094" end="16107" title="Ciompi Revolt" label="Ciompi Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="16271" end="16293" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="16376" end="16385" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q37577" start="16502" end="16513" title="John Calvin" label="John Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="16708" end="16717" title="Huguenots" label="Huguenots"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="16729" end="16752" title="French Wars of Religion" label="French Wars of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="17095" end="17107" title="Dutch Revolt" label="Dutch Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="17133" end="17147" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="17174" end="17190" title="Habsburg Spain" label="Spanish Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q634839" start="17322" end="17339" title="Act of Abjuration" label="Act of Abjuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="17362" end="17373" title="Philip II of Spain" label="king Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q318380" start="17436" end="17449" title="Francis, Duke of Anjou" label="Duke of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="17457" end="17477" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q78454" start="17489" end="17506" title="William the Silent" label="William of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888561" start="17576" end="17583" title="The Estates" label="Estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="17725" end="17742" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="17769" end="17777" title="Puritans" label="Puritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="17847" end="17861" title="Charles I of England" label="King Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q969183" start="17887" end="17903" title="James Harrington (author)" label="James Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034181" start="17905" end="17920" title="Algernon Sidney" label="Algernon Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="17926" end="17937" title="John Milton" label="John Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q330362" start="18054" end="18074" title="English Commonwealth" label="English Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q325380" start="18209" end="18220" title="stadtholder" label="stadtholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483107" start="18440" end="18459" title="early modern Europe" label="early modern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="18519" end="18536" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="18749" end="18759" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="18776" end="18789" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="18836" end="18859" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987351" start="18883" end="18898" title="The Protectorate" label="Cromwell regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q31895" start="18984" end="18991" title="anarchy" label="anarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q317" start="18995" end="19002" title="dictatorship" label="tyranny"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="19027" end="19035" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="19108" end="19129" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Jean-Jacques Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="19134" end="19145" title="Charles de Secondat, baron de Montesquieu" label="Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q71234" start="19357" end="19389" title="Corsican Republic" label="republican experiment in Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="19644" end="19663" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="19714" end="19732" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333767" start="19878" end="19919" title="Rights of Englishmen" label="their rights to representative government"/>
<link wikidata="Q180095" start="20118" end="20128" title="tyranny" label="tyrannical"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="20140" end="20181" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="United States Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="20412" end="20422" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q843940" start="20556" end="20568" title="Common Sense (pamphlet)" label="Common Sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q126462" start="20579" end="20591" title="Thomas Paine" label="Thomas Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="20702" end="20735" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q512187" start="20797" end="20813" title="federal republic" label="federal republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="20845" end="20858" title="confederation" label="confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="20917" end="20962" title="Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union" label="Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="21037" end="21065" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="United States Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q29677" start="21086" end="21100" title="natural rights" label="natural rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="21170" end="21187" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192894" start="21242" end="21260" title="Flight to Varennes" label="Flight to Varennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="21341" end="21350" title="Louis XVI of France" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="21413" end="21438" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q472538" start="21514" end="21530" title="French client republic" label="client republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="21577" end="21585" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="21605" end="21626" title="French First Republic" label="French First Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q472538" start="21635" end="21650" title="Sister Republic" label="Sister Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094259" start="21676" end="21694" title="Popular monarchy" label="popular monarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="21822" end="21840" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="21846" end="21863" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="21873" end="21887" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="22042" end="22057" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242047" start="22239" end="22245" title="Creole class" label="Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334385" start="22278" end="22290" title="Peninsulares" label="Peninsulares"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="22402" end="22412" title="Amerindian" label="Amerindian"/>
<link wikidata="Q285950" start="22508" end="22527" title="popular sovereignty" label="popular sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8605" start="22529" end="22542" title="Simón Bolívar" label="Simón Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q173424" start="22758" end="22767" title="autocracy" label="autocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q285658" start="22852" end="22872" title="First Mexican Empire" label="First Mexican Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="22885" end="22899" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q37055" start="22969" end="22981" title="independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q217230" start="23026" end="23042" title="Empire of Brazil" label="Empire of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q58326" start="23207" end="23229" title="French Second Republic" label="French Second Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="23267" end="23279" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="23324" end="23345" title="French Third Republic" label="French Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="23466" end="23485" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q497777" start="23512" end="23534" title="First Spanish Republic" label="First Spanish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665185" start="23724" end="23739" title="Lisbon Regicide" label="Lisbon Regicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q638903" start="23745" end="23770" title="5 October 1910 revolution" label="5 October 1910 revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q167360" start="23787" end="23806" title="First Portuguese Republic" label="Portuguese Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774261" start="23850" end="23869" title="anti-Qing sentiment" label="anti-Qing sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="24023" end="24034" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q260998" start="24042" end="24072" title="Three Principles of the People" label="Three Principles of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="24147" end="24164" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="24366" end="24376" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="24512" end="24521" title="Confucian" label="Confucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q875377" start="24652" end="24669" title="Mandate of Heaven" label="Mandate of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q319881" start="24752" end="24771" title="Republic of Formosa" label="Republic of Formosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361989" start="24780" end="24805" title="First Philippine Republic" label="First Philippine Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="24865" end="24876" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="24937" end="24951" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="24960" end="24973" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="24982" end="25005" title="Austro-Hungarian Empire" label="Austro-Hungarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="25018" end="25032" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140152" start="25151" end="25158" title="Irish Republic" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="25160" end="25166" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="25168" end="25175" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="25180" end="25194" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q87138" start="25272" end="25299" title="Greco-Turkish War (1919–22)" label="Greco-Turkish War (1919–22)"/>
<link wikidata="Q265824" start="25342" end="25366" title="Second Hellenic Republic" label="Second Hellenic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="25411" end="25434" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Second Spanish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="25461" end="25478" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="25513" end="25529" title="Francoist Spain" label="Francoist regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="25548" end="25560" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="25566" end="25571" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="25675" end="25689" title="Fascist Italy (1922–1943)" label="Fascist regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q187149" start="25776" end="25786" title="Umberto II of Italy" label="Umberto II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260521" start="25813" end="25850" title="1946 Italian institutional referendum" label="1946 Italian institutional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576291" start="25983" end="25997" title="Italia turrita" label="Italia turrita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142281" start="26009" end="26033" title="national personification" label="national personification"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="26193" end="26211" title="House of Savoy" label="Savoy coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q802461" start="26375" end="26397" title="Festa della Repubblica" label="Festa della Repubblica"/>
<link wikidata="Q719967" start="26436" end="26448" title="Constitution of Italy" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053185" start="26479" end="26499" title="Constituent Assembly of Italy" label="Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="26541" end="26553" title="anti-fascist" label="anti-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="26630" end="26649" title="liberation of Italy" label="liberation of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="26698" end="26710" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q202686" start="27071" end="27089" title="Commonwealth realm" label="Commonwealth realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="27193" end="27202" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="27211" end="27218" title="Oceania" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="27295" end="27301" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="27306" end="27310" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216856" start="27357" end="27365" title="Republics in the Commonwealth of Nations" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="27505" end="27509" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="27511" end="27517" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="27519" end="27525" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="27527" end="27534" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="27536" end="27540" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="27542" end="27547" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="27552" end="27557" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="27597" end="27601" title="coup" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="27928" end="27946" title="Russian Revolution" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q239543" start="27952" end="27982" title="Russian Provisional Government" label="Russian Provisional Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="28079" end="28089" title="Bolsheviks" label="Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="28119" end="28154" title="Union of Soviet Socialist Republics" label="Union of Soviet Socialist Republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="28209" end="28225" title="Marxist–Leninist" label="Marxist–Leninist"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="28398" end="28406" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="28539" end="28546" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="28548" end="28556" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="28558" end="28568" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="28570" end="28577" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="28582" end="28589" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="28795" end="28809" title="decolonization" label="decolonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500483" start="28862" end="28876" title="Nguyễn dynasty" label="Nguyễn dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="28909" end="28913" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="28918" end="28926" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q624284" start="28980" end="28994" title="Arab socialism" label="Arab socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="29067" end="29072" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q590478" start="29137" end="29154" title="African socialism" label="African socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="29234" end="29241" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="29246" end="29254" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="29313" end="29325" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194747" start="29370" end="29387" title="constitutionalism" label="constitutionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="29461" end="29481" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="29607" end="29630" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="29634" end="29651" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q173424" start="29678" end="29688" title="autocratic" label="autocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="29704" end="29712" title="monarchy" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30461" start="29806" end="29815" title="President (government title)" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="29824" end="29837" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="30025" end="30042" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="30171" end="30195" title="United States" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857508" start="30246" end="30283" title="President of the Continental Congress" label="President of the Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="30376" end="30406" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="30444" end="30460" title="executive branch" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="30510" end="30528" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="30547" end="30566" title="presidential system" label="presidential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="30850" end="30857" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="30859" end="30864" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="30866" end="30871" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="30877" end="30896" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198907" start="30915" end="30937" title="parliamentary republic" label="parliamentary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="30995" end="31015" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="31146" end="31160" title="prime minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="31203" end="31227" title="Semi-presidential system" label="Semi-presidential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q640506" start="31613" end="31620" title="cabinet (government)" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009796" start="31703" end="31715" title="cohabitation (government)" label="cohabitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="31742" end="31764" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q238" start="31766" end="31776" title="San Marino" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="31782" end="31793" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489757" start="31929" end="31935" title="consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114852" start="31979" end="31997" title="comitia centuriata" label="comitia centuriata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="32096" end="32107" title="democracy" label="democracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="32423" end="32440" title="United States Electoral College" label="electoral college"/>
<link wikidata="Q207982" start="32733" end="32743" title="Legitimacy (political science)" label="legitimacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q993847" start="33133" end="33149" title="Connecticut Compromise" label="Great Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="33423" end="33433" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q389256" start="33684" end="33697" title="reserve power" label="reserve power"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="33838" end="33845" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="33943" end="33968" title="constitutional monarchies" label="constitutional monarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572599" start="34474" end="34490" title="crowned republic" label="crowned republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q584683" start="35039" end="35058" title="elective monarchy" label="elective monarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="35195" end="35203" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174156" start="35214" end="35235" title="Yang di-Pertuan Agong" label="Yang di-Pertuan Agong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159925" start="35271" end="35291" title="Conference of Rulers" label="Conference of Rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658454" start="35338" end="35350" title="Malay states" label="Malay states"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="35360" end="35378" title="Vatican City-State" label="Vatican City-State"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="35390" end="35394" title="pope" label="pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="35443" end="35452" title="Cardinal (Catholicism)" label="cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q250843" start="35676" end="35689" title="primogeniture" label="primogeniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="35779" end="35809" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q978929" start="35906" end="35920" title="Golden Liberty" label="Golden Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153902" start="36142" end="36156" title="rzeczpospolita" label="rzeczpospolita"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="36269" end="36280" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="36438" end="36450" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="36990" end="37002" title="nation state" label="nation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="37010" end="37050" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="37407" end="37425" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q311464" start="37462" end="37489" title="second session of the AVNOJ" label="second session of the AVNOJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982616" start="37511" end="37531" title="Constitution of Yugoslavia" label="federal constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="37549" end="37560" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="all cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="37751" end="37767" title="Romance languages" label="Romance-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917" start="37930" end="37959" title="Canton of Geneva" label="Republic and Canton of Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724" start="37968" end="37997" title="Ticino" label="Republic and Canton of Ticino"/>
<link wikidata="Q133156" start="38869" end="38877" title="colonies" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q37055" start="38885" end="38896" title="independent (nation)" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="39142" end="39159" title="United States Constitution" label="U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140229" start="39172" end="39177" title="Political union" label="union"/>
<link wikidata="Q190944" start="39489" end="39499" title="Jean Bodin" label="Jean Bodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="39936" end="39953" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="40043" end="40059" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="40699" end="40715" title="Direct democracy" label="Direct democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="40830" end="40854" title="Representative democracy" label="Representative democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255892" start="40858" end="40877" title="Democratic republic" label="Democratic republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="40889" end="40898" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="41345" end="41353" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q44197" start="41355" end="41366" title="Maximilien Robespierre" label="Robespierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q122290" start="41372" end="41377" title="Jean-Paul Marat" label="Marat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="41648" end="41659" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128354" start="41947" end="41970" title="classical republicanism" label="classical republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128354" start="41974" end="41988" title="civic humanism" label="civic humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974906" start="42103" end="42115" title="civic virtue" label="civic virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="42117" end="42128" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="42225" end="42242" title="liberal democracy" label="liberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336397" start="42346" end="42361" title="J. G. A. Pocock" label="J. G. A. Pocock"/>
<link wikidata="Q465807" start="42733" end="42748" title="Quentin Skinner" label="Quentin Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237041" start="42750" end="42763" title="Philip Pettit" label="Philip Pettit"/>
<link wikidata="Q956164" start="42768" end="42781" title="Cass Sunstein" label="Cass Sunstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="43071" end="43095" title="representative democracy" label="representative democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049689" start="43209" end="43232" title="Federalist No. 10" label="Federalist Paper No. 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q241676" start="43322" end="43334" title="Noah Webster" label="Noah Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="43697" end="43714" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q266119" start="43739" end="43752" title="James McHenry" label="James McHenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="43867" end="43894" title="Declaration of Independence (United States)" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="44128" end="44141" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705664" start="44152" end="44168" title="Luther v. Borden" label="Luther v. Borden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823570" start="44248" end="44266" title="political question" label="political question"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893259" start="44372" end="44399" title="United States v. Cruikshank" label="United States v. Cruikshank"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="45320" end="45330" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q822286" start="45388" end="45402" title="Bernard Bailyn" label="Bernard Bailyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076618" start="45579" end="45593" title="Isaac Kramnick" label="Isaac Kramnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q836915" start="45641" end="45651" title="Free state (government)" label="Free state"/>
<link wikidata="Q309477" start="45654" end="45672" title="Primus inter pares" label="Primus inter pares"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636489" start="45675" end="45692" title="List of republics" label="List of republics"/>
<link wikidata="" start="45695" end="45711" title=":Category:Republics" label="Index: Republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841076" start="45714" end="45730" title="Guarantee Clause" label="Guarantee Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q465807" start="45824" end="45839" title="Quentin Skinner" label="Quentin Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008708" start="48412" end="48441" title="William Everdell" label="Everdell, William R. Everdell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25538" wikidata="Q229445" url="?curid=25538" title="Robyn">
<text>Robin Miriam Carlsson (; born 12 June 1979), known professionally as Robyn (), is a Swedish singer, songwriter, record producer, and DJ. Her 1995 debut album &quot;Robyn Is Here&quot; produced two &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 top 10 singles: &quot;Do You Know (What It Takes)&quot; and &quot;Show Me Love&quot;. Her second and third albums, &quot;My Truth&quot; (1999) and &quot;Don&#x27;t Stop the Music&quot; (2002), were released in Sweden.

Robyn returned to international success with her fourth album, &quot;Robyn&quot; (2005), which brought a Grammy Award nomination. The album spawned the singles &quot;Be Mine!&quot; and &quot;With Every Heartbeat&quot; – the latter of which topped the charts in the United Kingdom. Robyn released a trilogy of mini-albums in 2010, known as the &quot;Body Talk&quot; series. They received broad critical praise and three Grammy Award nominations, and produced three top-10 singles: &quot;Dancing On My Own&quot;, &quot;Hang with Me&quot; and &quot;Indestructible&quot;. Robyn followed this with two collaborative EPs: &quot;Do It Again&quot; (2014) with Röyksopp, and &quot;Love Is Free&quot; (2015) with La Bagatelle Magique. She released her eighth solo album, &quot;Honey&quot;, in 2018 to widespread acclaim.

== Career ==
=== 1989–1993: Early career ===
Robyn voiced the character of Miranda in the 1989 Swedish-Norwegian animated film &quot;The Journey to Melonia&quot;. Directed by Per Åhlin, the film is loosely based on William Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;The Tempest&quot;.

Robyn recorded &quot;Du kan alltid bli nummer ett&quot; (&quot;You Can Always be Number One&quot;), the theme song for the Swedish television show &quot;Lilla Sportspegeln&quot;, in 1991 at age 12. Robyn performed her first original song at that age on another television show, &quot;Söndagsöppet&quot; (&quot;Sundays&quot;). She was discovered by Swedish pop singer Meja in the early 1990s when Meja and her band, Legacy of Sound, visited Robyn&#x27;s school as part of a musical workshop. Impressed by Robyn&#x27;s performance, Meja contacted her management and a meeting was arranged with Robyn and her parents. At age 14, after completing middle school education in 1993, Robyn signed with Ricochet Records Sweden (which was acquired by BMG in 1994). Robyn collaborated with producers Max Martin and Denniz Pop, who gave the singer a gritty (but popular) sound.

=== 1994–2004: &quot;Robyn Is Here&quot;, &quot;My Truth&quot; and &quot;Don&#x27;t Stop the Music&quot; ===
She began her pop-music career at age 15, signing with RCA Records in 1994 and releasing her debut single (&quot;You&#x27;ve Got That Somethin&#x27;) in Sweden. Later that year, Robyn&#x27;s Swedish breakthrough came with the single &quot;Do You Really Want Me (Show Respect)&quot;. The singles became part of the album &quot;Robyn Is Here&quot;, which was released in October 1995. Robyn also contributed vocals to Blacknuss&#x27; 1996 single, &quot;Roll with Me.&quot; She entered Sweden&#x27;s pre-selection for the Eurovision Song Contest 1997 as co-writer and producer of &quot;Du gör mig hel igen&quot; (&quot;You Make Me Whole Again&quot;), which was performed by Cajsalisa Ejemyr. In Melodifestivalen 1997, the song finished fourth.

Robyn&#x27;s US breakthrough came in late 1997, when the dance-pop/R&amp;B singles &quot;Show Me Love&quot; and &quot;Do You Know (What It Takes)&quot; reached the top 10 of the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. She performed &quot;Show Me Love&quot; on the American children&#x27;s show &quot;All That&quot; that year, and the songs also performed well in the UK. Robyn re-released &quot;Do You Really Want Me (Show Respect)&quot; internationally, but it was less successful than the other releases. It was ineligible for the US charts because there was no retail single available, but it reached number 32 on the Hot 100 Airplay chart. &quot;Show Me Love&quot; was featured in the 1998 Lukas Moodysson film, &quot;Fucking Åmål&quot;, and the song&#x27;s title was used as the title of the film in English-speaking countries. As Robyn&#x27;s popularity grew internationally, she was diagnosed with exhaustion and returned to Sweden to recover.
Robyn&#x27;s second album, &quot;My Truth&quot;, was released in Sweden in May 1999 and subsequently in Europe. The single, &quot;Electric&quot;, was a commercial success and propelled &quot;My Truth&quot; to the number-two position in Sweden. The autobiographical album included the tracks &quot;Universal Woman&quot; and &quot;Giving You Back&quot;. Despite her US success with &quot;Robyn Is Here&quot;, &quot;My Truth&quot; was not released in that country, partly because it included two songs which referenced an abortion she had in her teens. Robyn contributed to Christian Falk&#x27;s 1999 debut solo album, &quot;Quel Bordel&quot; (&quot;What a Mess&quot;), appearing on &quot;Remember&quot; and &quot;Celebration&quot;. The following year, she appeared on &quot;Intro/Fristil&quot; on Petter&#x27;s self-titled album. In 2001, Robyn performed &quot;Say You&#x27;ll Walk the Distance&quot; for the soundtrack of &quot;On the Line&quot;.

She signed a worldwide deal with Jive Records in July 2001, moving from BMG after the singer was &quot;disillusioned with the lack of artistic control [she] had there&quot;; a year later, Jive was acquired by BMG when it bought Zomba Records. Robyn later said, &quot;I was back where I started!&quot; In October 2002, she released the album &quot;Don&#x27;t Stop the Music&quot; in Sweden. The album&#x27;s singles, &quot;Keep This Fire Burning&quot; and &quot;Don&#x27;t Stop the Music&quot;, received airplay in Scandinavia and elsewhere in Europe. The title track was later covered by the Swedish girl group Play, and the lead single (&quot;Keep This Fire Burning&quot;) was covered by the British soul singer Beverley Knight. In May 2004, &quot;Robyn&#x27;s Best&quot; was released in the US. It was a condensed version of her debut album, with no material from her later releases. In 2006, after her departure from BMG, &quot;Det Bästa Med Robyn&quot; (&quot;The Best of Robyn&quot;) was released in Sweden with material from her first three albums; notable omissions, however, were the singles &quot;Don&#x27;t Stop the Music&quot; and &quot;Keep This Fire Burning&quot;.

=== 2004–2009: Konichiwa Records and &quot;Robyn&quot; ===
The decade-long relationship between Robyn and her label ended in 2004. When Jive Records reacted negatively to &quot;Who&#x27;s That Girl?s new electropop sound, the singer decided to release music on her own. In early 2005, she announced that she was leaving Jive to start her own label. Konichiwa Records was created to liberate Robyn artistically. She said on her website that her new album would be released earlier than anticipated, with notable collaborators including Klas Åhlund from Teddybears STHLM, Swedish duo The Knife and former Cheiron Studios producer Alexander Kronlund.
Robyn released the single &quot;Be Mine!&quot; in March 2005. Her fourth album, &quot;Robyn&quot;, was her first number-one album in Sweden when it was released a month later. Influenced by electronica, rap, R&amp;B and new-age music, &quot;Robyn&quot; was critically praised and earned the singer three 2006 Swedish Grammy Awards: &quot;Årets Album&quot; (Best Album), &quot;Årets Kompositör&quot; (Best Writer, with Klas Åhlund) and &quot;Årets Pop Kvinnlig&quot; (Best Pop Female). The album evoked global interest in Robyn, who was recognized for co-writing the song &quot;Money for Nothing&quot; for Darin Zanyar (his debut single). She released three more singles—&quot;Who&#x27;s That Girl?&quot;, &quot;Handle Me&quot; and &quot;Crash and Burn Girl&quot;—from the eponymous LP, which was popular in Sweden. Robyn appeared on the Basement Jaxx track &quot;Hey U&quot; from their 2006 album, &quot;Crazy Itch Radio&quot;, and contributed &quot;Dream On&quot; and &quot;C.C.C&quot; to Christian Falk&#x27;s &quot;People Say&quot; (his second album) that year. In December 2006, Robyn released &quot;The Rakamonie EP&quot; in the UK as a preview of her more-recent material; this was followed by the March 2007 release of &quot;Konichiwa Bitches&quot;. A revised edition of &quot;Robyn&quot; was released in the UK the following month, with two new tracks—&quot;With Every Heartbeat&quot; (a collaboration with Kleerup) and &quot;Cobrastyle&quot; (a cover of a 2006 single by Swedish rockers Teddybears)—with slightly altered versions of the original music.

The second single from the release in the United Kingdom was &quot;With Every Heartbeat&quot; with Kleerup, which was released in late July 2007 and topped the UK Singles Chart, becoming the second single by Swedish artists to top the charts in Britain during the 2000s decade after Eric Prydz&#x27;s &quot;Call on Me&quot; in September and October 2004. Robyn appeared on Jo Whiley&#x27;s BBC Radio 1 showcase show, &quot;Live Lounge&quot;. In Australia, where &quot;Robyn&quot; reached the top ten of the iTunes Store&#x27;s album chart, &quot;With Every Heartbeat&quot; received attention on radio and video networks. Robyn contributed vocals to Fleshquartet&#x27;s single, &quot;This One&#x27;s for You&quot;, from their &quot;Voices of Eden&quot; album that year. Konichiwa Records signed an international licensing deal with Universal Music Group to distribute Robyn&#x27;s music globally, and her UK recordings are released by Island Records. &quot;The Rakamonie EP&quot; was released in January 2008 by Cherrytree Records (a subsidiary of Interscope Records), and the US version of &quot;Robyn&quot; was released in April of that year. &quot;With Every Heartbeat&quot;, &quot;Handle Me&quot; and &quot;Cobrastyle&quot; were top-10 club singles, and &quot;With Every Heartbeat&quot; received airplay on US pop and dance radio stations. Robyn provided backing vocals on Britney Spears&#x27; 2007 single, &quot;Piece of Me&quot;, and appeared on the Fyre Department remix of &quot;Sexual Eruption&quot; by rapper Snoop Dogg. She made a brief US tour to promote &quot;Robyn&quot;, and was the supporting act for Madonna&#x27;s Sticky &amp; Sweet Tour on European dates in 2008. In January 2009, Robyn received a 2008 Swedish Grammis Award for Best Live Act.

=== 2010–2016: &quot;Body Talk&quot;, &quot;Do It Again&quot; and EPs ===
She released the first album of the &quot;Body Talk&quot; trilogy, &quot;Body Talk Pt. 1&quot;, on 14 June 2010 in the Nordic countries on EMI and on 15 June in the US on Interscope Records. It was preceded by the single &quot;Dancing On My Own&quot; on 1 June 2010. The song was Robyn&#x27;s first number-one single in Sweden and her fourth top-10 single in the UK and the US, peaking at number eight on the UK Singles Chart and number three on &quot;Billboard&quot;&#x27;s Hot Dance Club Songs chart. In July 2010, she sang a minimalist, electro cover version of Alicia Keys&#x27; &quot;Try Sleeping with a Broken Heart&quot; live on IHeartRadio. Robyn made the All Hearts Tour in July and August 2010 with American singer Kelis to promote the &quot;Body Talk&quot; albums, and a four-date UK tour at the end of October.
On 6 September 2010, &quot;Body Talk Pt. 2&quot; was released in the UK. It was preceded by the lead single, a dance version of &quot;Hang with Me&quot; from &quot;Body Talk Pt. 1&quot;, the day before. The album includes a duet with American rapper Snoop Dogg, &quot;U Should Know Better&quot;. Robyn performed &quot;Dancing On My Own&quot; with deadmau5 at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards on 12 September. In a BBC &quot;Newsbeat&quot; interview, she explained her decision to release three albums in one year: &quot;It was just something I felt like I needed to do. I just never thought about selling records or not, making this decision. I just did it for myself. It&#x27;s a way of, for me, to stay inspired and to be able to do the things I like to do&quot;. However, Robyn said that she would not do it again: &quot;When you do 16 or 13 songs in one go, you kind of empty yourself, and it takes a while to fill back up and have new things to talk about, so I think it&#x27;s good for everyone&quot;. Robyn announced the release of the single, &quot;Indestructible&quot;, on 13 October 2010; an acoustic version appeared on &quot;Body Talk Pt. 2&quot;. The song was released on 17 November in Scandinavia and 22 November in the UK. Co-written by Klas Åhlund, it was described as a &quot;pulsating full power version [that] takes every ounce of that emotion and wraps it up in another exceptional disco-pop record worthy of any dance-floor or passion-laden sing-a-long.&quot; Robyn planned to collaborate with Swedish producer Max Martin on the song &quot;Time Machine&quot;; Martin produced Robyn&#x27;s US singles, &quot;Do You Know (What It Takes)&quot; and &quot;Show Me Love&quot;, both of which peaked in the top 10 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 100 in 1997. The &quot;Body Talk&quot; albums have sold 91,000 copies in the US.

Robyn guest-starred on &quot;War at the Roses&quot;, a 2010 episode of &quot;Gossip Girl&quot;, where she performed an acoustic version of &quot;Hang with Me&quot;; &quot;Dancing On My Own&quot; was featured at the end of the episode. In November, she said she would return to the studio in January 2011 with enough material to release a new album later that year. Robyn opened for Coldplay on their 2012 tour in Dallas, Houston, Tampa, Miami, Atlanta, Charlotte, Philadelphia and Washington, D.C. In mid-2013, she appeared with Paul Rudd and Sean Combs on &quot;Go Kindergarten&quot; from the Lonely Island&#x27;s &quot;The Wack Album&quot;. Robyn posted two videos of the Snoop Dogg collaboration (&quot;U Should Know Better&quot; and &quot;Behind the Scenes&quot;) and a game, &quot;Mixory&quot;, on 21 and 22 June 2013. That year she received the Stockholm KTH Royal Institute of Technology Great Prize for &quot;artistic contributions and embrace of technology&quot;, worth 1.2 million Swedish kronor (around £117,000 at the time), which she planned to donate to a cause of her choice.

Robyn sang on Neneh Cherry&#x27;s &quot;Out of the Black&quot;, from Cherry&#x27;s album &quot;Blank Project&quot;, in 2014. She also announced the Do It Again Tour with Röyksopp and a collaborative mini-album, &quot;Do It Again&quot;, that year. The tour ended prematurely after the death of Robyn&#x27;s longtime friend and collaborator, Christian Falk. An EP of their final collaboration, &quot;Love Is Free&quot;, was released soon afterwards. Robyn appeared at the Popaganda Festival in Sweden the following year and performed songs written with Falk before she postponed subsequent performances because she was still grieving.

She premiered a dance set of remixed versions of her songs at the May 2016 Boston Calling Music Festival, with plans for more dates during the year. Robyn released &quot;Trust Me&quot;, a collaboration EP with Mr. Tophat, in November 2016. She appeared on &quot;That Could Have Been Me&quot;, a track from Todd Rundgren&#x27;s album &quot;White Knight&quot;, the following year.

=== 2017–present: &quot;Honey&quot; ===

In March 2017, a new Robyn song called &quot;Honey&quot; was used in the soundtrack of the final season of HBO TV series, &quot;Girls&quot;. The creator of the show, Lena Dunham selected it from a collection of her in-progress tracks. Robyn finalized it specially for the series.

In February 2018, Robyn answered a fan on Twitter, that she will release her new album &quot;some time this year&quot;. During an interview with Kindness, she revealed she was almost done with her new album. Afterwards, at a party, she debuted the full version of her new song &quot;Honey&quot;. On 23 July, a new song entitled &quot;Missing U&quot; was enlisted as a single, and later taken down. Fans quickly began noticing the hints she was dropping, including a post on Twitter with the hashtag #MissingU. It was released on 1 August 2018.

On 1 August 2018, Robyn presented &quot;Missing U&quot; on Annie Mac&#x27;s BBC Radio 1 show. There she talked about the long silence and the process of making the upcoming album to be released before 2018&#x27;s end. Robyn also released a mini-documentary featuring the song and a tribute to her fans who were missing her and her new music for years. On 19 September 2018, Robyn announced her upcoming album is titled &quot;Honey&quot; to be released on 26 October 2018. In November 2018, Robyn announced she would be touring across North America and Europe come 2019. The trek kicked off on 5 February 2019 and ended that April. On 27 September 2019, she performed in Kungsträdgården in Stockholm during the international climate strikes. Before singing &quot;Ever Again&quot;, she also told the audience she had met climate researcher Johan Rockström.

In February 2020, she accepted the award for Songwriter of the Decade at the 2020 NME Awards. After cancelled promotion, gigs, and festivals starting that year amid the COVID-19 pandemic, Robyn launched a series of live-stream DJ sets from Stockholm, &quot;Robyn Presents Club DOMO&quot;, and also participated in Record Store Day with a series of previously unreleased remixes of tracks from her record &quot;Honey&quot; for limited-release vinyl then streaming by her favorite DJs, artists and collaborators, including Joe Goddard, Avalon Emerson, Robert Hood, Louie Vega, Soulwax, Kim Ann Foxman, Young Marco, The Blessed Madonna, Patrick Topping and Planningtorock. The next two years Robyn collaborated on SG Lewis and TEED&#x27;s electropop track &quot;Impact&quot; with Channel Tres for the former&#x27;s album &quot;Times&quot;, Jónsi&#x27;s avant-pop track &quot;Salt Licorice&quot; produced by A.G. Cook for the former&#x27;s album &quot;Shiver&quot;, and Joakim Åhlund and Björn Yttling&#x27;s revived side project &quot;Smile&quot; psychedelic pop track &quot;Call My Name&quot; for their album &quot;Phantom Island&quot;.

In September 2021, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, from a poll of more than 250 artists, musicians, producers, critics, journalists and industry figures, ranked &quot;Dancing On My Own&quot; at number 20, between Billie Holiday&#x27;s &quot;Strange Fruit&quot; and John Lennon&#x27;s &quot;Imagine&quot;, on their reissued list of &quot;The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time&quot;, the decade&#x27;s highest entry on their list. Also that month Robyn signed a management contract with Young Artists, the global division of Young (a music and arts organization founded in London) that still maintained her record label and distribution agreements apart from their own. In November 2021, Robyn received an Honorary Award for her &quot;significant contributions&quot; to the music industry from the Swedish Music Publishers Board who went on to say that she had &quot;forever written herself into music history&quot;.

In 2025, Robyn was part of the 50th anniversary celebrations of &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;. On February 14, 2025 she performed &quot;Dancing On My Own&quot; and Talking Heads&#x27; &quot;This Must Be the Place (Naive Melody)&quot; with David Byrne on &quot;SNL50: The Homecoming Concert&quot;, while also attending the show&#x27;s 50th Anniversary Special.

== Artistry ==
Robyn has a soprano vocal range. The &quot;Dallas Observer&quot;&#x27;s Preston Jones described her music as &quot;electro-pop confections, with their gleaming, sexy, sophisticated surfaces, each laced with sharply observed lyrics capable of leaving a bruise or breaking your heart&quot;, and characterized by &quot;lovelorn lyrics or her synth-sweetened hooks&quot;. Alex Morris of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; described &quot;the euphoria of heartbreak&quot; as a unifying theme underlying most of her albums. Robyn debuted as a mainstream pop-R&amp;B singer during the 1990s, but felt limited by the artistic constraints of working for a major record label. Andrew R. Cho of NBCNews.com described her earlier work as &quot;cookie cutter 1990s R&amp;B out of the TLC playbook&quot;. By the time she reinvented herself as an independent artist in 2005, she had pivoted away from R&amp;B and adopted an experimental electronic and synth-pop sound. Her fourth album, &quot;Robyn&quot;, retained some influences of American R&amp;B and hip hop, but &quot;largely stuck to the sound and feel of electronic gadgets, manipulating them to sound like other genres&quot;.

Writer and musician Sasha Frere-Jones called Robyn &quot;remarkably adept at producing pleasurable, accessible pop that, like some kind of graphite alloy, is light but strong, able to carry humor and emotional weight&quot;. Her lyrics sometimes reference female empowerment and independence; Frere-Jones said her &quot;wheelhouse is a classic subset of the dance song: a number that moves ahead quickly, with juicy chord changes, while the lyrics crack open with pain&quot;. According to Jake Hall of i-D, the term &quot;sad banger&quot; has become virtually synonymous with Robyn since she released &quot;Dancing on My Own&quot;.

While writing her eighth studio album, &quot;Honey&quot;, Robyn found that she was no longer interested in creating &quot;tidy pop songs&quot;, exploring music she described as hypnotic &quot;that didn&#x27;t have a beginning and an end&quot; unlike her previous work. She attributed this shift in approach to lacking the &quot;killer instinct&quot; to attempt to replicate her hits. Laura Snapes of &quot;The Guardian&quot; described the album as &quot;exploratory dance music that reflects the hopelessness and ecstasy that informed her time away from the spotlight&quot;. Robyn has said she that she prefers writing with other artists instead of independently, but finds it frustrating that people expect her as a woman &quot;to have written the lyrics and the guys to have made the music&quot;. Her collaborators have said that she &quot;was as involved in the technical work as they were&quot;. Caryn Ganz of &quot;The New York Times&quot; called her writing process &quot;designed to wring out truths&quot;, while songwriter and producer Klas Åhlund called it a series of “intimate, open and sort of confessional conversations&quot;, in which they would share details they wouldn&#x27;t with others. 

== Personal life ==
Robyn&#x27;s parents led an independent theatre group, and growing up in that environment influenced her sense of style: &quot;I was around people who dressed up for work every day, and so the concept of how you can use clothes to change your personality or communicate who you are is very interesting to me.&quot; Robyn has two younger siblings.

Robyn began dating Olof Inger in 2002, and they were engaged until 2011. She later became engaged to videographer Max Vitali, referring to him in a 2013 interview with &quot;Collection of Style&quot; magazine as her fiancé: &quot;We became friends when we made the video for &#x27;Be Mine&#x27;, and now we work together a lot. He made all the videos for the last album.&quot; She and Vitali separated for a period of time following the release of &quot;Body Talk&quot;, but had reconciled by 2018. In July 2023, Robyn revealed on Instagram that she had a son, Tyko, with further reporting from Sweden&#x27;s national registry noting he had been born in April 2022.

==Legacy==
Various publications have nicknamed Robyn the &quot;Queen of Sad Bangers&quot;. Robyn&#x27;s debut, &quot;Robyn Is Here&quot;, was instrumental in helping launch Max Martin&#x27;s career in pop music, and creating demand for &quot;white girl R&amp;B singers, from Mandy Moore to Billie Piper.&quot; When Robyn turned down Jive Records&#x27; attempt to sign her in the United States, the label shifted their focus to a young artist named Britney Spears, with the head of Jive calling Spears &quot;an American Robyn – a Europop teen queen, with an added dash of &#x27;girl next door. Martin ended up producing much of Spears&#x27;s debut album &quot;...Baby One More Time&quot;, and she was seen as &quot;easier to control than the &#x27;forceful&#x27; Swedish teenager.&quot;

&quot;Robyn&quot; (2005) has been cited as a foundational pop album of the 2000s, cementing the validity of &quot;poptimism&quot; in music critics circles that &quot;[made] indie nerds lighten up.&quot; It gained significant acclaim from indie magazine &quot;Pitchfork&quot;, which had only covered a few pop albums prior. Their acclaim &quot;placed synthpop on the same level as earnest, artsy acts such as Arcade Fire and Sufjan Stevens.&quot; She was seen as &quot;a bellwether for rock getting less rigid in introducing non-guitar sounds and for pop music becoming more dance-driven and experimental.&quot;

Robyn helped shape contemporary pop music by taking creative control, introducing indie elements to mainstream pop, and including feminist and other political themes in her music long before it became acceptable for popstars to do so. &quot;Variety&quot; attributed her work as a &quot;savant&quot; and &quot;pioneer&quot; upon going independent to the accelerated prominence of the alternative pop genre starting in the late 2000s. According to El Hunt of &quot;NME&quot;, the &quot;Body Talk&quot; project &quot;paved the way for more experimental, alternatively-minded pop stars to find a place in the landscape in years to come&quot; and pioneered &quot;a different kind of pop&quot;.

Publications such as &quot;The Guardian&quot; and &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; have called Robyn one of the most influential pop artists of her generation, whereas &quot;Billboard&quot; declared her &quot;one of the most critically lauded pop artists of the century&quot;. According to friend and collaborator Joseph Mount, after the singer&#x27;s come back in the mid-2000s, there was &quot;more than one Robyn-style track on every pop person&#x27;s record&quot;. According to Alexandra Pollard of &quot;The Independent&quot;, &quot;Ask any young pop singer today who their biggest influence is and chances are they&#x27;ll have mentioned Robyn&quot;. She has been recognized as an important influence by Carly Rae Jepsen, Lorde, Charli XCX, Taylor Swift, Christine and the Queens, Andy McCluskey, Ariel Rechtshaid and Perfume Genius. Her &quot;triumph in rejection&quot; has led to her status as an LGBTQ icon. &quot;NPR&quot; Jessica Hopper deemed Robyn &quot;The 21st Century&#x27;s Pop Oracle&quot;, while &quot;The New York Times&quot;″ Caryn Ganz called her &quot;Pop&#x27;s Glittery Rebel&quot;.

== Discography ==

* &quot;Robyn Is Here&quot; (1995)
* &quot;My Truth&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Don&#x27;t Stop the Music&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Robyn&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Body Talk Pt. 1&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Body Talk Pt. 2&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Body Talk&quot; (2010)

* &quot;Honey&quot; (2018)

== Awards and nominations ==
== See also ==
* Popular music in Sweden

== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q229445" start="0" end="21" title="Robyn" label="Robin Miriam Carlsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q229445" start="69" end="74" title="Robyn" label="Robyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284200" start="164" end="177" title="Robyn Is Here" label="Robyn Is Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="197" end="226" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286336" start="249" end="276" title="Do You Know (What It Takes)" label="Do You Know (What It Takes)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502983" start="293" end="305" title="Show Me Love (Robyn song)" label="Show Me Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284287" start="348" end="356" title="My Truth" label="My Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q151790" start="380" end="405" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Stop the Music (Robyn album)" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Stop the Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284281" start="515" end="520" title="Robyn (album)" label="Robyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="551" end="563" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875520" start="612" end="620" title="Be Mine! (Robyn song)" label="Be Mine!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569486" start="637" end="657" title="With Every Heartbeat" label="With Every Heartbeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641547" start="795" end="804" title="Body Talk (Robyn album)" label="Body Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488185" start="932" end="949" title="Dancing On My Own" label="Dancing On My Own"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498637" start="963" end="975" title="Hang with Me" label="Hang with Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498646" start="992" end="1006" title="Indestructible (Robyn song)" label="Indestructible"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991627" start="1068" end="1079" title="Do It Again (EP)" label="Do It Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q193218" start="1098" end="1106" title="Röyksopp" label="Röyksopp"/>
<link wikidata="Q20735589" start="1118" end="1130" title="Love Is Free (album)" label="Love Is Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q20648575" start="1149" end="1169" title="Robyn &amp;amp; La Bagatelle Magique" label="La Bagatelle Magique"/>
<link wikidata="Q58130768" start="1213" end="1218" title="Honey (Robyn album)" label="Honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q634983" start="1333" end="1340" title="Miranda (The Tempest)" label="Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="1371" end="1384" title="animated film" label="animated film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758203" start="1391" end="1413" title="The Journey to Melonia" label="The Journey to Melonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q369512" start="1433" end="1442" title="Per Åhlin" label="Per Åhlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="1473" end="1492" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q86440" start="1506" end="1517" title="The Tempest" label="The Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q10689158" start="1810" end="1822" title="Söndagsöppet" label="Söndagsöppet"/>
<link wikidata="Q242589" start="1893" end="1897" title="Meja" label="Meja"/>
<link wikidata="Q109852733" start="1941" end="1956" title="Legacy of Sound (Swedish group)" label="Legacy of Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q770103" start="2267" end="2270" title="Bertelsmann Music Group" label="BMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q318223" start="2315" end="2325" title="Max Martin" label="Max Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q372570" start="2330" end="2340" title="Denniz Pop" label="Denniz Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="2557" end="2568" title="RCA Records" label="RCA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q8056711" start="2615" end="2650" title="You&amp;#x27;ve Got That Somethin&amp;#x27;" label="You&amp;#x27;ve Got That Somethin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286368" start="2741" end="2777" title="Do You Really Want Me (Show Respect)" label="Do You Really Want Me (Show Respect)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284200" start="2828" end="2841" title="Robyn Is Here" label="Robyn Is Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q203987" start="3021" end="3049" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1997" label="Eurovision Song Contest 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310111" start="3085" end="3104" title="Du gör mig hel igen" label="Du gör mig hel igen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4945979" start="3173" end="3189" title="Cajsalisa Ejemyr" label="Cajsalisa Ejemyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654452" start="3194" end="3215" title="Melodifestivalen 1997" label="Melodifestivalen 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q211756" start="3301" end="3310" title="dance-pop" label="dance-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="3311" end="3318" title="contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502983" start="3333" end="3345" title="Show Me Love (Robyn song)" label="Show Me Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286336" start="3362" end="3389" title="Do You Know (What It Takes)" label="Do You Know (What It Takes)"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="3422" end="3451" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q280154" start="3535" end="3543" title="All That" label="All That"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356902" start="3856" end="3871" title="Hot 100 Airplay" label="Hot 100 Airplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q319849" start="3929" end="3944" title="Lukas Moodysson" label="Lukas Moodysson"/>
<link wikidata="Q304394" start="3957" end="3969" title="Fucking Åmål" label="Fucking Åmål"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="4040" end="4056" title="English language" label="English-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="4140" end="4150" title="Fatigue (medical)" label="exhaustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284287" start="4219" end="4227" title="My Truth" label="My Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962394" start="4316" end="4324" title="Electric (Robyn song)" label="Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284200" start="4572" end="4585" title="Robyn Is Here" label="Robyn Is Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993279" start="4757" end="4771" title="Christian Falk" label="Christian Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q765808" start="4981" end="4987" title="Petter (rapper)" label="Petter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278712" start="5113" end="5124" title="On the Line (2001 film)" label="On the Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q27184" start="5166" end="5178" title="Jive Records" label="Jive Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q770103" start="5205" end="5208" title="Bertelsmann Music Group" label="BMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q219112" start="5361" end="5374" title="Zomba Records" label="Zomba Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q151790" start="5480" end="5505" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Stop the Music (Robyn album)" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Stop the Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383092" start="5555" end="5577" title="Keep This Fire Burning" label="Keep This Fire Burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291948" start="5594" end="5619" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Stop the Music (Robyn song)" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Stop the Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402734" start="5744" end="5748" title="Play (band)" label="Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q508171" start="5846" end="5861" title="Beverley Knight" label="Beverley Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997060" start="6489" end="6510" title="Who&amp;#x27;s That Girl (Robyn song)" label="Who&amp;#x27;s That Girl?"/>
<link wikidata="Q188450" start="6516" end="6526" title="electropop" label="electropop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646020" start="6661" end="6678" title="Konichiwa Records" label="Konichiwa Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170564" start="6847" end="6858" title="Klas Åhlund" label="Klas Åhlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299813" start="6864" end="6880" title="Teddybears STHLM" label="Teddybears STHLM"/>
<link wikidata="Q741471" start="6894" end="6903" title="The Knife" label="The Knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089707" start="6915" end="6930" title="Cheiron Studios" label="Cheiron Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297178" start="6940" end="6958" title="Alexander Kronlund" label="Alexander Kronlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875520" start="6992" end="7000" title="Be Mine! (Robyn song)" label="Be Mine!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284281" start="7046" end="7051" title="Robyn (album)" label="Robyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q213121" start="7180" end="7193" title="new-age music" label="new-age music"/>
<link wikidata="Q212649" start="7565" end="7577" title="Darin Zanyar" label="Darin Zanyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647457" start="7671" end="7680" title="Handle Me" label="Handle Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182387" start="7697" end="7716" title="Crash and Burn Girl" label="Crash and Burn Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q544018" start="7797" end="7810" title="Basement Jaxx" label="Basement Jaxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q123700079" start="7823" end="7828" title="Hey U" label="Hey U"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183175" start="7864" end="7880" title="Crazy Itch Radio" label="Crazy Itch Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306415" start="7910" end="7918" title="Dream On (Christian Falk song)" label="Dream On"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993279" start="7950" end="7964" title="Christian Falk" label="Christian Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759358" start="8064" end="8080" title="The Rakamonie EP" label="The Rakamonie EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6429333" start="8192" end="8209" title="Konichiwa Bitches" label="Konichiwa Bitches"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569486" start="8326" end="8346" title="With Every Heartbeat" label="With Every Heartbeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082262" start="8375" end="8382" title="Kleerup" label="Kleerup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138999" start="8394" end="8404" title="Cobrastyle" label="Cobrastyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299813" start="8456" end="8466" title="Teddybears (band)" label="Teddybears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082262" start="8622" end="8629" title="Kleerup" label="Kleerup"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="8683" end="8699" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q155141" start="8806" end="8816" title="Eric Prydz" label="Eric Prydz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227079" start="8830" end="8840" title="Call on Me (Eric Prydz song)" label="Call on Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q133698" start="8896" end="8905" title="Jo Whiley" label="Jo Whiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="8913" end="8924" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6655284" start="8946" end="8957" title="Live Lounge" label="Live Lounge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9593" start="9030" end="9042" title="iTunes Store" label="iTunes Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q937124" start="9172" end="9184" title="Fleshquartet" label="Fleshquartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="9354" end="9375" title="Universal Music Group" label="Universal Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q190585" start="9457" end="9471" title="Island Records" label="Island Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q21089" start="9534" end="9552" title="Cherrytree Records" label="Cherrytree Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q231694" start="9570" end="9588" title="Interscope Records" label="Interscope Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975" start="9899" end="9913" title="Britney Spears" label="Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q717044" start="9939" end="9950" title="Piece of Me (Britney Spears song)" label="Piece of Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q953403" start="10009" end="10024" title="Sexual Eruption" label="Sexual Eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096" start="10041" end="10051" title="Snoop Dogg" label="Snoop Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="10139" end="10146" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q582526" start="10154" end="10177" title="Sticky &amp;amp; Sweet Tour" label="Sticky &amp;amp; Sweet Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542122" start="10252" end="10259" title="Grammis" label="Grammis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="10499" end="10502" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q231694" start="10531" end="10549" title="Interscope Records" label="Interscope Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488185" start="10587" end="10604" title="Dancing On My Own" label="Dancing On My Own"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="10769" end="10785" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="10806" end="10827" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638075" start="10835" end="10855" title="Hot Dance Club Songs" label="Hot Dance Club Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q121507" start="10925" end="10936" title="Alicia Keys" label="Alicia Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577556" start="10949" end="10981" title="Try Sleeping with a Broken Heart" label="Try Sleeping with a Broken Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q793699" start="10996" end="11007" title="IHeartRadio" label="IHeartRadio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728816" start="11024" end="11039" title="All Hearts" label="All Hearts Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q294979" start="11085" end="11090" title="Kelis" label="Kelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498637" start="11317" end="11329" title="Hang with Me" label="Hang with Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096" start="11433" end="11443" title="Snoop Dogg" label="Snoop Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q49009" start="11530" end="11538" title="deadmau5" label="deadmau5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066340" start="11546" end="11573" title="2010 MTV Video Music Awards" label="2010 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019591" start="11606" end="11614" title="Newsbeat" label="Newsbeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498646" start="12239" end="12253" title="Indestructible (Robyn song)" label="Indestructible"/>
<link wikidata="Q109969227" start="12585" end="12594" title="disco-pop" label="disco-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q318223" start="12715" end="12725" title="Max Martin" label="Max Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286336" start="12811" end="12838" title="Do You Know (What It Takes)" label="Do You Know (What It Takes)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502983" start="12855" end="12867" title="Show Me Love (Robyn song)" label="Show Me Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q199853" start="13098" end="13109" title="Gossip Girl" label="Gossip Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q45188" start="13403" end="13411" title="Coldplay" label="Coldplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q276525" start="13550" end="13559" title="Paul Rudd" label="Paul Rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q216936" start="13564" end="13574" title="Sean Combs" label="Sean Combs"/>
<link wikidata="Q863573" start="13611" end="13628" title="the Lonely Island" label="the Lonely Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q14396159" start="13642" end="13656" title="The Wack Album" label="The Wack Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096" start="13695" end="13705" title="Snoop Dogg" label="Snoop Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q854280" start="13882" end="13915" title="Royal Institute of Technology" label="KTH Royal Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q122922" start="14020" end="14026" title="Swedish krona" label="kronor"/>
<link wikidata="Q233342" start="14127" end="14139" title="Neneh Cherry" label="Neneh Cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239121" start="14208" end="14221" title="Blank Project" label="Blank Project"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14261" end="14277" title="Do It Again (Röyksopp and Robyn album)#Tour" label="Do It Again Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q193218" start="14283" end="14291" title="Röyksopp" label="Röyksopp"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991627" start="14330" end="14341" title="Do It Again (EP)" label="Do It Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993279" start="14453" end="14467" title="Christian Falk" label="Christian Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q20735589" start="14511" end="14523" title="Love Is Free (album)" label="Love Is Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073780" start="14822" end="14851" title="Boston Calling Music Festival" label="Boston Calling Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q364875" start="15053" end="15066" title="Todd Rundgren" label="Todd Rundgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q30601935" start="15086" end="15098" title="White Knight (album)" label="White Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q618329" start="15296" end="15301" title="Girls (TV series)" label="Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q288359" start="15334" end="15345" title="Lena Dunham" label="Lena Dunham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410629" start="15594" end="15602" title="Kindness (musician)" label="Kindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q56051895" start="15783" end="15792" title="Missing U (Robyn song)" label="Missing U"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="16070" end="16081" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q58130768" start="16419" end="16424" title="Honey (Robyn album)" label="Honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q926316" start="16664" end="16679" title="Kungsträdgården" label="Kungsträdgården"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="16683" end="16692" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q67205392" start="16704" end="16733" title="September 2019 climate strikes" label="international climate strikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q85759934" start="16756" end="16766" title="Ever Again" label="Ever Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q6075610" start="16832" end="16847" title="Johan Rockström" label="Johan Rockström"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637268" start="16932" end="16942" title="NME Awards" label="NME Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="17019" end="17036" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222130" start="17164" end="17180" title="Record Store Day" label="Record Store Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q58130768" start="17260" end="17265" title="Honey (Robyn album)" label="Honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q60734259" start="17371" end="17382" title="Joe Goddard (musician)" label="Joe Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q106920445" start="17384" end="17398" title="Avalon Emerson" label="Avalon Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q582813" start="17400" end="17411" title="Robert Hood" label="Robert Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256698" start="17413" end="17423" title="Louie Vega" label="Louie Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288216" start="17425" end="17432" title="Soulwax" label="Soulwax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609632" start="17434" end="17448" title="Kim Ann Foxman" label="Kim Ann Foxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q60736200" start="17463" end="17482" title="The Blessed Madonna" label="The Blessed Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q20687412" start="17484" end="17499" title="Patrick Topping" label="Patrick Topping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098277" start="17504" end="17518" title="Planningtorock" label="Planningtorock"/>
<link wikidata="Q60426261" start="17561" end="17569" title="SG Lewis" label="SG Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828198" start="17574" end="17578" title="Totally Enormous Extinct Dinosaurs" label="TEED"/>
<link wikidata="Q188450" start="17586" end="17596" title="electropop" label="electropop"/>
<link wikidata="Q100885871" start="17627" end="17639" title="Channel Tres" label="Channel Tres"/>
<link wikidata="Q105690113" start="17674" end="17679" title="Times (SG Lewis album)" label="Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q315650" start="17687" end="17692" title="Jónsi" label="Jónsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9162904" start="17700" end="17709" title="avant-pop" label="avant-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q18763975" start="17754" end="17763" title="A.G. Cook" label="A.G. Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q100144780" start="17798" end="17804" title="Shiver (Jónsi album)" label="Shiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6204768" start="17816" end="17829" title="Joakim Åhlund" label="Joakim Åhlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905218" start="17834" end="17847" title="Björn Yttling" label="Björn Yttling"/>
<link wikidata="Q383982" start="17894" end="17909" title="psychedelic pop" label="psychedelic pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="18011" end="18024" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488185" start="18148" end="18165" title="Dancing On My Own" label="Dancing On My Own"/>
<link wikidata="Q104358" start="18194" end="18208" title="Billie Holiday" label="Billie Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q765709" start="18222" end="18235" title="Strange Fruit" label="Strange Fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="18246" end="18257" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971" start="18271" end="18278" title="Imagine (John Lennon song)" label="Imagine"/>
<link wikidata="Q286102" start="18289" end="18358" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Songs of All Time" label="their reissued list of &amp;quot;The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q15548291" start="18501" end="18506" title="Young (record label)" label="Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646020" start="18579" end="18595" title="Konichiwa Records" label="her record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q15548291" start="18635" end="18644" title="Young (record label)" label="their own"/>
<link wikidata="Q125880451" start="18925" end="18954" title="Saturday Night Live season 50" label="50th anniversary celebrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="18964" end="18983" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488185" start="19032" end="19049" title="Dancing On My Own" label="Dancing On My Own"/>
<link wikidata="Q205001" start="19060" end="19073" title="Talking Heads" label="Talking Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q65952857" start="19086" end="19123" title="This Must Be the Place (Naive Melody)" label="This Must Be the Place (Naive Melody)"/>
<link wikidata="Q336640" start="19135" end="19146" title="David Byrne" label="David Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19156" end="19185" title="SNL50: The Homecoming Concert" label="SNL50: The Homecoming Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q131806449" start="19230" end="19254" title="Saturday Night Live 50th Anniversary Special" label="50th Anniversary Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q30903" start="19284" end="19291" title="soprano" label="soprano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211375" start="19315" end="19330" title="Dallas Observer" label="Dallas Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="19661" end="19674" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q203994" start="19701" end="19709" title="euphoria" label="euphoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="19811" end="19822" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="pop-R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184050" start="19947" end="19958" title="NBCNews.com" label="NBCNews.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q742804" start="20034" end="20037" title="TLC (group)" label="TLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298934" start="20200" end="20209" title="synth-pop" label="synth-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284281" start="20241" end="20246" title="Robyn (album)" label="Robyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7425084" start="20454" end="20471" title="Sasha Frere-Jones" label="Sasha Frere-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q286430" start="20935" end="20938" title="i-D" label="i-D"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488185" start="21040" end="21057" title="Dancing on My Own" label="Dancing on My Own"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="21986" end="22004" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170564" start="22110" end="22121" title="Klas Åhlund" label="Klas Åhlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q318223" start="23482" end="23492" title="Max Martin" label="Max Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="23562" end="23569" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q187832" start="23584" end="23595" title="Mandy Moore" label="Mandy Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q151113" start="23599" end="23611" title="Billie Piper" label="Billie Piper"/>
<link wikidata="Q27184" start="23642" end="23654" title="Jive Records" label="Jive Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975" start="23757" end="23771" title="Britney Spears" label="Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q517415" start="23838" end="23845" title="Europop" label="Europop"/>
<link wikidata="Q308087" start="23886" end="23900" title="girl next door" label="girl next door"/>
<link wikidata="Q190911" start="23968" end="23989" title="...Baby One More Time (album)" label="...Baby One More Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q130750875" start="24210" end="24219" title="poptimism" label="poptimism"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="24355" end="24364" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q58608" start="24504" end="24515" title="Arcade Fire" label="Arcade Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q319502" start="24520" end="24534" title="Sufjan Stevens" label="Sufjan Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="24740" end="24749" title="pop music" label="pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q42201" start="24790" end="24795" title="indie music" label="indie"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="24949" end="24956" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25091" end="25106" title="Alternative rock#Alternative pop" label="alternative pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="25171" end="25174" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="25425" end="25437" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6285663" start="25705" end="25717" title="Joseph Mount" label="Joseph Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q52583" start="26101" end="26117" title="Carly Rae Jepsen" label="Carly Rae Jepsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13476175" start="26119" end="26124" title="Lorde (singer)" label="Lorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084390" start="26126" end="26136" title="Charli XCX" label="Charli XCX"/>
<link wikidata="Q26876" start="26138" end="26150" title="Taylor Swift" label="Taylor Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q15838567" start="26152" end="26176" title="Christine and the Queens" label="Christine and the Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q526645" start="26178" end="26192" title="Andy McCluskey" label="Andy McCluskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790444" start="26194" end="26210" title="Ariel Rechtshaid" label="Ariel Rechtshaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484709" start="26215" end="26229" title="Perfume Genius" label="Perfume Genius"/>
<link wikidata="Q40221" start="26296" end="26306" title="gay icon" label="LGBTQ icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="26314" end="26317" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="26412" end="26430" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284200" start="26527" end="26540" title="Robyn Is Here" label="Robyn Is Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284287" start="26562" end="26570" title="My Truth" label="My Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q151790" start="26592" end="26617" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Stop the Music (Robyn album)" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Stop the Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284281" start="26639" end="26644" title="Robyn (album)" label="Robyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q890076" start="26666" end="26681" title="Body Talk Pt. 1" label="Body Talk Pt. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936869" start="26703" end="26718" title="Body Talk Pt. 2" label="Body Talk Pt. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641547" start="26740" end="26749" title="Body Talk (Robyn album)" label="Body Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q58130768" start="26772" end="26777" title="Honey (Robyn album)" label="Honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q10684890" start="26838" end="26861" title="Popular music in Sweden" label="Popular music in Sweden"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25540" wikidata="Q212971" url="?curid=25540" title="Request for Comments">
<text>A Request for Comments (RFC) is a publication in a series from the principal technical development and standards-setting bodies for the Internet, most prominently the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). An RFC is authored by individuals or groups of engineers and computer scientists in the form of a memorandum describing methods, behaviors, research, or innovations applicable to the working of the Internet and Internet-connected systems. It is submitted either for peer review or to convey new concepts, information, or, occasionally, engineering humor.

The IETF adopts some of the proposals published as RFCs as Internet Standards. However, many RFCs are informational or experimental in nature and are not standards. The RFC system was invented by Steve Crocker in 1969 to help record unofficial notes on the development of ARPANET. RFCs have since become official documents of Internet specifications, communications protocols, procedures, and events. According to Crocker, the documents &quot;shape the Internet&#x27;s inner workings and have played a significant role in its success,&quot; but are not widely known outside the community.

Outside of the Internet community, other documents also called &quot;requests for comments&quot; have been published, as in U.S. Federal government work, such as the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.

==History==
The inception of the RFC format occurred in 1969 as part of the seminal ARPANET project. Today, it is the official publication channel for the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), the Internet Architecture Board (IAB), and to some extent the global community of computer network researchers in general.

The authors of the first RFCs typewrote their work and circulated hard copies among the ARPA researchers. Unlike the modern RFCs, many of the early RFCs were actual Requests for Comments and were titled as such to avoid sounding too declarative and to encourage discussion. The RFC leaves questions open and is written in a less formal style. This less formal style is now typical of Internet Draft documents, the precursor step before being approved as an RFC.

In December 1969, researchers began distributing new RFCs via the newly operational ARPANET. , titled &quot;Host Software&quot;, was written by Steve Crocker of the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), and published on April 7, 1969. Although written by Steve Crocker, the RFC had emerged from an early working group discussion between Steve Crocker, Steve Carr, and Jeff Rulifson.

In , which first defined the RFC series, Crocker started attributing the RFC series to the Network Working Group. Rather than being a formal committee, it was a loose association of researchers interested in the ARPANET project. In effect, it included anyone who wanted to join the meetings and discussions about the project.

Many of the subsequent RFCs of the 1970s also came from UCLA, because UCLA is one of the first of what were Interface Message Processors (IMPs) on ARPANET. The Augmentation Research Center (ARC) at Stanford Research Institute, directed by Douglas Engelbart, is another of the four first of what were ARPANET nodes and the source of early RFCs. The ARC became the first network information center (InterNIC), which was managed by Elizabeth J. Feinler to distribute the RFCs along with other network information.

===RFC Editor function===
From 1969 until 1998, Jon Postel served as the RFC editor. On his death in 1998, his obituary was published as .

Following the expiration of the original ARPANET contract with the U.S. federal government, the Internet Society, acting on behalf of the IETF, contracted with the Networking Division of the University of Southern California (USC) Information Sciences Institute (ISI) to assume the editorship and publishing responsibilities under the direction of the IAB. 
Sandy Ginoza joined USC/ISI in 1999 to work on RFC editing, and Alice Hagens in 2005. Bob Braden took over the role of RFC project lead, while Joyce K. Reynolds continued to be part of the team until October 13, 2006.

In July 2007, &quot;streams&quot; of RFCs were defined, so that the editing duties could be divided. IETF documents came from IETF working groups or submissions sponsored by an IETF area director from the Internet Engineering Steering Group. The IAB can publish its own documents. A research stream of documents comes from the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF), and an independent stream from other outside sources. A new model was proposed in 2008, refined, and published in August 2009, splitting the task into several roles, including the RFC Series Advisory Group (RSAG). The model was updated in 2012, and 2020.
The streams were also refined in December 2009, with standards defined for their style.
In January 2010, the RFC Editor function was moved to a contractor, Association Management Solutions, with Glenn Kowack serving as interim series editor. In late 2011, Heather Flanagan was hired as the permanent RFC Series Editor (RSE). Also at that time, an RFC Series Oversight Committee (RSOC) was created.

In 2020, the IAB convened the RFC Editor Future Development program to discuss potential changes to the RFC Editor model. The results of the program were included the RFC Editor Model (Version 3) as defined in , published in June 2022. Generally, the new model is intended to clarify responsibilities and processes for defining and implementing policies related to the RFC series and the RFC Editor function. Changes in the new model included establishing the position of the RFC Consulting Editor, the RFC Series Working Group (RSWG), and the RFC Series Approval Board (RSAB). It also established a new Editorial Stream for the RFC Series and concluded the RSOC. The role of the RSE was changed to the RFC Series Consulting Editor (RSCE). In September 2022, Alexis Rossi was appointed to that position.

===New publishing format===
Requests for Comments were originally produced in non-reflowable text format. In August 2019, the format was changed so that new documents can be viewed optimally in devices with varying display sizes.

==Production and versioning==
The RFC Editor assigns each RFC a serial number. Once assigned a number and published, an RFC is never rescinded or modified; if the document requires amendments, the authors publish a revised document. Therefore, some RFCs supersede others; the superseded RFCs are said to be &quot;deprecated&quot;, &quot;obsolete&quot;, or &quot;obsoleted by&quot; the superseding RFC. Together, the serialized RFCs compose a continuous historical record of the evolution of Internet standards and practices. The RFC process is documented in (&quot;The Internet Standards Process, Revision 3&quot;).

The RFC production process differs from the standardization process of formal standards organizations such as International Organization for Standardization (ISO). Internet technology experts may submit an Internet Draft without support from an external institution. Standards-track RFCs are published with approval from the IETF, and are usually produced by experts participating in IETF Working Groups, which first publish an Internet Draft. This approach facilitates initial rounds of peer review before documents mature into RFCs.

The RFC tradition of pragmatic, experience-driven, after-the-fact standards authorship accomplished by individuals or small working groups can have important advantages over the more formal, committee-driven process typical of ISO and national standards bodies.

Most RFCs use a common set of terms such as &quot;MUST&quot; and &quot;NOT RECOMMENDED&quot; (as defined by ), augmented Backus–Naur form (ABNF) () as a meta-language, and simple text-based formatting, in order to keep the RFCs consistent and easy to understand.

===Sub-series===
The RFC series contains three sub-series for IETF RFCs: BCP, FYI, and STD. Best Current Practice (BCP) is a sub-series of mandatory IETF RFCs not on standards track. For Your Information (FYI) is a sub-series of informational RFCs promoted by the IETF as specified in (FYI 1). In 2011, obsoleted FYI 1 and concluded this sub-series. Standard (STD) used to be the third and highest maturity level of the IETF standards track specified in (BCP 9). In 2011 (a new part of BCP 9) reduced the standards track to two maturity levels.

===Streams===
There are five streams of RFCs: IETF, IRTF, IAB, &quot;independent submission&quot;, and &quot;Editorial&quot;. Only the IETF creates BCPs and RFCs on the standards track. The IAB publishes informational documents relating to policy or architecture. The IRTF publishes the results of research, either as informational documents or as experiments. Independent submissions are published
at the discretion of the Independent Submissions Editor. Non-IETF documents are reviewed by the IESG for conflicts with IETF work. IRTF and &quot;independent &quot; RFCs generally contain relevant information or experiments for the Internet at large not in conflict with IETF work. compare . The Editorial Stream is used to effect editorial policy changes across the RFC series (see ).

==Obtaining RFCs==

The official source for RFCs on the World Wide Web is the RFC Datatracker. Almost any published RFC can be retrieved via a URL of the form https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5000, shown for .

Every RFC is submitted as plain ASCII text and is published in that form, but may also be available in other formats.

For easy access to the metadata of an RFC, including abstract, keywords, author(s), publication date, errata, status, and especially later updates, the RFC Editor site offers a search form with many features. A redirection sets some efficient parameters, example: rfc:5000.

The official International Standard Serial Number (ISSN) of the RFC series is 2070-1721.

==Status==
Not all RFCs are standards.
Each RFC is assigned a designation with regard to status within the Internet standardization process. This status is one of the following: &quot;Informational&quot;, &quot;Experimental&quot;, &quot;Best Current Practice&quot;, &quot;Standards Track&quot;, or &quot;Historic&quot;.

Once submitted, accepted, and published, an RFC cannot be changed. Errata may be submitted, which are published separately. More significant changes require a new submission which will receive a new serial number.

===Standards Track===

Standards track documents are further divided into &quot;Proposed Standard&quot; and &quot;Internet Standard&quot; documents.

Only the IETF, represented by the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG), can approve standards-track RFCs.

If an RFC becomes an Internet Standard (STD), it is assigned an STD number but retains its RFC number. The definitive list of Internet Standards is the Official Internet Protocol Standards. Previously STD 1 used to maintain a snapshot of the list.

When an Internet Standard is updated, its STD number stays the same, now referring to a new RFC or set of RFCs. A given Internet Standard, STD &quot;n&quot;, may be RFCs &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; at a given time, but later the same standard may be updated to be RFC &quot;z&quot; instead. For example, in 2007 was an Internet Standard—STD 1—and in May 2008 it was replaced with , so changed to &quot;Historic&quot;, became an Internet Standard, and STD 1 is . is replaced by , updating to no longer use STD 1.

(Best Current Practices work in a similar fashion; BCP &quot;n&quot; refers to a certain RFC or set of RFCs, but which RFC or RFCs may change over time).

===Informational===
An informational RFC can be nearly anything from April 1 jokes to widely recognized essential RFCs like Domain Name System Structure and Delegation (). Some informational RFCs formed the FYI sub-series.

===Experimental===
An experimental RFC can be an IETF document or an individual submission to the RFC Editor. A draft is designated experimental if it is unclear the proposal will work as intended or unclear if the proposal will be widely adopted. An experimental RFC may be promoted to standards track if it becomes popular and works well.

===Best Current Practice===
The Best Current Practice subseries collects administrative documents and other texts which are considered as official rules and not only &quot;informational&quot;, but which do not affect &quot;over the wire data&quot;. The border between standards track and BCP is often unclear. If a document only affects the Internet Standards Process, like BCP 9, or IETF administration, it is clearly a BCP. If it only defines rules and regulations for Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) registries it is less clear; most of these documents are BCPs, but some are on the standards track.

The BCP series also covers technical recommendations for how to practice Internet standards; for instance, the recommendation to use source filtering to make DoS attacks more difficult (: &quot;Network Ingress Filtering: Defeating Denial of Service Attacks which employ IP Source Address Spoofing&quot;) is BCP 38.

===Historic===
A &quot;historic&quot; RFC is one that the technology defined by the RFC is no longer recommended for use, which differs from &quot;Obsoletes&quot; header in a replacement RFC. For example, (SMTP) itself is obsoleted by various newer RFCs, but SMTP itself is still &quot;current technology&quot;, so it is not in &quot;Historic&quot; status. However, since BGP version 4 has entirely superseded earlier BGP versions, the RFCs describing those earlier versions, such as , have been designated historic.

===Unknown===
Status &quot;unknown&quot; is used for some very old RFCs, where it is unclear which status the document would get if it were published today. Some of these RFCs would not be published at all today; an early RFC was often just that: a simple Request for Comments, not intended to specify a protocol, administrative procedure, or anything else for which the RFC series is used today.

==Copyright==
The general rule is that original authors (or their employers, if their employment conditions so stipulate) retain copyright unless they make an explicit transfer of their rights.

An independent body, the IETF Trust, holds the copyright for some RFCs and for all others it is granted a license by the authors that allows it to reproduce RFCs. The Internet Society is referenced on many RFCs prior to RFC4714 as the copyright owner, but it transferred its rights to the IETF Trust.

==See also==
* Best current practice
* Internet Experiment Note
* List of RFCs

==References==
==External links==

* RFC Editor
* RFC Database
* RFC Errata
* RFC Frequently Asked Questions
* RFC Index (text)
* Official Internet Protocol Standards
* IETF&#x27;s RFC page
* RFC Index (HTML) With the text of each RFC, also mentions what other RFCs this one &quot;updates&quot; or is &quot;updated by&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="2" end="22" title="Request for Comments" label="Request for Comments"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="24" end="27" title="Request for Comments" label="RFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="136" end="144" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="167" end="198" title="Internet Engineering Task Force" label="Internet Engineering Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q82594" start="268" end="286" title="computer scientist" label="computer scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q660651" start="305" end="315" title="memorandum" label="memorandum"/>
<link wikidata="Q215028" start="473" end="484" title="peer review" label="peer review"/>
<link wikidata="Q290378" start="622" end="639" title="Internet Standard" label="Internet Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178997" start="759" end="772" title="Steve Crocker" label="Steve Crocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q177524" start="835" end="842" title="ARPANET" label="ARPANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101564" start="898" end="912" title="specifications" label="specifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="914" end="937" title="communications protocol" label="communications protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="1277" end="1300" title="U.S. Federal government" label="U.S. Federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967350" start="1319" end="1365" title="National Highway Traffic Safety Administration" label="National Highway Traffic Safety Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q177524" start="1452" end="1459" title="ARPANET" label="ARPANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="1523" end="1554" title="Internet Engineering Task Force" label="Internet Engineering Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667943" start="1567" end="1594" title="Internet Architecture Board" label="Internet Architecture Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="1717" end="1726" title="typewrote" label="typewrote"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372066" start="1753" end="1764" title="Hard copy" label="hard copies"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="1775" end="1779" title="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency" label="ARPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421134" start="2071" end="2085" title="Internet Draft" label="Internet Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178997" start="2294" end="2307" title="Steve Crocker" label="Steve Crocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="2315" end="2352" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q27493" start="2462" end="2475" title="working group" label="working group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174866" start="2526" end="2539" title="Jeff Rulifson" label="Jeff Rulifson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451440" start="2977" end="3004" title="Interface Message Processor" label="Interface Message Processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820422" start="3029" end="3057" title="Augmentation Research Center" label="Augmentation Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q604924" start="3067" end="3094" title="Stanford Research Institute" label="Stanford Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q92614" start="3108" end="3125" title="Douglas Engelbart" label="Douglas Engelbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q173106" start="3177" end="3182" title="Node (networking)" label="nodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211090" start="3266" end="3274" title="InterNIC" label="InterNIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534" start="3298" end="3318" title="Elizabeth J. Feinler" label="Elizabeth J. Feinler"/>
<link wikidata="Q92623" start="3429" end="3439" title="Jon Postel" label="Jon Postel"/>
<link wikidata="Q194105" start="3458" end="3464" title="editor" label="editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="3712" end="3745" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030821" start="3752" end="3782" title="Information Sciences Institute" label="Information Sciences Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931909" start="3965" end="3975" title="Bob Braden" label="Bob Braden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563" start="4022" end="4039" title="Joyce K. Reynolds" label="Joyce K. Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="4303" end="4338" title="Internet Engineering Steering Group" label="Internet Engineering Steering Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667993" start="4425" end="4453" title="Internet Research Task Force" label="Internet Research Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307372" start="6003" end="6013" title="Reflowable document" label="reflowable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198578" start="6216" end="6229" title="serial number" label="serial number"/>
<link wikidata="Q369577" start="6813" end="6828" title="standardization" label="standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="6879" end="6925" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="International Organization for Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421134" start="6975" end="6989" title="Internet Draft" label="Internet Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="7153" end="7171" title="IETF Working Group" label="IETF Working Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q538050" start="7679" end="7705" title="augmented Backus–Naur form" label="augmented Backus–Naur form"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="7894" end="7898" title="IETF" label="IETF"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="8424" end="8428" title="IETF" label="IETF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667993" start="8430" end="8434" title="Internet Research Task Force" label="IRTF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667943" start="8436" end="8439" title="Internet Architecture Board" label="IAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="8873" end="8877" title="IESG" label="IESG"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="9220" end="9234" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q42253" start="9307" end="9310" title="URL" label="URL"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="9415" end="9420" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q235557" start="9492" end="9499" title="file format" label="formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q131276" start="9790" end="9826" title="International Standard Serial Number" label="International Standard Serial Number"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="10587" end="10622" title="Internet Engineering Steering Group" label="Internet Engineering Steering Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q290378" start="10643" end="10658" title="standards-track" label="standards-track"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322187" start="11656" end="11669" title="April Fools&amp;#x27; Day Request for Comments" label="April 1 jokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8767" start="11711" end="11729" title="Domain Name System" label="Domain Name System"/>
<link wikidata="Q359219" start="12185" end="12206" title="Best Current Practice" label="Best Current Practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q242540" start="12624" end="12659" title="Internet Assigned Numbers Authority" label="Internet Assigned Numbers Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q131406" start="12926" end="12936" title="DoS attack" label="DoS attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q160453" start="13290" end="13294" title="SMTP" label="SMTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11155" start="13456" end="13469" title="Border Gateway Protocol" label="BGP version 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q749257" start="14362" end="14378" title="Internet Society" label="Internet Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q359219" start="14512" end="14533" title="Best current practice" label="Best current practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153513" start="14536" end="14560" title="Internet Experiment Note" label="Internet Experiment Note"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243307" start="14563" end="14575" title="List of RFCs" label="List of RFCs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25596" wikidata="Q740911" url="?curid=25596" title="Ragga">
<text>Raggamuffin music (or simply ragga) is a subgenre of dancehall and reggae music. The instrumentals primarily consist of electronic music with heavy use of sampling.

Wayne Smith&#x27;s &quot;Under Mi Sleng Teng&quot;, produced by King Jammy in 1985 on a Casio MT-40 synthesizer, is a seminal ragga song. &quot;Sleng Teng&quot; boosted Jammy&#x27;s popularity immensely, and other producers quickly released their own versions of the riddim, accompanied by dozens of different vocalists.

==Origins==
Ragga originated in Jamaica during the 1980s, at the same time that electronic dance music&#x27;s popularity was increasing globally. Ragga spread to Europe, North America, and Africa, eventually spreading to Japan, India, and the rest of the world. Ragga heavily influenced early jungle music, and also spawned the 
bhangragga style when fused with bhangra. In the 1990s, ragga and breakcore music fused, creating a style known as raggacore.

The term &quot;raggamuffin&quot; is an intentional misspelling of &quot;&quot;, a word that entered the Jamaican Patois lexicon after the British Empire colonized Jamaica in the 17th century. Despite the British colonialists&#x27; pejorative application of the term, Jamaican youth appropriated it as an ingroup designation. The term &quot;raggamuffin music&quot; describes the music of Jamaica&#x27;s &quot;ghetto dwellers&quot;.

==Ragga and hip hop music==
King Jammy produced 1985 hit, &quot;(Under Me) Sleng Teng&quot; by Wayne Smith. In the late 1980s, Jamaican deejay Daddy Freddy and Asher D&#x27;s &quot;Ragamuffin Hip-Hop&quot; became the first multinational single to feature the word &quot;ragga&quot; in its title.

==See also==
*Reggae
*Ska
*Bouyon-muffin
*Bhangragga
*Jamaican Patois, the language of the distinctive vocals found in ragga

==References==

*The world of DJs and the turntable culture By Todd Souvignier
* Stascha (Staša) Bader: &quot;Worte wie Feuer: Dancehall Reggae und Raggamuffin&quot;. &quot;Words Like Fire. Dancehall Reggae and Raggamuffin&quot;. Dissertation Thesis at the Zurich University, 1986. Buchverlag Michael Schwinn, Neustadt, Deutschland, 1. Aufl. 1988, 2. Aufl. 1992
* René Wynands: &quot;Do The Reggae. Reggae von Pocomania bis Ragga und der Mythos Bob Marley.&quot; Pieper Verlag und Schott. 1995 (Pieper), (Schott) Online-Version
* Norman C. Stolzoff: &quot;Wake the Town and Tell the People. Dancehall Culture in Jamaica.&quot; Durham; London: Duke University Press, 2000. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q740911" start="0" end="17" title="Ragga" label="Raggamuffin music"/>
<link wikidata="Q740911" start="29" end="34" title="Ragga" label="ragga"/>
<link wikidata="Q474027" start="53" end="62" title="dancehall" label="dancehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="67" end="73" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="120" end="136" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="155" end="163" title="Sampling (music)" label="sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566866" start="166" end="177" title="Wayne Smith (musician)" label="Wayne Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294101" start="191" end="210" title="Sleng Teng" label="Under Mi Sleng Teng"/>
<link wikidata="Q329809" start="230" end="240" title="King Jammy" label="King Jammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048928" start="254" end="265" title="Casio MT-40" label="Casio MT-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q852209" start="433" end="439" title="riddim" label="riddim"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="520" end="527" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="568" end="590" title="electronic dance music" label="electronic dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102161" start="775" end="793" title="oldschool jungle" label="early jungle music"/>
<link wikidata="Q854844" start="817" end="827" title="bhangragga" label="bhangragga"/>
<link wikidata="Q854844" start="850" end="857" title="Bhangra (music)" label="bhangra"/>
<link wikidata="Q903735" start="883" end="892" title="breakcore" label="breakcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q903735" start="932" end="941" title="raggacore" label="raggacore"/>
<link wikidata="Q35939" start="1048" end="1063" title="Jamaican Patois" label="Jamaican Patois"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="1082" end="1096" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="1097" end="1106" title="Colonialism" label="colonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520214" start="1226" end="1238" title="Reappropriation" label="appropriated"/>
<link wikidata="Q375181" start="1248" end="1255" title="ingroup" label="ingroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q572717" start="1322" end="1338" title="music of Jamaica" label="music of Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q329809" start="1404" end="1414" title="King Jammy" label="King Jammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294101" start="1440" end="1461" title="Sleng Teng" label="(Under Me) Sleng Teng"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566866" start="1471" end="1482" title="Wayne Smith (musician)" label="Wayne Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156959" start="1519" end="1531" title="Daddy Freddy" label="Daddy Freddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804832" start="1536" end="1543" title="Asher D (rapper)" label="Asher D"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027319" start="1557" end="1575" title="Ragamuffin Hip-Hop" label="Ragamuffin Hip-Hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="1613" end="1619" title="Single (music)" label="single"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="1687" end="1693" title="Reggae" label="Reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q54365" start="1695" end="1698" title="Ska" label="Ska"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1700" end="1713" title="Bouyon music#Bouyon-muffin" label="Bouyon-muffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q854844" start="1715" end="1725" title="Bhangragga" label="Bhangragga"/>
<link wikidata="Q35939" start="1727" end="1742" title="Jamaican Patois" label="Jamaican Patois"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25597" wikidata="Q814997" url="?curid=25597" title="Religious conversion">
<text>Religious conversion is the adoption of a set of beliefs identified with one particular religious denomination to the exclusion of others. Thus &quot;religious conversion&quot; would describe the abandoning of adherence to one denomination and affiliating with another. This might be from one to another denomination within the same religion, for example, from Protestant Christianity to Roman Catholicism or from Shi&#x27;a Islam to Sunni Islam. In some cases, religious conversion &quot;marks a transformation of religious identity and is symbolized by special rituals&quot;.

People convert to a different religion for various reasons, including active conversion by free choice due to a change in beliefs, secondary conversion, deathbed conversion, conversion for convenience, marital conversion, and forced conversion. Religious conversion can also be driven by practical considerations. Historically, people have converted to evade taxes, to escape military service or to gain political representation.

Proselytism is the act of attempting to convert by persuasion another individual from a different religion or belief system. Apostate is a term used by members of a religion or denomination to refer to someone who has left that religion or denomination.

== Religion and proselytization ==
The religions of the world are divided into two groups: those that actively seek new followers (missionary religions) and those that do not (non-missionary religions). This classification dates back to a lecture given by Max Müller in 1873, and is based on whether or not a religion seeks to gain new converts. The three main religions classified as missionary religions are Buddhism, Christianity, and Islam, while the non-missionary religions include Judaism, Zoroastrianism, and Hinduism. Other religions, such as Primal Religions, Confucianism, and Taoism, may also be considered non-missionary religions.

==Abrahamic religions==
===Baháʼí Faith===

In sharing their faith with others, Baháʼís are cautioned to &quot;obtain a hearing&quot; – meaning to make sure the person they are proposing to teach is open to hearing what they have to say. &quot;Baháʼí pioneers&quot;, rather than attempting to supplant the cultural underpinnings of the people in their adopted communities, are encouraged to integrate into the society and apply Baháʼí principles in living and working with their neighbors.

Baháʼís recognize the divine origins of all revealed religion, and believe that these religions occurred sequentially as part of a divine plan (see Progressive revelation), with each new revelation superseding and fulfilling that of its predecessors. Baháʼís regard their own faith as the most recent (but not the last), and believe its teachings – which are centered around the principle of the oneness of humanity – are most suited to meeting the needs of a global community.

In most countries conversion is a simple matter of filling out a card stating a declaration of belief. This includes acknowledgement of Bahá&#x27;u&#x27;llah – the Founder of the Faith – as the Messenger of God for this age, awareness and acceptance of his teachings, and intention to be obedient to the institutions and laws he established.

Conversion to the Baháʼí Faith carries with it an explicit belief in the common foundation of all revealed religion, a commitment to the unity of mankind, and active service to the community at large, especially in areas that will foster unity and concord. Since the Baháʼí Faith has no clergy, converts are encouraged to be active in all aspects of community life. Even a recent convert may be elected to serve on a local Spiritual Assembly – the guiding Baháʼí institution at the community level.

===Christianity===
Within Christianity conversion refers variously to three different phenomena: a person becoming Christian who was previously not Christian; a Christian moving from one Christian denomination to another; a particular spiritual development, sometimes called the &quot;second conversion&quot;, or &quot;the conversion of the baptised&quot;.

Conversion to Christianity is the religious conversion of a previously non-Christian person to some form of Christianity. Some Christian sects require full conversion for new members regardless of any history in other Christian sects, or from certain other sects. The exact requirements vary between different churches and denominations. Baptism is traditionally seen as a sacrament of admission to Christianity. Christian baptism has some parallels with Jewish immersion by &quot;mikvah&quot;.

In the New Testament, Jesus commanded his disciples in the Great Commission to &quot;go and make disciples of all nations&quot;. Evangelization – sharing the Gospel message or &quot;Good News&quot; in deed and word, is an expectation of Christians.

Conversions to Christianity have been widespread. Even Christian communities not known for proselytization, such as the Armenian Apostolic Church, are known to have accepted converts among Muslims, Yazidis, and Jews in the nineteenth century.

====Comparison between Protestants====

This table summarizes three Protestant beliefs.
==== Latter Day Saint movement ====
Much of the theology of Latter Day Saint baptism was established during the early Latter Day Saint movement founded by Joseph Smith, Jr. According to this theology, baptism must be by immersion, for the remission of sins (meaning that through baptism, past sins are forgiven), and occurs after one has shown faith and repentance. Mormon baptism does not purport to remit any sins other than personal ones, as adherents do not believe in original sin. Latter Day Saints baptisms also occur only after an &quot;age of accountability&quot; which is defined as the age of eight years. The theology thus rejects infant baptism.

In addition, Latter Day Saint theology requires that baptism may only be performed with one who has been called and ordained by God with priesthood authority. Because the churches of the Latter Day Saint movement operate under a lay priesthood, children raised in a Mormon family are usually baptized by a father or close male friend or family member who has achieved the office of priest, which is conferred upon worthy male members at least 16 years old in the LDS Church.

Baptism is seen as symbolic both of Jesus&#x27; death, burial and resurrection and is also symbolic of the baptized individual putting off of the natural or sinful man and becoming spiritually reborn as a disciple of Jesus.

Membership into a Latter Day Saint church is granted only by baptism whether or not a person has been raised in the church. Latter Day Saint churches do not recognize baptisms of other faiths as valid because they believe baptisms must be performed under the church&#x27;s unique authority. Thus, all who come into one of the Latter Day Saint faiths as converts are baptized, even if they have previously received baptism in another faith.

When performing a Baptism, Latter Day Saints say the following prayer before performing the ordinance:

Baptisms inside and outside the temples are usually done in a baptistry, although they can be performed in any body of water in which the person may be completely immersed. The person administering the baptism must recite the prayer exactly, and immerse every part, limb, hair and clothing of the person being baptized. If there are any mistakes, or if any part of the person being baptized is not fully immersed, the baptism must be redone. In addition to the baptizer, two members of the church witness the baptism to ensure that it is performed properly.

Following baptism, Latter Day Saints receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands of a Melchizedek Priesthood holder.

Latter Day Saints hold that one may be baptized after death through the vicarious act of a living individual. Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints with a valid temple recommend (beginning in the year they turn twelve, and after being ordained to the Aaronic Priesthood for men and boys) have the opportunity to practice baptism for the dead as a missionary ritual. However, individuals for whom such baptisms are performed are not counted in figures regarding church membership statistics, such as total membership in the church, or the number of convert baptisms in a given year. Other churches of the Latter Day Saint movement also perform baptisms for the dead. This doctrine, in combination with others regarding the time between an individual&#x27;s death and resurrection, also explains what happens to the righteous non-believer and the unevangelized by providing a post-mortem means of repentance and salvation.

===Islam===

Converting to Islam requires one to declare the &quot;shahādah&quot;, the Muslim profession of faith (&quot;there is no god but God; Muhammad is the messenger of God&quot;). According to Clinton Bennett, British–American scholar of Religious studies, one&#x27;s declaration of the Muslim profession of faith does not imply faith in God alone, since the conversion to Islam includes other distinct Islamic beliefs as well as part of the Muslim creed (&quot;ʿaqīdah&quot;):
In the Islamic religion, it is believed that everyone is Muslim at birth. Due to this, those who convert are typically referred to as reverts. In Islam, the practice of religious circumcision is considered a &quot;sunnah&quot; custom, not a requirement for conversion, and furthermore it is never mentioned in the Quran. The majority of clerical opinions holds that circumcision is not required upon entering the Muslim faith. In the Sunnī branch of Islam, the Shāfiʿī and Ḥanbalī schools regard both male and female circumcision as legally obligatory for Muslims, while the Mālikī and Ḥanafī schools regard it as non-binding and only recommended for both sexes.

===Judaism===

Conversion to Judaism is the religious conversion of non-Jews to become members of the Jewish religion and Jewish ethnoreligious community. The procedure and requirements for conversion depend on the sponsoring denomination. A conversion in accordance with the process of a denomination is not a guarantee of recognition by another denomination. A formal conversion is also sometimes undertaken by individuals whose Jewish ancestry is questioned, even if they were raised Jewish, but may not actually be considered Jews according to traditional Jewish law.

As late as the 6th century, the Eastern Roman empire and Caliph Umar ibn Khattab were issuing decrees against conversion to Judaism, implying that this was still occurring.

In some cases, a person may forgo a formal conversion to Judaism and adopt some or all beliefs and practices of Judaism. However, without a formal conversion, many highly observant Jews will reject a convert&#x27;s Jewish status.

=== Spiritism ===
There are no rituals or dogmas, nor any sort of procedures in conversion to Spiritism. The doctrine is first considered as science, then philosophy and lastly as a religion. Allan Kardec&#x27;s codification of Spiritism occurred between the years 1857 and 1868. Currently there are 25 to 60 million people studying Spiritism in various countries, mainly in Brazil, through its essential books, which include &quot;The Spirits Book&quot;, &quot;The Book on Mediums&quot;, &quot;The Gospel According to Spiritism&quot;, &quot;Heaven and Hell&quot; and &quot;The Genesis According to Spiritism&quot;.

Chico Xavier wrote over 490 additional books, which expand on the spiritualist doctrine.

As explained in the first of the 1,019 questions and answers in &quot;The Spirits Book&quot;: 
1. What is God? Answer: &quot;God is the Supreme Intelligence-First Cause of all things.&quot;

The consensus in Spiritism is that God, the Great Creator, is above everything, including all human things such as rituals, dogmas, denominations or any other thing.

==Dharmic religions==

=== Buddhism ===

Persons newly adhering to Buddhism traditionally &quot;Taking Three Refuge&quot; (express faith in the Three Jewels – Buddha, Dhamma, and Sangha) before a monk, nun, or similar representative, with often the sangha, the community of practitioners, also in ritual attendance.

Throughout the timeline of Buddhism, conversions of entire countries and regions to Buddhism were frequent, as Buddhism spread throughout Asia. For example, in the 11th century in Burma, king Anoratha converted his entire country to Theravada Buddhism. At the end of the 12th century, Jayavarman VII set the stage for conversion of the Khmer people to Theravada Buddhism. Mass conversions of areas and communities to Buddhism occur up to the present day, for example, in the Dalit Buddhist movement in India there have been organized mass conversions.

Exceptions to encouraging conversion may occur in some Buddhist movements. In Tibetan Buddhism, for example, the current Dalai Lama discourages active attempts to win converts.

===Hinduism===
Hinduism is a diverse system of thought with beliefs spanning monotheism, polytheism, panentheism, pantheism, pandeism, monism, and atheism among others. Hinduism has no traditional ecclesiastical order, no centralized religious authorities, no universally accepted governing body, no binding holy book nor any mandatory prayer attendance requirements. In its diffuse and open structure, numerous schools and sects of Hinduism have developed and spun off in India with help from its ascetic scholars, since the Vedic age. The six Astika and two Nastika schools of Hindu philosophy, in its history, did not develop a missionary or proselytization methodology, and they co-existed with each other. Most Hindu sub-schools and sects do not actively seek converts. Individuals have had a choice to enter, leave or change their god(s), spiritual convictions, accept or discard any rituals and practices, and pursue spiritual knowledge and liberation (moksha) in different ways. However, various schools of Hinduism do have some core common beliefs, such as the belief that all living beings have Atman (soul), a belief in karma theory, spirituality, ahimsa (non-violence) as the greatest dharma or virtue, and others.

Religious conversion to Hinduism has a long history outside India. Merchants and traders of India, particularly from Indian peninsula, carried their religious ideas, which led to religious conversions to Hinduism in Indonesia, Champa, Cambodia and Burma. Some sects of Hindus, particularly of the Bhakti schools began seeking or accepting converts in early to mid 20th century. For example, groups like the International Society for Krishna Consciousness accept those who have a desire to follow their sects of Hinduism and have their own religious conversion procedure.

Since 1800 CE, religious conversion from and to Hinduism has been a controversial subject within Hinduism. Some have suggested that the concept of missionary conversion, either way, is contrary to the precepts of Hinduism. Religious leaders of some of Hinduism sects such as Brahmo Samaj have seen Hinduism as a non-missionary religion yet welcomed new members, while other leaders of Hinduism&#x27;s diverse schools have stated that with the arrival of missionary Islam and Christianity in India, the view that &quot;there is no such thing as proselytism in Hinduism&quot; must be re-examined.

In recent decades, mainstream Hinduism schools have attempted to systematize ways to accept religious converts, with an increase in inter-religious mixed marriages. The steps involved in becoming a Hindu have variously included a period where the interested person gets an informal &quot;ardha-Hindu&quot; name and studies ancient literature on spiritual path and practices (English translations of Upanishads, Agama, Itihasa, ethics in Sutra, Hindu festivals, yoga). If after a period of study, the individual still wants to convert, a &quot;Namakarana Samskara&quot; ceremony is held, where the individual adopts a traditional Hindu name. The initiation ceremony may also include &quot;Yajna&quot; (i.e., fire ritual with Sanskrit hymns) under guidance of a local Hindu priest. Some of these places are &quot;mathas&quot; and &quot;asramas&quot; (hermitage, monastery), where one or more &quot;gurus&quot; (spiritual guide) conduct the conversion and offer spiritual discussions. Some schools encourage the new convert to learn and participate in community activities such as festivals (Diwali etc.), read and discuss ancient literature, learn and engage in rites of passages (ceremonies of birth, first feeding, first learning day, age of majority, wedding, cremation and others).

===Jainism===
Jainism accepts anyone who wants to embrace the religion. There is no specific ritual for becoming a Jain. One does not need to ask any authorities for admission. One becomes a Jain on one&#x27;s own by observing the five vows (&quot;vratas&quot;) The five main vows as mentioned in the ancient Jain texts like Tattvarthasutra are:
# &quot;Ahimsa&quot; - Not to injure any living being by actions and thoughts.
# &quot;Satya&quot; - Not to lie or speak words that hurt others.
# &quot;Asteya&quot; - Not to take anything if not given.
# &quot;Brahmacharya&quot; - Chastity for householders / Celibacy in action, words and thoughts for monks and nuns.
# &quot;Aparigraha&quot; (Non-possession) - non-attachment to possessions.

Following the five vows is the main requirement in Jainism. All other aspects such as visiting temples are secondary. Jain monks and nuns are required to observe these five vows strictly.
===Sikhism===
Sikhism is not known to openly proselytize conversions, however it is open and accepting to anyone wanting to take on the Sikh faith.

== Other religions and sects ==
In the second half of the 20th century, the rapid growth of new religious movements (NRMs) led some psychologists and other scholars to propose that these groups were using &quot;brainwashing&quot; or &quot;mind control&quot; techniques to gain converts. This theory was publicized by the popular news media but disputed by other scholars, including some sociologists of religion.

In the 1960s sociologist John Lofland lived with Unification Church missionary Young Oon Kim and a small group of American church members in California and studied their activities in trying to promote their beliefs and win converts to their church. Lofland noted that most of their efforts were ineffective and that most of the people who joined did so because of personal relationships – often family relationships – with existing members. Lofland summarised his findings in 1964 in a doctoral thesis entitled &quot;The World Savers: A Field Study of Cult Processes&quot;, and in 1966 in book form (published by Prentice-Hall) as &quot;Doomsday Cult: A Study of Conversion, Proselytization, and Maintenance of Faith&quot;. It is considered to be one of the most important and widely cited studies of the process of religious conversion, and one of the first modern sociological studies of a new religious movement.

The Church of Scientology attempts to gain converts by offering &quot;free stress tests&quot;. It has also used the celebrity status of some of its members (most notably that of the American actor Tom Cruise) to attract converts. The Church of Scientology requires that all converts sign a legal waiver which covers their relationship with the Church of Scientology before engaging in Scientology services.

Research in the United States and in the Netherlands has shown a positive correlation between areas lacking mainstream churches and the percentage of people who are members of a new religious movement. This applies also for the presence of New Age centres.

On the other end of the proselytising scale are religions that do not accept any converts. Often these are relatively small, close-knit minority religions that are ethnically based such as the Yazidis, Druze, and Mandaeans. The Parsis, a Zoroastrianism group based in India, classically does not accept converts, but this issue became controversial in the 20th century due to a rapid decline in membership. Chinese traditional religion lacks clear criteria for membership, and hence for conversion. However, Taoism does have its own religious conversion ceremony which seems to be adopted and modified from Chinese Buddhist refuge-taking ceremonies. The Shakers and some Indian eunuch brotherhoods do not allow procreation, so that every member is a convert.

== Fostering conversion ==

Different factors and circumstances may operate and interact to persuade individuals of groups to convert and adopt a new set of religious doctrines and habits.

Religious enthusiasm for proselytism can play a role. For example, the New Testament chronicles the personal activities of the Apostles and their followers in inspired preaching, miracle-working and the subsequent gathering of followers. Freshly-converted Irish and Anglo-Saxon priests spread their new-found faith among pagan British and Germanic peoples. Missions of the 19th century spread against a background of North Atlantic revivalism with its emotionalism and mass-meeting crowd psychological behaviours.

Messianism may prepare groups for the coming of a Messiah or of a saviour. Thus the 1st-century Levant, steeped in expectations of overturning the political situation, provided fertile ground for nascent Christianity and other Jewish messianic sects, such as the Zealots.

Some religious traditions, rather than stressing emotion in the conversion process, emphasise the importance of philosophical thought as a pathway to adopting a new religion. Saint Paul in Athens fits here, as do some of the Indic religions (such as Buddhism and Jainism). The historical God-fearers may represent a philosophical bridge between Hellenism and Abrahamic faith.

A religious creed which can capture the ear and support of secular power can become a prestige movement, encouraging the mass of a people to follow its tenets. Christianity grew after becoming the state religion in Armenia, in the Roman Empire, and in Ethiopia. Eastern Orthodoxy expanded when it gained official sanction in Kievan Rus&#x27;.

Some people convert under the influence of other social conditions. Early Christianity attracted followers by offering community material support and enhanced status for disadvantaged groups such as women and slaves. Islam allegedly spread in North Africa through just administration, and in the Balkans by integrating new believers with improved tax conditions and social prestige. Colonial missions since the 19th century have attracted people to an implied nexus of material well-being, civilisation, and European-style religion.

Force can – at least apparently – coerce people into adopting different ideas. Religious police in (for example) Iran and Saudi Arabia answer for the correct religious expression of those in their purview. The Inquisition in France and in Iberia worked to convert heretics – with varying success. Frankish armies spread Roman Catholicism eastwards in the Middle Ages. Religious wars and suppression shaped the histories of the Baltic tribes, the Hussites and the Huguenots.

On the other hand, persecution can drive religious faith and practice underground and strengthen the resolve of oppressed adherents – as in the cases of the Waldenses or the Baháʼí Faith.

==International law==
The United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights defines religious conversion as a human right: &quot;Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion; this right includes freedom to change his religion or belief&quot; (Article 18). Despite this UN-declared human right, some groups forbid or restrict religious conversion (see below).

Based on the declaration the United Nations Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) drafted the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, a legally binding treaty. It states that &quot;Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion. This right shall include freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his choice&quot; (Article 18.1). &quot;No one shall be subject to coercion which would impair his freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his choice&quot; (Article 18.2).

The UNCHR issued a General Comment on this Article in 1993: &quot;The Committee observes that the freedom to &#x27;have or to adopt&#x27; a religion or belief necessarily entails the freedom to choose a religion or belief, &quot;including the right to replace one&#x27;s current religion or belief with another&quot; or to adopt atheistic views ... Article 18.2 bars coercion that would impair the right to have or adopt a religion or belief, including the use of threat of physical force or penal sanctions to compel believers or non-believers to adhere to their religious beliefs and congregations, to recant their religion or belief &quot;or to convert&quot;.&quot; (CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.4, General Comment No. 22.; emphasis added)

Some countries distinguish voluntary, motivated conversion from organized proselytism, attempting to restrict the latter. The boundary between them is not easily defined: what one person considers legitimate evangelizing, or witness-bearing, another may consider intrusive and improper. Illustrating the problems that can arise from such subjective viewpoints is this extract from an article by C. Davis, published in Cleveland State University&#x27;s &quot;Journal of Law and Health&quot;: &quot;According to the Union of American Hebrew Congregations, Jews for Jesus and Hebrew Christians constitute two of the most dangerous cults, and its members are appropriate candidates for deprogramming. Anti-cult evangelicals ... protest that &#x27;aggressiveness and proselytizing ... are basic to authentic Christianity,&#x27; and that Jews for Jesus and Campus Crusade for Christ are not to be labeled as cults. Furthermore, certain Hassidic groups who physically attacked a meeting of the Hebrew Christian &#x27;cult&#x27; have themselves been labeled a &#x27;cult&#x27; and equated with the followers of Reverend Moon, by none other than the President of the Central Conference of American Rabbis.&quot;

Since the collapse of the former Soviet Union the Russian Orthodox Church has enjoyed a revival. However, it takes exception to what it considers illegitimate proselytizing by the Roman Catholic Church, the Salvation Army, Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, and other religious movements in what it refers to as its &quot;canonical territory&quot;.

Greece has a long history of conflict, mostly with Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, but also with some Pentecostals, over its laws on proselytism. This situation stems from a law passed in the 1930s by the dictator Ioannis Metaxas. A Jehovah&#x27;s Witness, Minos Kokkinakis, won the equivalent of $14,400 in damages from the Greek state after being arrested for trying to preach his faith from door to door. In another case, &quot;Larissis v. Greece&quot;, a member of the Pentecostal church also won a case in the European Court of Human Rights.

== See also ==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Barker, Eileen &quot;The Making of a Moonie: Choice or Brainwashing?&quot; (1984)
* Barrett, D. V. &quot;The New Believers: A survey of sects, cults and alternative religions&quot; (2001) UK, Cassell &amp; Co 
* Buckser, A. S. and S. D. Glazier. eds. &quot;The Anthropology of Religious Conversion&quot; Rowman and Littlefield, 2003 
* Cooper, Richard S. &quot;The Assessment and Collection of Kharaj Tax in Medieval Egypt&quot; &quot;Journal of the American Oriental Society&quot;, Vol. 96, No. 3. (Jul–Sep., 1976), pp. 365–382.
* Curtin, Phillip D. &quot;Cross-Cultural Trade in World History&quot;. Cambridge University Press, 1984.
* Hoiberg, Dale, and Indu Ramachandran. &quot;Students&#x27; Britannica India&quot;. Popular Prakashan, 2000.
* Idris, Gaefar, &quot;Sheikh&quot;. &quot;The Process of Islamization&quot;. Plainfield, Ind.: Muslim Students&#x27; Association of the U.S. and Canada, 1977. vi, 20 p. Without ISBN
* James, William, The varieties of religious experience: a study in human nature. Being the Gifford lectures on natural religion delivered at Edinburgh in 1901–1902; Longmans, Green &amp; Co, New York (1902)
* Morris, Harold C., and Lin M. Morris. &quot;Power and purpose: Correlates to conversion.&quot; Psychology: A Journal of Human Behavior, Vol 15(4), Nov–Dec 1978, 15–22.
* Rambo, Lewis R. &quot;Understanding Religious Conversion&quot;. Yale University Press, 1993.
* Rambo, Lewis R., &amp; Farhadian, Charles. &quot;Oxford Handbook of Religious Conversion&quot;. Oxford University Press, 2014.
* Ramstedt, Martin. &quot;Hinduism in Modern Indonesia: A Minority Religion Between Local, National, and Global Interests&quot;. Routledge, 2004.
* Rawat, Ajay S. &quot;StudentMan and Forests: The Khatta and Gujjar Settlements of Sub-Himalayan Tarai&quot;. Indus Publishing, 1993.
* 

== External links ==
* &quot;Conversion: A Family Affair&quot;, Craig Harline, &quot;Berfrois&quot;, 4 October 2011</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q814997" start="0" end="20" title="Religious conversion" label="Religious conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414953" start="88" end="110" title="religious denomination" label="religious denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="361" end="384" title="Protestant Christianity" label="Protestant Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="388" end="405" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="414" end="430" title="Shia Islam" label="Shi&amp;#x27;a Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="434" end="445" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443824" start="710" end="730" title="secondary conversion" label="secondary conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247662" start="732" end="751" title="deathbed conversion" label="deathbed conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006385" start="781" end="799" title="marital conversion" label="marital conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378806" start="805" end="822" title="forced conversion" label="forced conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q217170" start="1010" end="1021" title="Proselytism" label="Proselytism"/>
<link wikidata="Q223681" start="1135" end="1143" title="Apostasy" label="Apostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="1675" end="1683" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="1685" end="1697" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="1703" end="1708" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="1753" end="1760" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="1762" end="1776" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="1782" end="1790" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="1835" end="1847" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="1853" end="1859" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2155" end="2170" title="Baháʼí teaching plans#Pioneering" label="Baháʼí pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q596151" start="2550" end="2572" title="Progressive revelation (Baháʼí)" label="Progressive revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q101054" start="3017" end="3038" title="Bahá&amp;#x27;u&amp;#x27;llah" label="Bahá&amp;#x27;u&amp;#x27;llah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499061" start="3647" end="3665" title="Spiritual Assembly" label="Spiritual Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="4405" end="4418" title="Christian denominations" label="denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="4420" end="4427" title="Baptism" label="Baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q211351" start="4563" end="4569" title="mikvah" label="mikvah"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="4585" end="4598" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="4600" end="4605" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51642" start="4637" end="4653" title="Great Commission" label="Great Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="4707" end="4721" title="Evangelization" label="Evangelization"/>
<link wikidata="Q683724" start="4948" end="4973" title="Armenian Apostolic Church" label="Armenian Apostolic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="5017" end="5024" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q200885" start="5026" end="5033" title="Yazidis" label="Yazidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="5039" end="5043" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="5278" end="5303" title="Latter Day Saint movement" label="Latter Day Saint movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="5315" end="5331" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith, Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299434" start="5380" end="5389" title="Immersion baptism" label="immersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q60227" start="5412" end="5415" title="sin" label="sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184186" start="5633" end="5645" title="original sin" label="original sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q123384190" start="5705" end="5726" title="age of accountability" label="age of accountability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741926" start="5803" end="5817" title="infant baptism" label="infant baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492096" start="5957" end="5967" title="priesthood (Latter Day Saints)" label="priesthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242872" start="6202" end="6208" title="Priest (Latter Day Saints)" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="6332" end="6337" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="6362" end="6374" title="Resurrection of Jesus" label="resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q210077" start="7128" end="7137" title="baptistry" label="baptistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="7644" end="7660" title="Latter Day Saint" label="Latter Day Saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160126" start="7674" end="7696" title="Confirmation (Latter Day Saints)" label="Gift of the Holy Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076136" start="7704" end="7722" title="laying on of hands" label="laying on of hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357681" start="7728" end="7750" title="Melchizedek priesthood (Latter Day Saints)" label="Melchizedek Priesthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q81990" start="7799" end="7819" title="Baptism for the dead" label="baptized after death"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="7881" end="7928" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="8730" end="8735" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q41831" start="8770" end="8778" title="Shahada" label="shahādah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095353" start="8844" end="8847" title="God in Islam" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="8849" end="8857" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q168827" start="8865" end="8874" title="Prophets and messengers in Islam" label="messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3680815" start="8903" end="8918" title="Clinton Bennett" label="Clinton Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q34187" start="8948" end="8965" title="Religious studies" label="Religious studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q235258" start="9152" end="9164" title="Aqidah" label="Muslim creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q604832" start="9233" end="9260" title="Fitra" label="everyone is Muslim at birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q179561" start="9357" end="9379" title="Khitan (circumcision)" label="religious circumcision"/>
<link wikidata="Q234764" start="9402" end="9408" title="sunnah" label="sunnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="9502" end="9507" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q189459" start="9525" end="9542" title="Ulama" label="clerical opinions"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="9622" end="9627" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunnī"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9628" end="9643" title="Islamic schools and branches#Sunnī Islam" label="branch of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q82245" start="9649" end="9656" title="Shafiʽi school" label="Shāfiʿī"/>
<link wikidata="Q233387" start="9661" end="9668" title="Hanbali" label="Ḥanbalī"/>
<link wikidata="Q208373" start="9698" end="9717" title="female circumcision" label="female circumcision"/>
<link wikidata="Q48221" start="9763" end="9769" title="Maliki" label="Mālikī"/>
<link wikidata="Q228986" start="9774" end="9780" title="Hanafi" label="Ḥanafī"/>
<link wikidata="Q252837" start="9920" end="9928" title="gentile" label="non-Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="9954" end="9969" title="Judaism" label="Jewish religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197007" start="9981" end="10005" title="ethnoreligion" label="ethnoreligious community"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001185" start="10078" end="10090" title="Jewish denominations" label="denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147832" start="10371" end="10386" title="Who is a Jew?" label="considered Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="10400" end="10422" title="halakha" label="traditional Jewish law"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="10465" end="10477" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Roman empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8467" start="10482" end="10505" title="Umar" label="Caliph Umar ibn Khattab"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="10549" end="10556" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q214255" start="10924" end="10933" title="Kardecist spiritism" label="Spiritism"/>
<link wikidata="Q240643" start="11022" end="11034" title="Allan Kardec" label="Allan Kardec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850117" start="11042" end="11054" title="Spiritist Codification" label="codification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850117" start="11225" end="11240" title="Spiritist Codification" label="essential books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705356" start="11262" end="11278" title="The Spirits Book" label="The Spirits Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705338" start="11292" end="11311" title="The Book on Mediums" label="The Book on Mediums"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205616" start="11325" end="11358" title="The Gospel According to Spiritism" label="The Gospel According to Spiritism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221429" start="11372" end="11387" title="Heaven and Hell (Allan Kardec)" label="Heaven and Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3209399" start="11404" end="11438" title="The Genesis According to Spiritism" label="The Genesis According to Spiritism"/>
<link wikidata="Q561598" start="11447" end="11459" title="Chico Xavier" label="Chico Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q214255" start="11513" end="11534" title="Kardecist spiritism" label="spiritualist doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q228220" start="11991" end="12010" title="Refuge (Buddhism)" label="Taking Three Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068303" start="12026" end="12031" title="faith in Buddhism" label="faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q228220" start="12039" end="12051" title="Three Jewels" label="Three Jewels"/>
<link wikidata="Q56247062" start="12054" end="12060" title="Buddhahood" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4984257" start="12062" end="12068" title="Buddhist paths to liberation" label="Dhamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q193944" start="12074" end="12080" title="Sangha (Buddhism)" label="Sangha"/>
<link wikidata="Q854997" start="12091" end="12095" title="Bhikkhu" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q854979" start="12097" end="12100" title="Bhikkhunī" label="nun"/>
<link wikidata="Q186955" start="12227" end="12247" title="timeline of Buddhism" label="timeline of Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="12392" end="12397" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q45241" start="12404" end="12412" title="Anoratha" label="Anoratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="12445" end="12463" title="Theravada Buddhism" label="Theravada Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q335273" start="12497" end="12511" title="Jayavarman VII" label="Jayavarman VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q201028" start="12548" end="12560" title="Khmer people" label="Khmer people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273436" start="12687" end="12710" title="Dalit Buddhist movement" label="Dalit Buddhist movement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12736" end="12762" title="Dalit Buddhist movement#Organized mass conversions" label="organized mass conversions"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="12843" end="12859" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17293" start="12878" end="12896" title="Tenzin Gyatso, 14th Dalai Lama" label="current Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022644" start="13020" end="13030" title="Hindu views on monotheism" label="monotheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9163" start="13032" end="13042" title="polytheism" label="polytheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q221390" start="13044" end="13055" title="panentheism" label="panentheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q728455" start="13057" end="13066" title="Hindu views on Pantheism" label="pantheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620224" start="13068" end="13076" title="pandeism" label="pandeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178801" start="13078" end="13084" title="monism" label="monism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813321" start="13090" end="13097" title="Atheism in Hinduism" label="atheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344370" start="13441" end="13448" title="sannyasa" label="ascetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q215262" start="13469" end="13478" title="Vedic period" label="Vedic age"/>
<link wikidata="Q618680" start="13488" end="13494" title="Āstika and nāstika" label="Astika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079293" start="13522" end="13538" title="Hindu philosophy" label="Hindu philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183379" start="13903" end="13909" title="moksha" label="moksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052811" start="14048" end="14053" title="Ātman (Hinduism)" label="Atman"/>
<link wikidata="Q132196" start="14074" end="14079" title="karma" label="karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q178498" start="14102" end="14108" title="ahimsa" label="ahimsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q507417" start="14468" end="14474" title="Bhakti" label="Bhakti"/>
<link wikidata="Q190193" start="14578" end="14625" title="International Society for Krishna Consciousness" label="International Society for Krishna Consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="14791" end="14799" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q897356" start="15018" end="15030" title="Brahmo Samaj" label="Brahmo Samaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113985" start="15738" end="15748" title="Upanishads" label="Upanishads"/>
<link wikidata="Q390312" start="15750" end="15755" title="Agama (Hinduism)" label="Agama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774766" start="15757" end="15764" title="Itihasa" label="Itihasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q209680" start="15776" end="15781" title="Sutra" label="Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9350" start="15800" end="15804" title="yoga" label="yoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572489" start="15882" end="15892" title="Namakarana" label="Namakarana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764567" start="16027" end="16032" title="Yajna" label="Yajna"/>
<link wikidata="Q10244" start="16428" end="16434" title="Diwali" label="Diwali"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="16638" end="16645" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006151" start="16933" end="16943" title="Jain texts" label="Jain texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778761" start="16949" end="16964" title="Tattvarthasutra" label="Tattvarthasutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4695121" start="16978" end="16984" title="Ahimsa in Jainism" label="Ahimsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317397" start="17057" end="17062" title="Satya" label="Satya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517751" start="17123" end="17129" title="Asteya" label="Asteya"/>
<link wikidata="Q897318" start="17181" end="17193" title="Brahmacharya" label="Brahmacharya"/>
<link wikidata="Q191778" start="17230" end="17238" title="Celibacy" label="Celibacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048984" start="17297" end="17307" title="Aparigraha" label="Aparigraha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048984" start="17315" end="17329" title="Non-possession" label="Non-possession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784985" start="17483" end="17502" title="Jain monasticism" label="Jain monks and nuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="17567" end="17574" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q477544" start="17794" end="17817" title="new religious movements" label="new religious movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q743263" start="17913" end="17925" title="brainwashing" label="brainwashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q743263" start="17941" end="17953" title="Brainwashing" label="mind control"/>
<link wikidata="Q461659" start="18089" end="18113" title="Sociology of religion" label="sociologists of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6245134" start="18141" end="18153" title="John Lofland (sociologist)" label="John Lofland"/>
<link wikidata="Q217059" start="18165" end="18183" title="Unification Church" label="Unification Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="18184" end="18194" title="missionary" label="missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058332" start="18195" end="18208" title="Young Oon Kim" label="Young Oon Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="18257" end="18267" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q443253" start="18730" end="18743" title="Prentice-Hall" label="Prentice-Hall"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18754" end="18833" title="Doomsday Cult: A Study of Conversion, Proselytization, and Maintenance of Faith" label="Doomsday Cult: A Study of Conversion, Proselytization, and Maintenance of Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820380" start="19038" end="19059" title="Church of Scientology" label="Church of Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q37079" start="19231" end="19241" title="Tom Cruise" label="Tom Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q797551" start="19330" end="19336" title="waiver" label="waiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136628" start="19507" end="19527" title="Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient" label="positive correlation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="19682" end="19689" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q200885" start="19893" end="19899" title="Yazidi" label="Yazidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="19902" end="19907" title="Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747710" start="19913" end="19922" title="Mandaeans" label="Mandaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="19938" end="19952" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="20107" end="20135" title="Chinese folk religion" label="Chinese traditional religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="20208" end="20214" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q847618" start="20307" end="20323" title="Chinese Buddhist" label="Chinese Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370167" start="20354" end="20361" title="Shakers" label="Shakers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20378" end="20384" title="Eunuch (court official)#India" label="eunuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q840407" start="20650" end="20670" title="Religious enthusiasm" label="Religious enthusiasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="20721" end="20734" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="20777" end="20785" title="Apostles in the New Testament" label="Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q60797" start="20818" end="20827" title="preaching" label="preaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q170774" start="20829" end="20836" title="miracle" label="miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q592459" start="20906" end="20911" title="Hiberno-Scottish mission" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087692" start="20936" end="20964" title="Anglo-Saxon mission" label="spread their new-found faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146522" start="21082" end="21092" title="Christian revival" label="revivalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="21102" end="21109" title="emotion" label="emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13430821" start="21132" end="21137" title="crowd" label="crowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q630281" start="21165" end="21175" title="Messianism" label="Messianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q51626" start="21215" end="21222" title="Messiah" label="Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q416582" start="21231" end="21238" title="savior (disambiguation)" label="saviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="21261" end="21267" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003997" start="21308" end="21331" title="Judea (Roman province)" label="the political situation"/>
<link wikidata="Q262109" start="21361" end="21381" title="Jewish Christians" label="nascent Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q189225" start="21428" end="21435" title="Zealots" label="Zealots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="21550" end="21571" title="philosophy" label="philosophical thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="21613" end="21623" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Saint Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789055" start="21624" end="21633" title="Areopagus sermon" label="in Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651597" start="21663" end="21678" title="Indic religions" label="Indic religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="21688" end="21696" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="21701" end="21708" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575788" start="21726" end="21736" title="God-fearer" label="God-fearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q47280" start="21797" end="21812" title="Abrahamic religions" label="Abrahamic faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q877546" start="21901" end="21909" title="social prestige" label="prestige"/>
<link wikidata="Q683724" start="22012" end="22037" title="Armenian Apostolic Church" label="state religion in Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="22046" end="22058" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q179829" start="22067" end="22075" title="Ethiopian Church" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="22077" end="22094" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q573211" start="22119" end="22156" title="Christianization of Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="official sanction in Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q625559" start="22278" end="22304" title="Christian communism" label="community material support"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610620" start="22376" end="22398" title="Spread of Islam" label="Islam allegedly spread"/>
<link wikidata="Q133156" start="22542" end="22550" title="Colony" label="Colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="22649" end="22661" title="civilisation" label="civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16546882" start="22772" end="22788" title="Religious police" label="Religious police"/>
<link wikidata="Q5964479" start="22806" end="22810" title="Guidance Patrol" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094290" start="22815" end="22827" title="Committee for the Promotion of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice (Saudi Arabia)" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="22903" end="22914" title="Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="22957" end="22965" title="heresy" label="heretics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129467" start="22973" end="22988" title="Conversos" label="varying success"/>
<link wikidata="Q146246" start="22990" end="22998" title="Francia" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="23013" end="23030" title="Latin Church" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q51662" start="23120" end="23133" title="Northern Crusades" label="Baltic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131372" start="23139" end="23147" title="Hussites" label="Hussites"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="23156" end="23165" title="Huguenots" label="Huguenots"/>
<link wikidata="Q301585" start="23187" end="23198" title="Religious persecution" label="persecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q201620" start="23325" end="23334" title="Waldenses" label="Waldenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="23342" end="23354" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="23383" end="23397" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="23398" end="23435" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="23470" end="23481" title="human rights" label="human right"/>
<link wikidata="Q277569" start="23515" end="23533" title="freedom of thought" label="freedom of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="23550" end="23558" title="freedom of religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q685248" start="23774" end="23815" title="United Nations Commission on Human Rights" label="United Nations Commission on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q392119" start="23836" end="23888" title="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights" label="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q685248" start="24280" end="24285" title="United Nations Commission on Human Rights" label="UNCHR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100801" start="25429" end="25455" title="Cleveland State University" label="Cleveland State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130842" start="25525" end="25563" title="Union of American Hebrew Congregations" label="Union of American Hebrew Congregations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586427" start="25565" end="25579" title="Jews for Jesus" label="Jews for Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q262109" start="25584" end="25601" title="Hebrew Christians" label="Hebrew Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996418" start="25693" end="25706" title="deprogramming" label="deprogramming"/>
<link wikidata="Q578100" start="25862" end="25887" title="Campus Crusade for Christ" label="Campus Crusade for Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="25941" end="25949" title="Hassidic" label="Hassidic"/>
<link wikidata="Q296734" start="26114" end="26127" title="Reverend Moon" label="Reverend Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="26248" end="26260" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="26265" end="26288" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="26395" end="26416" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q188307" start="26422" end="26436" title="Salvation Army" label="Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="26438" end="26462" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="26652" end="26664" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostals"/>
<link wikidata="Q189139" start="26764" end="26779" title="Ioannis Metaxas" label="Ioannis Metaxas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869318" start="26807" end="26823" title="Minos Kokkinakis" label="Minos Kokkinakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="27065" end="27095" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q368784" start="27150" end="27164" title="Eileen Barker" label="Barker, Eileen"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27171" end="27218" title="The Making of a Moonie: Choice or Brainwashing?" label="The Making of a Moonie: Choice or Brainwashing?"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25599" wikidata="Q895" url="?curid=25599" title="Rubidium">
<text>Rubidium is a chemical element; it has symbol Rb and atomic number 37. It is a very soft, whitish-grey solid in the alkali metal group, similar to potassium and caesium. Rubidium is the first alkali metal in the group to have a density higher than water. On Earth, natural rubidium comprises two isotopes: 72% is a stable isotope Rb, and 28% is slightly radioactive Rb, with a half-life of 48.8 billion years – more than three times as long as the estimated age of the universe.

German chemists Robert Bunsen and Gustav Kirchhoff discovered rubidium in 1861 by the newly developed technique, flame spectroscopy. The name comes from the Latin word , meaning deep red, the color of its emission spectrum. Rubidium&#x27;s compounds have various chemical and electronic applications. Rubidium metal is easily vaporized and has a convenient spectral absorption range, making it a frequent target for laser manipulation of atoms. Rubidium is not a known nutrient for any living organisms. However, rubidium ions have similar properties and the same charge as potassium ions, and are actively taken up and treated by animal cells in similar ways.

==Characteristics==
=== Physical properties ===

Rubidium is a very soft, ductile, silvery-white metal. It has a melting point of and a boiling point of . It forms amalgams with mercury and alloys with gold, iron, caesium, sodium, and potassium, but not lithium (despite rubidium and lithium being in the same periodic group). Rubidium and potassium show a very similar purple color in the flame test, and distinguishing the two elements requires more sophisticated analysis, such as spectroscopy.

=== Chemical properties ===

Rubidium is the second most electropositive of the stable alkali metals and has a very low first ionization energy of only 403 kJ/mol. It has an electron configuration of [Kr]5s1 and is photosensitive. Due to its strong electropositive nature, rubidium reacts explosively with water to produce rubidium hydroxide and hydrogen gas. As with all the alkali metals, the reaction is usually vigorous enough to ignite metal or the hydrogen gas produced by the reaction, potentially causing an explosion. Rubidium, being denser than potassium, sinks in water, reacting violently; caesium explodes on contact with water. However, the reaction rates of all alkali metals depend upon surface area of metal in contact with water, with small metal droplets giving explosive rates. Rubidium has also been reported to ignite spontaneously in air.

===Compounds===
Rubidium chloride (RbCl) is probably the most used rubidium compound: among several other chlorides, it is used to induce living cells to take up DNA; it is also used as a biomarker, because in nature, it is found only in small quantities in living organisms and when present, replaces potassium. Other common rubidium compounds are the corrosive rubidium hydroxide (RbOH), the starting material for most rubidium-based chemical processes; rubidium carbonate (Rb2CO3), used in some optical glasses, and rubidium copper sulfate, Rb2SO4·CuSO4·6H2O. Rubidium silver iodide (RbAg4I5) has the highest room temperature conductivity of any known ionic crystal, a property exploited in thin film batteries and other applications.

Rubidium forms a number of oxides when exposed to air, including rubidium monoxide (Rb2O), Rb6O, and Rb9O2; rubidium in excess oxygen gives the superoxide RbO2. Rubidium forms salts with halogens, producing rubidium fluoride, rubidium chloride, rubidium bromide, and rubidium iodide.

===Isotopes===

Although rubidium is monoisotopic, rubidium in the Earth&#x27;s crust is composed of two isotopes: the stable 85Rb (72.2%) and the radioactive 87Rb (27.8%). Natural rubidium is radioactive, with specific activity of about 670 Bq/g, enough to significantly expose a photographic film in 110 days. Thirty additional rubidium isotopes have been synthesized with half-lives of less than 3 months; most are highly radioactive and have few uses.

Rubidium-87 has a half-life of  years, which is more than three times the age of the universe of  years, making it a primordial nuclide. It readily substitutes for potassium in minerals, and is therefore fairly widespread. Rb has been used extensively in dating rocks; 87Rb beta decays to stable 87Sr. During fractional crystallization, Sr tends to concentrate in plagioclase, leaving Rb in the liquid phase. Hence, the Rb/Sr ratio in residual magma may increase over time, and the progressing differentiation results in rocks with elevated Rb/Sr ratios. The highest ratios (10 or more) occur in pegmatites. If the initial amount of Sr is known or can be extrapolated, then the age can be determined by measurement of the Rb and Sr concentrations and of the 87Sr/86Sr ratio. The dates indicate the true age of the minerals only if the rocks have not been subsequently altered (see rubidium–strontium dating).

Rubidium-82, one of the element&#x27;s non-natural isotopes, is produced by electron-capture decay of strontium-82 with a half-life of 25.36 days. With a half-life of 76 seconds, rubidium-82 decays by positron emission to stable krypton-82.

==Occurrence==
Rubidium is not abundant, being one of 56 elements that combined make up 0.05% of the Earth&#x27;s crust; at roughly the 23rd most abundant element in the Earth&#x27;s crust it is more abundant than zinc or copper. It occurs naturally in the minerals leucite, pollucite, carnallite, and zinnwaldite, which contain as much as 1% rubidium oxide. Lepidolite contains between 0.3% and 3.5% rubidium, and is the commercial source of the element. Some potassium minerals and potassium chlorides also contain the element in commercially significant quantities.

Seawater contains an average of 125 μg/L of rubidium compared to the much higher value for potassium of 408 mg/L and the much lower value of 0.3 μg/L for caesium. Rubidium is the 18th most abundant element in seawater.

Because of its large ionic radius, rubidium is one of the &quot;incompatible elements&quot;. During magma crystallization, rubidium is concentrated together with its heavier analogue caesium in the liquid phase and crystallizes last. Therefore, the largest deposits of rubidium and caesium are zone pegmatite ore bodies formed by this enrichment process. Because rubidium substitutes for potassium in the crystallization of magma, the enrichment is far less effective than that of caesium. Zone pegmatite ore bodies containing mineable quantities of caesium as pollucite or the lithium minerals lepidolite are also a source for rubidium as a by-product.

Two notable sources of rubidium are the rich deposits of pollucite at Bernic Lake, Manitoba, Canada, and the rubicline found as impurities in pollucite on the Italian island of Elba, with a rubidium content of 17.5%. Both of those deposits are also sources of caesium.

==Production==
Although rubidium is more abundant in Earth&#x27;s crust than caesium, the limited applications and the lack of a mineral rich in rubidium limits the production of rubidium compounds to 2 to 4 tonnes per year. Several methods are available for separating potassium, rubidium, and caesium. The fractional crystallization of a rubidium and caesium alum yields after 30 subsequent steps pure rubidium alum. Two other methods are reported, the chlorostannate process and the ferrocyanide process.

For several years in the 1950s and 1960s, a by-product of potassium production called Alkarb was a main source for rubidium. Alkarb contained 21% rubidium, with the rest being potassium and a small amount of caesium. Today the largest producers of caesium produce rubidium as a by-product from pollucite.

==History==

Rubidium was discovered in 1861 by Robert Bunsen and Gustav Kirchhoff, in Heidelberg, Germany, in the mineral lepidolite through flame spectroscopy. Because of the bright red lines in its emission spectrum, they chose a name derived from the Latin word , meaning &quot;deep red&quot;.

Rubidium is a minor component in lepidolite. Kirchhoff and Bunsen processed 150 kg of a lepidolite containing only 0.24% rubidium monoxide (Rb2O). Both potassium and rubidium form insoluble salts with chloroplatinic acid, but those salts show a slight difference in solubility in hot water. Therefore, the less soluble rubidium hexachloroplatinate (Rb2PtCl6) could be obtained by fractional crystallization. After reduction of the hexachloroplatinate with hydrogen, the process yielded 0.51 grams of rubidium chloride (RbCl) for further studies. Bunsen and Kirchhoff began their first large-scale isolation of caesium and rubidium compounds with of mineral water, which yielded 7.3 grams of caesium chloride and 9.2 grams of rubidium chloride. Rubidium was the second element, shortly after caesium, to be discovered by spectroscopy, just one year after the invention of the spectroscope by Bunsen and Kirchhoff.

The two scientists used the rubidium chloride to estimate that the atomic weight of the new element was 85.36 (the currently accepted value is 85.47). They tried to generate elemental rubidium by electrolysis of molten rubidium chloride, but instead of a metal, they obtained a blue homogeneous substance, which &quot;neither under the naked eye nor under the microscope showed the slightest trace of metallic substance&quot;. They presumed that it was a subchloride (); however, the product was probably a colloidal mixture of the metal and rubidium chloride. In a second attempt to produce metallic rubidium, Bunsen was able to reduce rubidium by heating charred rubidium tartrate. Although the distilled rubidium was pyrophoric, they were able to determine the density and the melting point. The quality of this research in the 1860s can be appraised by the fact that their determined density differs by less than 0.1 g/cm3 and the melting point by less than 1 °C from the presently accepted values.

The slight radioactivity of rubidium was discovered in 1908, but that was before the theory of isotopes was established in 1910, and the low level of activity (half-life greater than 1010 years) made interpretation complicated. The now proven decay of 87Rb to stable 87Sr through beta decay was still under discussion in the late 1940s.

Rubidium had minimal industrial value before the 1920s. Since then, the most important use of rubidium is research and development, primarily in chemical and electronic applications. In 1995, rubidium-87 was used to produce a Bose–Einstein condensate, for which the discoverers, Eric Allin Cornell, Carl Edwin Wieman and Wolfgang Ketterle, won the 2001 Nobel Prize in Physics.

==Applications==

Rubidium compounds are sometimes used in fireworks to give them a purple color. Rubidium has also been considered for use in a thermoelectric generator using the magnetohydrodynamic principle, whereby hot rubidium ions are passed through a magnetic field. These conduct electricity and act like an armature of a generator, thereby generating an electric current. Rubidium, particularly vaporized 87Rb, is one of the most commonly used atomic species employed for laser cooling and Bose–Einstein condensation. Its desirable features for this application include the ready availability of inexpensive diode laser light at the relevant wavelength and the moderate temperatures required to obtain substantial vapor pressures. For cold-atom applications requiring tunable interactions, 85Rb is preferred for its rich Feshbach spectrum.

Rubidium has been used for polarizing 3He, producing volumes of magnetized 3He gas, with the nuclear spins aligned rather than random. Rubidium vapor is optically pumped by a laser, and the polarized Rb polarizes 3He through the hyperfine interaction. Such spin-polarized 3He cells are useful for neutron polarization measurements and for producing polarized neutron beams for other purposes.

The resonant element in atomic clocks utilizes the hyperfine structure of rubidium&#x27;s energy levels, and rubidium is useful for high-precision timing. It is used as the main component of secondary frequency references (rubidium oscillators) in cell site transmitters and other electronic transmitting, networking, and test equipment. These rubidium standards are often used with GNSS to produce a &quot;primary frequency standard&quot; that has greater accuracy and is less expensive than caesium standards. Such rubidium standards are often mass-produced for the telecommunications industry.

Other potential or current uses of rubidium include a working fluid in vapor turbines, as a getter in vacuum tubes, and as a photocell component. Rubidium is also used as an ingredient in special types of glass, in the production of superoxide by burning in oxygen, in the study of potassium ion channels in biology, and as the vapor in atomic magnetometers. In particular, 87Rb is used with other alkali metals in the development of spin-exchange relaxation-free (SERF) magnetometers.

Rubidium-82 is used for positron emission tomography. Rubidium is very similar to potassium, and tissue with high potassium content will also accumulate the radioactive rubidium. One of the main uses is myocardial perfusion imaging. As a result of changes in the blood–brain barrier in brain tumors, rubidium collects more in brain tumors than normal brain tissue, allowing the use of radioisotope rubidium-82 in nuclear medicine to locate and image brain tumors. Rubidium-82 has a very short half-life of 76 seconds, and the production from decay of strontium-82 must be done close to the patient.

Rubidium was tested for the influence on manic depression and depression. Dialysis patients suffering from depression show a depletion in rubidium, and therefore a supplementation may help during depression. In some tests the rubidium was administered as rubidium chloride with up to 720 mg per day for 60 days.

==Precautions and biological effects==

Rubidium reacts violently with water and can cause fires. To ensure safety and purity, this metal is usually kept under dry mineral oil or sealed in glass ampoules in an inert atmosphere. Rubidium forms peroxides on exposure even to a small amount of air diffused into the oil, and storage is subject to similar precautions as the storage of metallic potassium.

Rubidium, like sodium and potassium, almost always has +1 oxidation state when dissolved in water, even in biological contexts. The human body tends to treat Rb+ ions as if they were potassium ions, and therefore concentrates rubidium in the body&#x27;s intracellular fluid (i.e., inside cells). The ions are not particularly toxic; a 70 kg person contains on average 0.36 g of rubidium, and an increase in this value by 50 to 100 times did not show negative effects in test persons. The biological half-life of rubidium in humans measures 31–46 days. Although a partial substitution of potassium by rubidium is possible, when more than 50% of the potassium in the muscle tissue of rats was replaced with rubidium, the rats died.

==References==
==Further reading==
* Meites, Louis (1963). &quot;Handbook of Analytical Chemistry&quot; (New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1963)

==External links==
* Rubidium at &quot;The Periodic Table of Videos&quot; (University of Nottingham)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q895" start="0" end="8" title="Rubidium" label="Rubidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="14" end="30" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q102500" start="39" end="45" title="Symbol (chemistry)" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q895" start="46" end="48" title="Rubidium" label="Rb"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="53" end="66" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q19557" start="116" end="128" title="alkali metal" label="alkali metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="147" end="156" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="161" end="168" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q19557" start="192" end="204" title="alkali metal" label="alkali metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478447" start="248" end="253" title="Properties of water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="296" end="303" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="354" end="365" title="radioactive" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="377" end="386" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q500699" start="458" end="477" title="age of the universe" label="age of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q71031" start="496" end="509" title="Robert Bunsen" label="Robert Bunsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q60052" start="514" end="530" title="Gustav Kirchhoff" label="Gustav Kirchhoff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="593" end="611" title="Atomic emission spectroscopy#Flame emission spectroscopy" label="flame spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="637" end="642" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="896" end="901" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="918" end="922" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="966" end="982" title="organism" label="living organisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="1002" end="1005" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="1111" end="1122" title="animal cell" label="animal cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q211702" start="1216" end="1223" title="ductility" label="ductile"/>
<link wikidata="Q182574" start="1306" end="1314" title="amalgam (chemistry)" label="amalgams"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="1320" end="1327" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="1332" end="1337" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="1344" end="1348" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="1350" end="1354" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="1356" end="1363" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="1365" end="1371" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="1377" end="1386" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q568" start="1396" end="1403" title="lithium" label="lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q898373" start="1532" end="1542" title="flame test" label="flame test"/>
<link wikidata="Q78974" start="1698" end="1713" title="Electronegativity" label="electropositive"/>
<link wikidata="Q483769" start="1767" end="1784" title="ionization energy" label="ionization energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="2095" end="2103" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q418909" start="2520" end="2537" title="Rubidium chloride" label="Rubidium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="2666" end="2669" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q121430" start="2867" end="2885" title="rubidium hydroxide" label="rubidium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q424915" start="2960" end="2978" title="rubidium carbonate" label="rubidium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376098" start="3067" end="3089" title="Rubidium silver iodide" label="Rubidium silver iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q111092" start="3116" end="3132" title="room temperature" label="room temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="3133" end="3145" title="electrical conductivity" label="conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q899869" start="3159" end="3172" title="ionic crystal" label="ionic crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q267298" start="3208" end="3217" title="battery (electricity)" label="batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q425243" start="3270" end="3276" title="Rubidium oxide" label="oxides"/>
<link wikidata="Q413283" start="3387" end="3397" title="superoxide" label="superoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171592" start="3398" end="3402" title="Rubidium superoxide" label="RbO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q420338" start="3450" end="3467" title="rubidium fluoride" label="rubidium fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q418909" start="3469" end="3486" title="rubidium chloride" label="rubidium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q421120" start="3488" end="3504" title="rubidium bromide" label="rubidium bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q426446" start="3510" end="3525" title="rubidium iodide" label="rubidium iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588104" start="3565" end="3577" title="monoisotopic element" label="monoisotopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="3675" end="3686" title="radioactive" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q102573" start="3770" end="3772" title="Becquerel" label="Bq"/>
<link wikidata="Q6293" start="3809" end="3826" title="photographic film" label="photographic film"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="4003" end="4012" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q500699" start="4059" end="4078" title="age of the universe" label="age of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q759767" start="4102" end="4120" title="primordial nuclide" label="primordial nuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="4149" end="4158" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="4162" end="4169" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="4240" end="4252" title="rock dating" label="dating rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="4259" end="4269" title="beta decay" label="beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q577904" start="4294" end="4320" title="Fractional crystallization (geology)" label="fractional crystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q714830" start="4349" end="4360" title="plagioclase" label="plagioclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q42278" start="4429" end="4434" title="magma" label="magma"/>
<link wikidata="Q498203" start="4479" end="4494" title="Igneous differentiation" label="differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q105630" start="4581" end="4590" title="pegmatite" label="pegmatite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499814" start="4866" end="4891" title="rubidium–strontium dating" label="rubidium–strontium dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860122" start="4895" end="4906" title="Rubidium-82" label="Rubidium-82"/>
<link wikidata="Q109910" start="4971" end="4987" title="electron capture" label="electron-capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325627" start="4997" end="5009" title="strontium-82" label="strontium-82"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373439" start="5124" end="5134" title="krypton-82" label="krypton-82"/>
<link wikidata="Q24580" start="5278" end="5325" title="Abundance of elements in Earth&amp;#x27;s crust" label="most abundant element in the Earth&amp;#x27;s crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="5351" end="5355" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="5359" end="5365" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q419201" start="5403" end="5410" title="leucite" label="leucite"/>
<link wikidata="Q419274" start="5412" end="5421" title="pollucite" label="pollucite"/>
<link wikidata="Q409781" start="5423" end="5433" title="carnallite" label="carnallite"/>
<link wikidata="Q680224" start="5439" end="5450" title="zinnwaldite" label="zinnwaldite"/>
<link wikidata="Q50690" start="5489" end="5494" title="oxide" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q429926" start="5496" end="5506" title="Lepidolite" label="Lepidolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="5598" end="5607" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q184630" start="5621" end="5639" title="potassium chloride" label="potassium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q184395" start="5707" end="5715" title="Seawater" label="Seawater"/>
<link wikidata="Q908801" start="5948" end="5960" title="ionic radius" label="ionic radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663708" start="5991" end="6011" title="incompatible element" label="incompatible element"/>
<link wikidata="Q577904" start="6027" end="6048" title="Fractional crystallization (geology)" label="magma crystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q105630" start="6226" end="6235" title="pegmatite" label="pegmatite"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="6315" end="6324" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q419274" start="6488" end="6497" title="pollucite" label="pollucite"/>
<link wikidata="Q429926" start="6522" end="6532" title="lepidolite" label="lepidolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q419274" start="6639" end="6648" title="pollucite" label="pollucite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894272" start="6652" end="6663" title="Bernic Lake" label="Bernic Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="6665" end="6673" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q74976" start="6691" end="6700" title="rubicline" label="rubicline"/>
<link wikidata="Q45328" start="6759" end="6763" title="Elba" label="Elba"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="7060" end="7065" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q15045177" start="7160" end="7186" title="fractional crystallization (chemistry)" label="fractional crystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q71031" start="7715" end="7728" title="Robert Bunsen" label="Robert Bunsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q60052" start="7733" end="7749" title="Gustav Kirchhoff" label="Gustav Kirchhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q429926" start="7790" end="7800" title="lepidolite" label="lepidolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q186548" start="7809" end="7827" title="flame spectroscopy" label="flame spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q216817" start="7868" end="7885" title="emission spectrum" label="emission spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="7922" end="7927" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q429926" start="7999" end="8009" title="lepidolite" label="lepidolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q411467" start="8167" end="8186" title="chloroplatinic acid" label="chloroplatinic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5748690" start="8294" end="8313" title="hexachloroplatinate" label="hexachloroplatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15045177" start="8346" end="8372" title="fractional crystallization (chemistry)" label="fractional crystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="8422" end="8430" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q418909" start="8466" end="8483" title="rubidium chloride" label="rubidium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q296694" start="8657" end="8673" title="caesium chloride" label="caesium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q418909" start="8691" end="8708" title="rubidium chloride" label="rubidium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q912034" start="8841" end="8853" title="spectroscope" label="spectroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q41377" start="8947" end="8960" title="atomic weight" label="atomic weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q899734" start="9335" end="9346" title="Non-stoichiometric compound" label="subchloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q181780" start="9387" end="9394" title="colloid" label="colloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q425046" start="9554" end="9562" title="tartrate" label="tartrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q912400" start="9600" end="9610" title="pyrophoric" label="pyrophoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="10164" end="10174" title="beta decay" label="beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q46202" start="10448" end="10472" title="Bose–Einstein condensate" label="Bose–Einstein condensate"/>
<link wikidata="Q205954" start="10501" end="10519" title="Eric Allin Cornell" label="Eric Allin Cornell"/>
<link wikidata="Q206379" start="10521" end="10538" title="Carl Edwin Wieman" label="Carl Edwin Wieman"/>
<link wikidata="Q76462" start="10543" end="10560" title="Wolfgang Ketterle" label="Wolfgang Ketterle"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="10575" end="10597" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q127933" start="10659" end="10668" title="fireworks" label="fireworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11569191" start="10745" end="10769" title="thermoelectric generator" label="thermoelectric generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549249" start="10780" end="10799" title="magnetohydrodynamics" label="magnetohydrodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="10858" end="10872" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q557042" start="10916" end="10924" title="armature (electrical engineering)" label="armature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="10963" end="10979" title="electric current" label="electric current"/>
<link wikidata="Q163117" start="11081" end="11094" title="laser cooling" label="laser cooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q46202" start="11099" end="11125" title="Bose–Einstein condensation" label="Bose–Einstein condensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q321098" start="11217" end="11228" title="diode laser" label="diode laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="11251" end="11261" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q442883" start="11430" end="11447" title="Feshbach resonance" label="Feshbach spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q533498" start="11488" end="11491" title="Helium-3" label="3He"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413102" start="11679" end="11688" title="hyperfine structure" label="hyperfine"/>
<link wikidata="Q962347" start="11707" end="11721" title="spin polarization" label="spin-polarized"/>
<link wikidata="Q227467" start="11868" end="11880" title="atomic clock" label="atomic clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413102" start="11895" end="11914" title="hyperfine structure" label="hyperfine structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q499637" start="12188" end="12205" title="rubidium standard" label="rubidium standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q179435" start="12227" end="12231" title="GNSS" label="GNSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401742" start="12412" end="12439" title="telecommunications industry" label="telecommunications industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q935396" start="12534" end="12540" title="getter" label="getter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="12544" end="12555" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q210765" start="12567" end="12576" title="photocell" label="photocell"/>
<link wikidata="Q413283" start="12675" end="12685" title="superoxide" label="superoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="12700" end="12706" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="12724" end="12733" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q62536" start="12734" end="12745" title="ion channel" label="ion channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q333921" start="12786" end="12798" title="magnetometer" label="magnetometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4072221" start="12906" end="12926" title="SERF" label="(SERF) magnetometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860122" start="12929" end="12940" title="Rubidium-82" label="Rubidium-82"/>
<link wikidata="Q208376" start="12953" end="12981" title="positron emission tomography" label="positron emission tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956679" start="13132" end="13160" title="myocardial perfusion imaging" label="myocardial perfusion imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="13192" end="13211" title="blood–brain barrier" label="blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q214963" start="13342" end="13358" title="nuclear medicine" label="nuclear medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325627" start="13480" end="13492" title="strontium-82" label="strontium-82"/>
<link wikidata="Q583582" start="14006" end="14017" title="mineral oil" label="mineral oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q107429" start="14085" end="14093" title="peroxide" label="peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="14233" end="14242" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="14303" end="14318" title="oxidation state" label="oxidation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259242" start="14499" end="14518" title="intracellular fluid" label="intracellular fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q686886" start="14733" end="14753" title="biological half-life" label="biological half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988689" start="15163" end="15191" title="The Periodic Table of Videos" label="The Periodic Table of Videos"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25600" wikidata="Q1086" url="?curid=25600" title="Ruthenium">
<text>Ruthenium is a chemical element; it has symbol Ru and atomic number 44. It is a rare transition metal belonging to the platinum group of the periodic table. Like the other metals of the platinum group, ruthenium is unreactive to most chemicals. Karl Ernst Claus, a Russian scientist of Baltic-German ancestry, discovered the element in 1844 at Kazan State University and named it in honor of Russia, using the Latin name &quot;Ruthenia&quot;. Ruthenium is usually found as a minor component of platinum ores; the annual production has risen from about 19 tonnes in 2009 to some 35.5 tonnes in 2017. Most ruthenium produced is used in wear-resistant electrical contacts and thick-film resistors. A minor application for ruthenium is in platinum alloys and as a chemical catalyst. A new application of ruthenium is as the capping layer for extreme ultraviolet photomasks. Ruthenium is generally found in ores with the other platinum group metals in the Ural Mountains and in North and South America. Small but commercially important quantities are also found in pentlandite extracted from Sudbury, Ontario, and in pyroxenite deposits in South Africa.

==Characteristics==
===Physical properties===
Ruthenium, a polyvalent hard white metal, is a member of the platinum group and is in group 8 of the periodic table:

Whereas all other group 8 elements have two electrons in the outermost shell, in ruthenium the outermost shell has only one electron (the final electron is in a lower shell). This anomaly is also observed in the neighboring metals niobium (41), molybdenum (42), and rhodium (45).

===Chemical properties===
Ruthenium has four crystal modifications and does not tarnish at ambient conditions; it oxidizes upon heating to . Ruthenium dissolves in fused alkalis to give ruthenates (). It is not attacked by acids (even aqua regia) but is attacked by sodium hypochlorite at room temperature, and halogens at high temperatures. Ruthenium is most readily attacked by oxidizing agents. Small amounts of ruthenium can increase the hardness of platinum and palladium. The corrosion resistance of titanium is increased markedly by the addition of a small amount of ruthenium. The metal can be plated by electroplating and by thermal decomposition. A ruthenium–molybdenum alloy is known to be superconductive at temperatures below 10.6 K. Ruthenium is the only 4d transition metal that can assume the group oxidation state +8, and even then it is less stable there than the heavier congener osmium: this is the first group from the left of the table where the second and third-row transition metals display notable differences in chemical behavior. Like iron but unlike osmium, ruthenium can form aqueous cations in its lower oxidation +2 and +3 states.

Ruthenium is the first in a downward trend in the melting and boiling points and atomization enthalpy in the 4d transition metals after the maximum seen at molybdenum, because the 4d subshell is more than half full and the electrons are contributing less to metallic bonding. (Technetium, the previous element, has an exceptionally low value that is off the trend due to its half-filled [Kr]4d55s2 configuration, though it is not as far off the trend in the 4d series as manganese in the 3d transition series.) Unlike the lighter congener iron, ruthenium is paramagnetic at room temperature, as iron also is above its Curie point.

The reduction potentials in acidic aqueous solution for some common ruthenium species are shown below:
=== Isotopes ===
Naturally occurring ruthenium is composed of seven stable isotopes. Additionally, 34 radioactive isotopes have been discovered. Of these radioisotopes, the most stable are 106Ru with a half-life of 373.59 days, 103Ru with a half-life of 39.26 days and 97Ru with a half-life of 2.9 days.

Fifteen other radioisotopes have been characterized with atomic weights ranging from (90Ru) to 114.928 Da (115Ru). Most of these have half-lives that are less than five minutes; the exceptions are 95Ru (half-life 1.643 hours) and 105Ru (half-life 4.44 hours).

The primary decay mode before the most abundant isotope, 102Ru, is electron capture while the primary mode after is beta emission. The primary decay product before 102Ru is technetium and the primary decay product after is rhodium.

106Ru is a product of fission of a nucleus of uranium or plutonium. High concentrations of detected atmospheric 106Ru were associated with an alleged undeclared nuclear accident in Russia in 2017.

=== Occurrence ===

Ruthenium is found in about 100 parts per trillion in the Earth&#x27;s crust, making it the 78th most abundant element. It is generally found in ores with the other platinum group metals in the Ural Mountains and in North and South America. Small but commercially important quantities are also found in pentlandite extracted from Sudbury, Ontario, Canada, and in pyroxenite deposits in South Africa. The native form of ruthenium is a very rare mineral (Ir replaces part of Ru in its structure). Ruthenium has a relatively high fission product yield in nuclear fission; and given that its most long-lived radioisotope has a half life of &quot;only&quot; around a year, there are often proposals to recover ruthenium in a new kind of nuclear reprocessing from spent fuel. An unusual ruthenium deposit can also be found at the natural nuclear fission reactor that was active in Oklo, Gabon, some two billion years ago. Indeed, the isotope ratio of ruthenium found there was one of several ways used to confirm that a nuclear fission chain reaction had indeed occurred at that site in the geological past. Uranium is no longer mined at Oklo, and there have never been serious attempts to recover any of the platinum group metals present there.

== Production ==
Roughly 30 tonnes of ruthenium are mined each year, and world reserves are estimated at 5,000 tonnes. The composition of the mined platinum group metal (PGM) mixtures varies widely, depending on the geochemical formation. For example, the PGMs mined in South Africa contain on average 11% ruthenium while the PGMs mined in the former USSR contain only 2% (1992). Ruthenium, osmium, and iridium are considered the minor platinum group metals.

Ruthenium, like the other platinum group metals, is obtained commercially as a by-product from processing of nickel, copper, and platinum metal ore. During electrorefining of copper and nickel, noble metals such as silver, gold, and the platinum group metals precipitate as &quot;anode mud&quot;, the feedstock for the extraction. The metals are converted to ionized solutes by any of several methods, depending on the composition of the feedstock. One representative method is fusion with sodium peroxide followed by dissolution in aqua regia, and solution in a mixture of chlorine with hydrochloric acid. Osmium (Os), ruthenium (Ru), rhodium (Rh), and iridium (Ir) are insoluble in aqua regia and readily precipitate, leaving the other metals in solution. Rhodium is separated from the residue by treatment with molten sodium bisulfate. The insoluble residue, containing Ru, Os, and Ir is treated with sodium oxide, in which Ir is insoluble, producing dissolved Ru and Os salts. After oxidation to the volatile oxides, is separated from by precipitation of (NH4)3RuCl6 with ammonium chloride or by distillation or extraction with organic solvents of the volatile osmium tetroxide. Hydrogen is used to reduce ammonium ruthenium chloride, yielding a powder. The product is reduced using hydrogen, yielding the metal as a powder or sponge metal that can be treated with powder metallurgy techniques or argon-arc welding.

Ruthenium is contained in spent nuclear fuel, both as a direct fission product and as a product of neutron absorption by long-lived fission product . After allowing the unstable isotopes of ruthenium to decay, chemical extraction could yield ruthenium for use in all applications of ruthenium.

Ruthenium can also be produced by deliberate nuclear transmutation from . Given its relatively long half life, high fission product yield and high chemical mobility in the environment, is among the most often proposed non-actinides for commercial scale nuclear transmutation. has a relatively large neutron cross section, and because technetium has no stable isotopes, there would not be a problem of neutron activation of stable isotopes. Significant amounts of are produced in nuclear fission. They are also produced as a byproduct of the use of in nuclear medicine, because this isomer decays to . Exposing the target to strong enough neutron radiation will eventually yield appreciable quantities of ruthenium, which can be chemically separated while consuming .

== Chemical compounds ==

The oxidation states of ruthenium range from 0 to +8, and −2. The properties of ruthenium and osmium compounds are often similar. The +2, +3, and +4 states are the most common. The most prevalent precursor is ruthenium trichloride, a red solid that is poorly defined chemically but versatile synthetically.

=== Oxides and chalcogenides ===
Ruthenium can be oxidized to ruthenium(IV) oxide (RuO2, oxidation state +4), which can, in turn, be oxidized by sodium metaperiodate to the volatile yellow tetrahedral ruthenium tetroxide, RuO4, an aggressive, strong oxidizing agent with structure and properties analogous to osmium tetroxide. RuO4 is mostly used as an intermediate in the purification of ruthenium from ores and radiowastes.

Dipotassium ruthenate (K2RuO4, +6) and potassium perruthenate (KRuO4, +7) are also known. Unlike osmium tetroxide, ruthenium tetroxide is less stable, is strong enough as an oxidising agent to oxidise dilute hydrochloric acid and organic solvents like ethanol at room temperature, and is easily reduced to ruthenate () in aqueous alkaline solutions; it decomposes to form the dioxide above 100 °C. Unlike iron but like osmium, ruthenium does not form oxides in its lower +2 and +3 oxidation states. Ruthenium forms dichalcogenides, which are diamagnetic semiconductors crystallizing in the pyrite structure. Ruthenium sulfide (RuS2) occurs naturally as the mineral laurite.

Like iron, ruthenium does not readily form oxoanions and prefers to achieve high coordination numbers with hydroxide ions instead. Ruthenium tetroxide is reduced by cold dilute potassium hydroxide to form black potassium perruthenate, KRuO4, with ruthenium in the +7 oxidation state. Potassium perruthenate can also be produced by oxidising potassium ruthenate, K2RuO4, with chlorine gas. The perruthenate ion is unstable and is reduced by water to form the orange ruthenate. Potassium ruthenate may be synthesized by reacting ruthenium metal with molten potassium hydroxide and potassium nitrate.

Some mixed oxides are also known, such as MIIRuIVO3, Na3RuVO4, NaRuO, and MLnRuO.

=== Halides and oxyhalides ===
The highest known ruthenium halide is the hexafluoride, a dark brown solid that melts at 54 °C. It hydrolyzes violently upon contact with water and easily disproportionates to form a mixture of lower ruthenium fluorides, releasing fluorine gas. Ruthenium pentafluoride is a tetrameric dark green solid that is also readily hydrolyzed, melting at 86.5 °C. The yellow ruthenium tetrafluoride is probably also polymeric and can be formed by reducing the pentafluoride with iodine. Among the binary compounds of ruthenium, these high oxidation states are known only in the oxides and fluorides.

Ruthenium trichloride is a well-known compound, existing in a black α-form and a dark brown β-form: the trihydrate is red. Of the known trihalides, trifluoride is dark brown and decomposes above 650 °C, tribromide is dark-brown and decomposes above 400 °C, and triiodide is black. Of the dihalides, difluoride is not known, dichloride is brown, dibromide is black, and diiodide is blue. The only known oxyhalide is the pale green ruthenium(VI) oxyfluoride, RuOF4.

=== Coordination and organometallic complexes ===

Ruthenium forms a variety of coordination complexes. Examples are the many pentaammine derivatives [Ru(NH3)5L]n+ that often exist for both Ru(II) and Ru(III). Derivatives of bipyridine and terpyridine are numerous, best known being the luminescent tris(bipyridine)ruthenium(II) chloride.

Ruthenium forms a wide range compounds with carbon–ruthenium bonds. Grubbs&#x27; catalyst is used for alkene metathesis. Ruthenocene is analogous to ferrocene structurally, but exhibits distinctive redox properties. The colorless liquid ruthenium pentacarbonyl converts in the absence of CO pressure to the dark red solid triruthenium dodecacarbonyl. Ruthenium trichloride reacts with carbon monoxide to give many derivatives including RuHCl(CO)(PPh3)3 and Ru(CO)2(PPh3)3 (Roper&#x27;s complex). Heating solutions of ruthenium trichloride in alcohols with triphenylphosphine gives tris(triphenylphosphine)ruthenium dichloride (RuCl2(PPh3)3), which converts to the hydride complex chlorohydridotris(triphenylphosphine)ruthenium(II) (RuHCl(PPh3)3).

== History ==
Though naturally occurring platinum alloys containing all six platinum-group metals were used for a long time by pre-Columbian Americans and known as a material to European chemists from the mid-16th century, not until the mid-18th century was platinum identified as a pure element. That natural platinum contained palladium, rhodium, osmium and iridium was discovered in the first decade of the 19th century. Platinum in alluvial sands of Russian rivers gave access to raw material for use in plates and medals and for the minting of ruble coins, starting in 1828. Residues from platinum production for coinage were available in the Russian Empire, and therefore most of the research on them was done in Eastern Europe.

It is possible that the Polish chemist Jędrzej Śniadecki isolated element 44 (which he called &quot;vestium&quot; after the asteroid Vesta discovered shortly before) from South American platinum ores in 1807. He published an announcement of his discovery in 1808. His work was never confirmed, however, and he later withdrew his claim of discovery.

Jöns Berzelius and Gottfried Osann nearly discovered ruthenium in 1827. They examined residues that were left after dissolving crude platinum from the Ural Mountains in aqua regia. Berzelius did not find any unusual metals, but Osann thought he found three new metals, which he called pluranium, ruthenium, and polinium. This discrepancy led to a long-standing controversy between Berzelius and Osann about the composition of the residues. As Osann was not able to repeat his isolation of ruthenium, he eventually relinquished his claims. The name &quot;ruthenium&quot; was chosen by Osann because the analysed samples stemmed from the Ural Mountains in Russia.

In 1844, Karl Ernst Claus, a Russian scientist of Baltic German descent, showed that the compounds prepared by Gottfried Osann contained small amounts of ruthenium, which Claus had discovered the same year. Claus isolated ruthenium from the platinum residues of rouble production while he was working in Kazan University, Kazan, the same way its heavier congener osmium had been discovered four decades earlier. Claus showed that ruthenium oxide contained a new metal and obtained 6 grams of ruthenium from the part of crude platinum that is insoluble in aqua regia. Choosing the name for the new element, Claus stated: &quot;I named the new body, in honour of my Motherland, ruthenium. I had every right to call it by this name because Mr. Osann relinquished his ruthenium and the word does not yet exist in chemistry.&quot; The name itself derives from the Latin word &quot;Ruthenia&quot;.
In doing so, Claus started a trend that continues to this day – naming an element after a country.

== Applications ==
Approximately 30.9 tonnes of ruthenium were consumed in 2016, 13.8 of them in electrical applications, 7.7 in catalysis, and 4.6 in electrochemistry.

Because it hardens platinum and palladium alloys, ruthenium is used in electrical contacts, where a thin film is sufficient to achieve the desired durability. With its similar properties to and lower cost than rhodium, electric contacts are a major use of ruthenium. The ruthenium plate is applied to the electrical contact and electrode base metal by electroplating or sputtering.

Ruthenium dioxide with lead and bismuth ruthenates are used in thick-film chip resistors. These two electronic applications account for 50% of the ruthenium consumption.

Ruthenium is seldom alloyed with metals outside the platinum group, where small quantities improve some properties. The added corrosion resistance in titanium alloys led to the development of a special alloy with 0.1% ruthenium. Ruthenium is also used in some advanced high-temperature single-crystal superalloys, with applications that include the turbines in jet engines. Several nickel based superalloy compositions are described, such as EPM-102 (with 3% Ru), TMS-162 (with 6% Ru), TMS-138, and TMS-174, the latter two containing 6% rhenium. Fountain pen nibs are frequently tipped with ruthenium alloy. From 1944 onward, the Parker 51 fountain pen was fitted with the &quot;RU&quot; nib, a 14K gold nib tipped with 96.2% ruthenium and 3.8% iridium.

Ruthenium is a component of mixed-metal oxide (MMO) anodes used for cathodic protection of underground and submerged structures, and for electrolytic cells for such processes as generating chlorine from salt water. The fluorescence of some ruthenium complexes is quenched by oxygen, finding use in optode sensors for oxygen. Ruthenium red, [(NH3)5Ru-O-Ru(NH3)4-O-Ru(NH3)5]6+, is a biological stain used to stain polyanionic molecules such as pectin and nucleic acids for light microscopy and electron microscopy. The beta-decaying isotope 106 of ruthenium is used in radiotherapy of eye tumors, mainly malignant melanomas of the uvea. Ruthenium-centered complexes are being researched for possible anticancer properties. Compared with platinum complexes, those of ruthenium show greater resistance to hydrolysis and more selective action on tumors.

Ruthenium tetroxide exposes latent fingerprints by reacting on contact with fatty oils or fats with sebaceous contaminants and producing brown/black ruthenium dioxide pigment.

=== Electronics ===
Electronics is the largest use of ruthenium. Ru metal is particularly nonvolatile, which is advantageous in microelectronic devices. Ru and its main oxide RuO2 have comparable electrical resistivities. Copper can be directly electroplated onto ruthenium, particular applications include barrier layers, transistor gates, and interconnects. Ru films can be deposited by chemical vapor deposition using volatile complexes such as ruthenium tetroxide and the organoruthenium compound (cyclohexadiene)Ru(CO)3.

=== Catalysis ===
Many ruthenium-containing compounds exhibit useful catalytic properties. Solutions containing ruthenium trichloride are highly active for olefin metathesis. Such catalysts are used commercially for the production of polynorbornene for example. Well defined ruthenium carbene and alkylidene complexes show similar reactivity but are only used on small-scale. The Grubbs&#x27; catalysts for example have been employed in the preparation of drugs and advanced materials.

Some ruthenium complexes are highly active catalysts for transfer hydrogenations (sometimes referred to as &quot;borrowing hydrogen&quot; reactions). Chiral ruthenium complexes, introduced by Ryoji Noyori, are employed for the enantioselective hydrogenation of ketones, aldehydes, and imines. A typical catalyst is (cymene)Ru(S,S-TsDPEN): A Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded in 2001 to Ryōji Noyori for contributions to the field of asymmetric hydrogenation.

Ruthenium-promoted cobalt catalysts are used in Fischer–Tropsch synthesis.

===Emerging applications===
Ruthenium-based compounds are components of dye-sensitized solar cells, which are proposed as low-cost solar cell system.

== Health effects ==
Little is known about the health effects of ruthenium and it is relatively rare for people to encounter ruthenium compounds. Metallic ruthenium is inert (is not chemically reactive). Some compounds such as ruthenium oxide (RuO4) are highly toxic and volatile.

== See also ==

* Airborne radioactivity increase in Europe in autumn 2017

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 

== External links ==
* Ruthenium at &quot;The Periodic Table of Videos&quot; (University of Nottingham)
* Nano-layer of ruthenium stabilizes magnetic sensors </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1086" start="0" end="9" title="Ruthenium" label="Ruthenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="15" end="31" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q102500" start="40" end="46" title="Symbol (chemistry)" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086" start="47" end="49" title="Ruthenium" label="Ru"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="54" end="67" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q19588" start="85" end="101" title="transition metal" label="transition metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q223995" start="119" end="133" title="platinum group" label="platinum group"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="141" end="155" title="periodic table" label="periodic table"/>
<link wikidata="Q554178" start="245" end="261" title="Karl Ernst Claus" label="Karl Ernst Claus"/>
<link wikidata="Q113788" start="344" end="366" title="Kazan State University" label="Kazan State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="392" end="398" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147883" start="427" end="435" title="Ruthenia" label="Ruthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="494" end="502" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="555" end="560" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="744" end="749" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="769" end="777" title="catalysis" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319657" start="858" end="867" title="photomask" label="photomask"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="951" end="965" title="Ural Mountains" label="Ural Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="973" end="978" title="North America" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="983" end="996" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q410101" start="1060" end="1071" title="pentlandite" label="pentlandite"/>
<link wikidata="Q383434" start="1087" end="1103" title="Sudbury, Ontario" label="Sudbury, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q648913" start="1112" end="1122" title="pyroxenite" label="pyroxenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="1135" end="1147" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1209" end="1219" title="Valence (chemistry)#Common valences" label="polyvalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q223995" start="1257" end="1271" title="platinum group" label="platinum group"/>
<link wikidata="Q202224" start="1282" end="1289" title="group 8 element" label="group 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046" start="1545" end="1552" title="niobium" label="niobium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="1559" end="1569" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087" start="1580" end="1587" title="rhodium" label="rhodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q174670" start="1830" end="1840" title="aqua regia" label="aqua regia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605" start="1906" end="1913" title="halogen" label="halogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="2049" end="2057" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089" start="2062" end="2071" title="palladium" label="palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="2077" end="2086" title="corrosion" label="corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="2101" end="2109" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503392" start="2207" end="2221" title="electroplating" label="electroplating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="2264" end="2274" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="2296" end="2311" title="superconductivity" label="superconductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="2339" end="2340" title="Kelvin" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="2914" end="2924" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054" start="3035" end="3045" title="Technetium" label="Technetium"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="3229" end="3238" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q188479" start="3316" end="3328" title="paramagnetic" label="paramagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191073" start="3376" end="3387" title="Curie point" label="Curie point"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="3568" end="3575" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="3595" end="3615" title="radioactive isotopes" label="radioactive isotopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="3647" end="3659" title="radioisotope" label="radioisotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="3695" end="3704" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q41377" start="3855" end="3868" title="atomic weight" label="atomic weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="4071" end="4081" title="decay mode" label="decay mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q109910" start="4126" end="4142" title="electron capture" label="electron capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="4175" end="4188" title="beta emission" label="beta emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q191637" start="4202" end="4215" title="decay product" label="decay product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054" start="4232" end="4242" title="technetium" label="technetium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087" start="4282" end="4289" title="rhodium" label="rhodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="4338" end="4345" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102" start="4349" end="4358" title="plutonium" label="plutonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530434" start="4442" end="4479" title="Airborne radioactivity increase in Europe in autumn 2017" label="undeclared nuclear accident in Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="4542" end="4560" title="parts per trillion" label="parts per trillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q428867" start="4602" end="4628" title="Abundance of the chemical elements" label="78th most abundant element"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="4704" end="4718" title="Ural Mountains" label="Ural Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q410101" start="4813" end="4824" title="pentlandite" label="pentlandite"/>
<link wikidata="Q383434" start="4840" end="4847" title="Greater Sudbury" label="Sudbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="4849" end="4856" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q648913" start="4873" end="4883" title="pyroxenite" label="pyroxenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="4896" end="4908" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q24267" start="5037" end="5058" title="fission product yield" label="fission product yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208852" start="5242" end="5262" title="nuclear reprocessing" label="nuclear reprocessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623868" start="5268" end="5278" title="spent fuel" label="spent fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q64470499" start="5334" end="5365" title="natural nuclear fission reactor" label="natural nuclear fission reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q26761" start="5385" end="5389" title="Oklo" label="Oklo"/>
<link wikidata="Q223995" start="5899" end="5919" title="platinum group metal" label="platinum group metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="6320" end="6326" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="6328" end="6334" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6367" end="6392" title="Copper extraction techniques#Electrorefining" label="electrorefining of copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q192355" start="6512" end="6521" title="feedstock" label="feedstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q205459" start="6701" end="6716" title="sodium peroxide" label="sodium peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q174670" start="6744" end="6754" title="aqua regia" label="aqua regia"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="6785" end="6793" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="6799" end="6816" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q751" start="6818" end="6824" title="Osmium" label="Osmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087" start="6847" end="6854" title="rhodium" label="rhodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q877" start="6865" end="6872" title="iridium" label="iridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="7394" end="7402" title="Hydrogen" label="Hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q190901" start="7421" end="7429" title="ammonium" label="ammonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q900548" start="7542" end="7554" title="sponge metal" label="sponge metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q726605" start="7580" end="7597" title="powder metallurgy" label="powder metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q696" start="7612" end="7617" title="argon" label="argon"/>
<link wikidata="Q422937" start="7618" end="7629" title="arc welding" label="arc welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623868" start="7658" end="7676" title="spent nuclear fuel" label="spent nuclear fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094166" start="7695" end="7710" title="fission product" label="fission product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064418" start="7731" end="7749" title="neutron absorption" label="neutron absorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q24246" start="7753" end="7779" title="long-lived fission product" label="long-lived fission product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374122" start="7810" end="7831" title="isotopes of ruthenium" label="isotopes of ruthenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q202651" start="7972" end="7993" title="nuclear transmutation" label="nuclear transmutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q24267" start="8043" end="8064" title="fission product yield" label="fission product yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q19577" start="8149" end="8157" title="actinide" label="actinide"/>
<link wikidata="Q751259" start="8226" end="8247" title="neutron cross section" label="neutron cross section"/>
<link wikidata="Q901707" start="8328" end="8346" title="neutron activation" label="neutron activation"/>
<link wikidata="Q214963" start="8478" end="8494" title="nuclear medicine" label="nuclear medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q922364" start="8565" end="8582" title="neutron radiation" label="neutron radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="8725" end="8740" title="oxidation state" label="oxidation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173" start="8822" end="8831" title="Chemical compound" label="compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q303472" start="8930" end="8951" title="ruthenium trichloride" label="ruthenium trichloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="9079" end="9087" title="oxidation" label="oxidized"/>
<link wikidata="Q417022" start="9091" end="9110" title="ruthenium(IV) oxide" label="ruthenium(IV) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q281419" start="9174" end="9194" title="Sodium periodate" label="sodium metaperiodate"/>
<link wikidata="Q416759" start="9230" end="9249" title="ruthenium tetroxide" label="ruthenium tetroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q422021" start="9338" end="9354" title="osmium tetroxide" label="osmium tetroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="9664" end="9681" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="9708" end="9715" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q898920" start="9973" end="9985" title="chalcogenide" label="chalcogenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="10046" end="10052" title="pyrite" label="pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q417246" start="10121" end="10128" title="laurite" label="laurite"/>
<link wikidata="Q132298" start="10308" end="10327" title="potassium hydroxide" label="potassium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q177836" start="10710" end="10727" title="potassium nitrate" label="potassium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q409508" start="10886" end="10898" title="ruthenium hexafluoride" label="hexafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177832" start="11089" end="11112" title="Ruthenium pentafluoride" label="Ruthenium pentafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q59917602" start="11210" end="11233" title="ruthenium tetrafluoride" label="ruthenium tetrafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103" start="11314" end="11320" title="iodine" label="iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q303472" start="11436" end="11457" title="Ruthenium trichloride" label="Ruthenium trichloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q413658" start="12126" end="12136" title="bipyridine" label="bipyridine"/>
<link wikidata="Q408228" start="12141" end="12152" title="terpyridine" label="terpyridine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184240" start="12188" end="12199" title="luminescence" label="luminescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774530" start="12200" end="12238" title="tris(bipyridine)ruthenium(II) chloride" label="tris(bipyridine)ruthenium(II) chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q414452" start="12309" end="12330" title="Grubbs&amp;#x27; catalyst" label="Grubbs&amp;#x27; catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q409522" start="12362" end="12373" title="Ruthenocene" label="Ruthenocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q211972" start="12390" end="12399" title="ferrocene" label="ferrocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q25323976" start="12478" end="12501" title="ruthenium pentacarbonyl" label="ruthenium pentacarbonyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115937" start="12563" end="12590" title="triruthenium dodecacarbonyl" label="triruthenium dodecacarbonyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q303472" start="12592" end="12613" title="Ruthenium(III) chloride" label="Ruthenium trichloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990492" start="12714" end="12734" title="Roper&amp;#x27;s complex" label="Roper&amp;#x27;s complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q115493" start="12797" end="12815" title="triphenylphosphine" label="triphenylphosphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272487" start="12822" end="12866" title="tris(triphenylphosphine)ruthenium dichloride" label="tris(triphenylphosphine)ruthenium dichloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q223995" start="13065" end="13085" title="platinum-group metal" label="platinum-group metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="13116" end="13129" title="pre-Columbian" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="13425" end="13439" title="alluvium" label="alluvial sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q15788" start="13538" end="13543" title="ruble" label="ruble"/>
<link wikidata="Q41207" start="13544" end="13549" title="coins" label="coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="13749" end="13755" title="Poland" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336700" start="13764" end="13781" title="Jędrzej Śniadecki" label="Jędrzej Śniadecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030" start="13858" end="13863" title="4 Vesta" label="Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q151911" start="14075" end="14089" title="Jöns Berzelius" label="Jöns Berzelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q67170" start="14094" end="14109" title="Gottfried Osann" label="Gottfried Osann"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="14226" end="14240" title="Ural Mountains" label="Ural Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q174670" start="14244" end="14254" title="aqua regia" label="aqua regia"/>
<link wikidata="Q554178" start="14747" end="14763" title="Karl Ernst Claus" label="Karl Ernst Claus"/>
<link wikidata="Q157139" start="14788" end="14801" title="Baltic German" label="Baltic German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195325" start="14919" end="14929" title="discovery of the chemical elements" label="discovered"/>
<link wikidata="Q113788" start="15042" end="15058" title="Kazan University" label="Kazan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q900" start="15060" end="15065" title="Kazan" label="Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q174670" start="15293" end="15303" title="aqua regia" label="aqua regia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147883" start="15614" end="15622" title="Ruthenia" label="Ruthenia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15971" end="15990" title="Switch#Contacts" label="electrical contacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q898444" start="16270" end="16280" title="sputtering" label="sputtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="16306" end="16310" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q942" start="16315" end="16322" title="bismuth" label="bismuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="16604" end="16612" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q637345" start="16755" end="16765" title="superalloy" label="superalloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="16815" end="16826" title="jet engines" label="jet engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q737" start="16991" end="16998" title="rhenium" label="rhenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q192401" start="17000" end="17012" title="Fountain pen" label="Fountain pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138273" start="17084" end="17093" title="Parker 51" label="Parker 51"/>
<link wikidata="Q877" start="17199" end="17206" title="iridium" label="iridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883994" start="17237" end="17254" title="mixed-metal oxide" label="mixed-metal oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q32179" start="17387" end="17406" title="Chlorine production" label="generating chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="17428" end="17440" title="fluorescence" label="fluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027509" start="17507" end="17513" title="optode" label="optode"/>
<link wikidata="Q424006" start="17534" end="17547" title="Ruthenium red" label="Ruthenium red"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332446" start="17590" end="17606" title="biological stain" label="biological stain"/>
<link wikidata="Q901016" start="17621" end="17630" title="polyanion" label="polyanion"/>
<link wikidata="Q188154" start="17651" end="17657" title="pectin" label="pectin"/>
<link wikidata="Q123619" start="17662" end="17675" title="nucleic acids" label="nucleic acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074953" start="17680" end="17696" title="light microscopy" label="light microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132560" start="17701" end="17720" title="electron microscopy" label="electron microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180614" start="17811" end="17829" title="malignant melanoma" label="malignant melanoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q278859" start="17838" end="17842" title="uvea" label="uvea"/>
<link wikidata="Q416759" start="18059" end="18078" title="Ruthenium tetroxide" label="Ruthenium tetroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q175403" start="18364" end="18379" title="microelectronic" label="microelectronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275435" start="18543" end="18556" title="barrier layer" label="barrier layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q505668" start="18625" end="18650" title="chemical vapor deposition" label="chemical vapor deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q416759" start="18684" end="18703" title="ruthenium tetroxide" label="ruthenium tetroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563183" start="18712" end="18736" title="organoruthenium compound" label="organoruthenium compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211201" start="18738" end="18752" title="cyclohexadiene" label="cyclohexadiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q303472" start="18875" end="18896" title="ruthenium trichloride" label="ruthenium trichloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q898959" start="18919" end="18936" title="olefin metathesis" label="olefin metathesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q419257" start="19048" end="19055" title="carbene" label="carbene"/>
<link wikidata="Q11172462" start="19060" end="19070" title="alkylidene" label="alkylidene"/>
<link wikidata="Q414452" start="19143" end="19164" title="Grubbs&amp;#x27; catalyst" label="Grubbs&amp;#x27; catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143742" start="19307" end="19329" title="transfer hydrogenation" label="transfer hydrogenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734365" start="19400" end="19406" title="Chiral" label="Chiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q157210" start="19442" end="19454" title="Ryoji Noyori" label="Ryoji Noyori"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812077" start="19477" end="19507" title="asymmetric hydrogenation" label="enantioselective hydrogenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170744" start="19511" end="19517" title="ketone" label="ketone"/>
<link wikidata="Q101497" start="19520" end="19528" title="aldehyde" label="aldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q408057" start="19535" end="19540" title="imine" label="imine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279741" start="19582" end="19586" title="DPEN" label="DPEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="19591" end="19615" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q157210" start="19639" end="19651" title="Ryōji Noyori" label="Ryōji Noyori"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812077" start="19686" end="19710" title="asymmetric hydrogenation" label="asymmetric hydrogenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q654400" start="19761" end="19786" title="Fischer–Tropsch process" label="Fischer–Tropsch synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q81121" start="19861" end="19886" title="dye-sensitized solar cell" label="dye-sensitized solar cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="19911" end="19930" title="low-cost solar cell" label="low-cost solar cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q262175" start="20108" end="20113" title="Chemically inert" label="inert"/>
<link wikidata="Q778774" start="20122" end="20141" title="Reactivity (chemistry)" label="chemically reactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q416759" start="20167" end="20189" title="RuO4" label="ruthenium oxide (RuO4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530434" start="20240" end="20296" title="Airborne radioactivity increase in Europe in autumn 2017" label="Airborne radioactivity increase in Europe in autumn 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988689" start="20392" end="20420" title="The Periodic Table of Videos" label="The Periodic Table of Videos"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25601" wikidata="Q1087" url="?curid=25601" title="Rhodium">
<text>Rhodium is a chemical element; it has symbol Rh and atomic number 45. It is a very rare, silvery-white, hard, corrosion-resistant transition metal. It is a noble metal and a member of the platinum group. It has only one naturally occurring isotope, which is 103Rh. Naturally occurring rhodium is usually found as a free metal or as an alloy with similar metals and rarely as a chemical compound in minerals such as bowieite and rhodplumsite. It is one of the rarest and most valuable precious metals. Rhodium is a group 9 element (cobalt group).

Rhodium is found in platinum or nickel ores with the other members of the platinum group metals. It was discovered in 1803 by William Hyde Wollaston in one such ore, and named for the rose color of one of its chlorine compounds.

The element&#x27;s major use (consuming about 80% of world rhodium production) is as one of the catalysts in the three-way catalytic converters in automobiles. Because rhodium metal is inert against corrosion and most aggressive chemicals, and because of its rarity, rhodium is usually alloyed with platinum or palladium and applied in high-temperature and corrosion-resistive coatings. White gold is often plated with a thin rhodium layer to improve its appearance, while sterling silver is often rhodium-plated to resist tarnishing.

Rhodium detectors are used in nuclear reactors to measure the neutron flux level. Other uses of rhodium include asymmetric hydrogenation used to form drug precursors and the processes for the production of acetic acid.

==History==
Rhodium (from , meaning &#x27;rose&#x27;) was discovered in 1803 by William Hyde Wollaston, soon after he discovered palladium. He used crude platinum ore presumably obtained from South America. His procedure dissolved the ore in aqua regia and neutralized the acid with sodium hydroxide (NaOH). He then precipitated the platinum as ammonium chloroplatinate by adding ammonium chloride (). Most other metals like copper, lead, palladium, and rhodium were precipitated with zinc. Diluted nitric acid dissolved all but palladium and rhodium. Of these, palladium dissolved in aqua regia but rhodium did not, and the rhodium was precipitated by the addition of sodium chloride as . After being washed with ethanol, the rose-red precipitate was reacted with zinc, which displaced the rhodium in the ionic compound and thereby released the rhodium as free metal.

For decades, the rare element had only minor applications; for example, by the turn of the century, rhodium-containing thermocouples were used to measure temperatures up to 1800 °C. They have exceptionally good stability in the temperature range of 1300 to 1800 °C.

The first major application was electroplating for decorative uses and as corrosion-resistant coating. The introduction of the three-way catalytic converter by Volvo in 1976 increased the demand for rhodium. The previous catalytic converters used platinum or palladium, while the three-way catalytic converter used rhodium to reduce the amount of NOx in the exhaust.

== Characteristics ==
Rhodium is a hard, silvery, durable metal that has a high reflectance. Rhodium metal does not normally form an oxide, even when heated. Oxygen is absorbed from the atmosphere only at the melting point of rhodium, but is released on solidification. Rhodium has both a higher melting point and lower density than platinum. It is not attacked by most acids: it is completely insoluble in nitric acid and dissolves slightly in aqua regia.

Rhodium belongs to group 9 of the periodic table, but exhibits an atypical ground state valence electron configuration for that group. Like neighboring elements niobium (41), ruthenium (44), and palladium (46), it only has one electron in its outermost &quot;s&quot; orbital.

===Chemical properties===


The common oxidation states of rhodium are +3 and +1. Oxidation states 0, +2, and +4 are also well known. A few complexes at still higher oxidation states are known.

The rhodium oxides include , , , , and . None are of technological significance.

All the Rh(III) halides are known but the hydrated trichloride is most frequently encountered. It is also available in an anhydrous form, which is somewhat refractory. Other rhodium(III) chlorides include sodium hexachlororhodate, , and pentaamminechlororhodium dichloride, . They are used in the recycling and purification of this very expensive metal. Heating a methanolic solution of hydrated rhodium trichloride with sodium acetate give the blue-green rhodium(II) acetate, , which features a Rh-Rh bond. This complex and related rhodium(II) trifluoroacetate have attracted attention as catalysts for cyclopropanation reactions. Hydrated rhodium trichloride is reduced by carbon monoxide, ethylene, and trifluorophosphine to give rhodium(I) complexes (L = CO, ). When treated with triphenylphosphine, hydrated rhodium trichloride converts to the maroon-colored , which is known as Wilkinson&#x27;s catalyst. Reduction of rhodium carbonyl chloride gives hexarhodium hexadecacarbonyl, , and tetrarhodium dodecacarbonyl, , the two most common Rh(0) complexes.

As for other metals, rhodium forms high oxidation state binary fluorides. These include rhodium pentafluoride, a tetrameric complex with the true formula ) and rhodium hexafluoride.

=== Isotopes ===
Naturally occurring rhodium is composed of only one isotope, 103Rh. The most stable radioisotopes are 101Rh with a half-life of 3.3 years, 102Rh with a half-life of 207 days, 102mRh with a half-life of 2.9 years, and 99Rh with a half-life of 16.1 days. Twenty other radioisotopes have been characterized with atomic weights ranging from 92.926 u (93Rh) to 116.925 u (117Rh). Most of these have half-lives shorter than an hour, except 100Rh (20.8 hours) and 105Rh (35.36 hours). Rhodium has numerous meta states, the most stable being 102mRh (0.141 MeV) with a half-life of about 2.9 years and 101mRh (0.157 MeV) with a half-life of 4.34 days (see isotopes of rhodium).

In isotopes weighing less than 103 (the stable isotope), the primary decay mode is electron capture and the primary decay product is ruthenium. In isotopes greater than 103, the primary decay mode is beta emission and the primary product is palladium.

==Occurrence==
Rhodium is one of the rarest elements in the Earth&#x27;s crust, comprising an estimated 0.0002 parts per million (2 × 10−10). Its rarity affects its price and its use in commercial applications. The concentration of rhodium in nickel meteorites is typically 1 part per billion. Rhodium has been measured in some potatoes with concentrations between 0.8 and 30 ppt.

===Mining and price===

Rhodium ores are a mixture with other metals such as palladium, silver, platinum, and gold. Few rhodium minerals are known. The separation of rhodium from the other metals poses significant challenges. Principal sources are located in South Africa, river sands of the Ural Mountains in Russia, and in North America, especially the copper-nickel sulfide mining area of the Sudbury, Ontario, region. Although the rhodium abundance at Sudbury is very small, the large amount of processed nickel ore makes rhodium recovery cost-effective.

The main exporter of rhodium is South Africa (approximately 80% in 2010) followed by Russia. The annual world production is 30 tonnes. The price of rhodium is highly variable.

===Used nuclear fuels===
Rhodium is a fission product of uranium-235: each kilogram of fission product contains a significant amount of the lighter platinum group metals. Used nuclear fuel is therefore a potential source of rhodium, but the extraction is complex and expensive, and the presence of rhodium radioisotopes requires a period of cooling storage for multiple half-lives of the longest-lived isotope (101Rh with a half-life of 3.3 years, and 102mRh with a half-life of 2.9 years), or about 10 years. These factors make the source unattractive and no large-scale extraction has been attempted.

==Applications==
The primary use of this element is in automobiles as a catalytic converter, changing harmful unburned hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide, and nitrogen oxide exhaust emissions into less noxious gases. Of 30,000 kg of rhodium consumed worldwide in 2012, 81% (24,300 kg) went into this application, and 8,060 kg was recovered from old converters. About 964 kg of rhodium was used in the glass industry, mostly for production of fiberglass and flat-panel glass, and 2,520 kg was used in the chemical industry.

In 2008, net demand (with the recycling accounted for) of rhodium for automotive converters made up 84% of the world usage, with the number fluctuating around 80% in 2015−2021.

===Carbonylation===
Rhodium catalysts are used in some industrial processes, notably those involving carbon monoxide. In the Monsanto process, rhodium iodides catalyze the carbonylation of methanol to produce acetic acid. This technology has been significantly displaced by the iridium-based Cativa process, which effects the same conversion but more efficiently. Rhodium-based complexes are the dominant catalysts for hydroformylation, which converts alkenes to aldehydes according to the following equation:

Rh-based hydroformylation underpins the industrial production of products as diverse as detergents, fragrances, and some drugs. Originally hydroformylation relied on much cheaper cobalt carbonyl-based catalysts, but that technology has largely been eclipsed by rhodium-based catalysts despite the cost differential.

Rhodium is also known to catalyze many reactions involving hydrogen gas and hydrosilanes. These include hydrogenations and hydrosilylations of alkenes. Rhodium metal, but not rhodium complexes, catalyzes the hydrogenation of benzene to cyclohexane.

===Ornamental uses===
Rhodium finds use in jewelry and for decorations. It is electroplated on white gold and platinum to give it a reflective white surface at time of sale, after which the thin layer wears away with use. This is known as rhodium flashing in the jewelry business. It may also be used in coating sterling silver to protect against tarnish (silver sulfide, Ag2S, produced from atmospheric hydrogen sulfide, H2S). Solid (pure) rhodium jewelry is very rare, more because of the difficulty of fabrication (high melting point and poor malleability) than because of the high price. The high cost ensures that rhodium is applied only as an electroplate. Rhodium has also been used for honors or to signify elite status, when more commonly used metals such as silver, gold or platinum were deemed insufficient. In 1979 the &quot;Guinness Book of World Records&quot; gave Paul McCartney a rhodium-plated disc for being history&#x27;s all-time best-selling songwriter and recording artist.

===Other uses===
Rhodium is used as an alloying agent for hardening and improving the corrosion resistance of platinum and palladium. These alloys are used in furnace windings, bushings for glass fiber production, thermocouple elements, electrodes for aircraft spark plugs, and laboratory crucibles. Other uses include:

* Electrical contacts, where it is valued for small electrical resistance, small and stable contact resistance, and great corrosion resistance.
* Rhodium plated by either electroplating or evaporation is extremely hard and useful for optical instruments.
* Filters in mammography systems for the characteristic X-rays it produces.
* Rhodium neutron detectors are used in nuclear reactors to measure neutron flux levels—this method requires a digital filter to determine the current neutron flux level, generating three separate signals: immediate, a few seconds delay, and a minute delay, each with its own signal level; all three are combined in the rhodium detector signal. The three Palo Verde nuclear reactors each have 305 rhodium neutron detectors, 61 detectors on each of five vertical levels, providing an accurate 3D &quot;picture&quot; of reactivity and allowing fine tuning to consume the nuclear fuel most economically.

In automobile manufacturing, rhodium is also used in the construction of headlight reflectors.

== Precautions ==
Being a noble metal, pure rhodium is inert and harmless in elemental form. However, chemical complexes of rhodium can be reactive. For rhodium chloride, the median lethal dose (LD50) for rats is 198 mg () per kilogram of body weight. Like the other noble metals, rhodium has not been found to serve any biological function.

People can be exposed to rhodium in the workplace by inhalation. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has specified the legal limit (Permissible exposure limit) for rhodium exposure in the workplace at 0.1 mg/m3 over an 8-hour workday, and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set the recommended exposure limit (REL), at the same level. At levels of 100 mg/m3, rhodium is immediately dangerous to life or health. For soluble compounds, the PEL and REL are both 0.001 mg/m3.

==See also==
* 2000s commodities boom
* 2020s commodities boom
* Bullion
* Bullion coin
* Rhodium compounds

==References==
==External links==
* Rhodium at &quot;The Periodic Table of Videos&quot; (University of Nottingham)
* Rhodium Technical and Safety Data
* CDC – NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1087" start="0" end="7" title="Rhodium" label="Rhodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="13" end="29" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q102500" start="38" end="44" title="Symbol (chemistry)" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087" start="45" end="47" title="Rhodium" label="Rh"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="52" end="65" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="110" end="129" title="corrosion" label="corrosion-resistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q19588" start="130" end="146" title="transition metal" label="transition metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q585302" start="156" end="167" title="noble metal" label="noble metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q223995" start="188" end="202" title="platinum group" label="platinum group"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="240" end="247" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643249" start="415" end="423" title="bowieite" label="bowieite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058511" start="428" end="440" title="rhodplumsite" label="rhodplumsite"/>
<link wikidata="Q271449" start="484" end="498" title="precious metal" label="precious metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q208107" start="514" end="521" title="Group 9 element" label="group 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q223995" start="621" end="635" title="platinum group" label="platinum group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195325" start="651" end="661" title="discovery of the chemical elements" label="discovered"/>
<link wikidata="Q312975" start="673" end="695" title="William Hyde Wollaston" label="William Hyde Wollaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="756" end="764" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="873" end="881" title="catalyst" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="890" end="920" title="Catalytic converter#Three-way" label="three-way catalytic converters"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="1063" end="1068" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="1076" end="1084" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089" start="1088" end="1097" title="palladium" label="palladium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1164" end="1174" title="Colored gold#White gold" label="White gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q31576" start="1250" end="1265" title="sterling silver" label="sterling silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="1343" end="1358" title="nuclear reactor" label="nuclear reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754040" start="1375" end="1393" title="Neutron detection" label="neutron flux level"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="1519" end="1530" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195325" start="1591" end="1601" title="discovery of the chemical elements" label="discovered"/>
<link wikidata="Q312975" start="1613" end="1635" title="William Hyde Wollaston" label="William Hyde Wollaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089" start="1662" end="1671" title="palladium" label="palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="1687" end="1695" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="1725" end="1738" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q174670" start="1775" end="1785" title="aqua regia" label="aqua regia"/>
<link wikidata="Q102769" start="1816" end="1832" title="sodium hydroxide" label="sodium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616062" start="1878" end="1902" title="ammonium chloroplatinate" label="ammonium chloroplatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q188543" start="1913" end="1930" title="ammonium chloride" label="ammonium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="1958" end="1964" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="1966" end="1970" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089" start="1972" end="1981" title="palladium" label="palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="2018" end="2022" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="2032" end="2043" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q174670" start="2118" end="2128" title="aqua regia" label="aqua regia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="2202" end="2217" title="sodium chloride" label="sodium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="2310" end="2319" title="Displacement reaction" label="displaced"/>
<link wikidata="Q653807" start="2807" end="2826" title="catalytic converter" label="catalytic converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q163810" start="2830" end="2835" title="Volvo" label="Volvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20962970" start="3017" end="3020" title="NOx" label="NOx"/>
<link wikidata="Q663650" start="3118" end="3129" title="reflectance" label="reflectance"/>
<link wikidata="Q50690" start="3171" end="3176" title="oxide" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="3196" end="3202" title="Oxygen" label="Oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8104" start="3224" end="3234" title="atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="3247" end="3260" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="3358" end="3365" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="3371" end="3379" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="3408" end="3412" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="3445" end="3456" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q174670" start="3483" end="3493" title="aqua regia" label="aqua regia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208107" start="3515" end="3522" title="group 9 element" label="group 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q4480008" start="3571" end="3583" title="ground state" label="ground state"/>
<link wikidata="Q107414" start="3584" end="3600" title="valence electron" label="valence electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046" start="3657" end="3664" title="niobium" label="niobium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086" start="3671" end="3680" title="ruthenium" label="ruthenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089" start="3691" end="3700" title="palladium" label="palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="3749" end="3770" title="s orbital" label="&amp;quot;s&amp;quot; orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="3812" end="3827" title="oxidation state" label="oxidation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q20979803" start="4287" end="4322" title="pentaamminechlororhodium dichloride" label="pentaamminechlororhodium dichloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q339940" start="4471" end="4485" title="sodium acetate" label="sodium acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604267" start="4506" end="4525" title="rhodium(II) acetate" label="rhodium(II) acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q72506661" start="4583" end="4611" title="rhodium(II) trifluoroacetate" label="rhodium(II) trifluoroacetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156600" start="4654" end="4670" title="cyclopropanation" label="cyclopropanation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="4725" end="4740" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q151313" start="4742" end="4750" title="ethylene" label="ethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q423581" start="4756" end="4774" title="trifluorophosphine" label="trifluorophosphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q115493" start="4834" end="4852" title="triphenylphosphine" label="triphenylphosphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q414182" start="4934" end="4959" title="Wilkinson&amp;#x27;s catalyst" label="Wilkinson&amp;#x27;s catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q20671903" start="4974" end="4999" title="rhodium carbonyl chloride" label="rhodium carbonyl chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092934" start="5006" end="5034" title="hexarhodium hexadecacarbonyl" label="hexarhodium hexadecacarbonyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164130" start="5042" end="5069" title="tetrarhodium dodecacarbonyl" label="tetrarhodium dodecacarbonyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q66392" start="5167" end="5182" title="binary phase" label="binary fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q65561698" start="5199" end="5220" title="rhodium pentafluoride" label="rhodium pentafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q413023" start="5271" end="5291" title="rhodium hexafluoride" label="rhodium hexafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="5363" end="5370" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="5395" end="5407" title="radioisotope" label="radioisotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="5426" end="5435" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q41377" start="5620" end="5633" title="atomic weight" label="atomic weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q483261" start="5655" end="5656" title="atomic mass unit" label="u"/>
<link wikidata="Q846110" start="5810" end="5820" title="meta state" label="meta state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320863" start="5958" end="5977" title="isotopes of rhodium" label="isotopes of rhodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="6050" end="6060" title="decay mode" label="decay mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q109910" start="6064" end="6080" title="electron capture" label="electron capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q191637" start="6097" end="6110" title="decay product" label="decay product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086" start="6114" end="6123" title="ruthenium" label="ruthenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="6181" end="6194" title="beta emission" label="beta emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089" start="6222" end="6231" title="palladium" label="palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q24580" start="6271" end="6312" title="Abundance of elements in Earth&amp;#x27;s crust" label="rarest elements in the Earth&amp;#x27;s crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="6345" end="6362" title="Parts-per notation" label="parts per million"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="6484" end="6493" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="6510" end="6526" title="Parts-per notation" label="part per billion"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="6562" end="6568" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089" start="6693" end="6702" title="palladium" label="palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="6704" end="6710" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="6712" end="6720" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="6726" end="6730" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="6744" end="6751" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="6908" end="6922" title="Ural Mountains" label="Ural Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="6971" end="6977" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985595" start="6978" end="6992" title="nickel sulfide" label="nickel sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q383434" start="7012" end="7019" title="Greater Sudbury" label="Sudbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="7303" end="7308" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q848497" start="7410" end="7421" title="uranium-235" label="uranium-235"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623868" start="7524" end="7541" title="Used nuclear fuel" label="Used nuclear fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="7777" end="7786" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="7819" end="7828" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q653807" start="8029" end="8048" title="catalytic converter" label="catalytic converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="8682" end="8690" title="catalyst" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="8755" end="8770" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q901246" start="8779" end="8795" title="Monsanto process" label="Monsanto process"/>
<link wikidata="Q900377" start="8826" end="8839" title="carbonylation" label="carbonylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="8843" end="8851" title="methanol" label="methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="8863" end="8874" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q877" start="8932" end="8939" title="iridium" label="iridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q579304" start="8946" end="8960" title="Cativa process" label="Cativa process"/>
<link wikidata="Q899181" start="9073" end="9089" title="hydroformylation" label="hydroformylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q101497" start="9117" end="9125" title="aldehyde" label="aldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7517194" start="9558" end="9569" title="hydrosilane" label="hydrosilane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270" start="9707" end="9714" title="benzene" label="benzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q211433" start="9718" end="9729" title="cyclohexane" label="cyclohexane"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="9775" end="9782" title="jewelry" label="jewelry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503392" start="9810" end="9823" title="electroplated" label="electroplated"/>
<link wikidata="Q309191" start="9827" end="9837" title="white gold" label="white gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q31576" start="10044" end="10059" title="sterling silver" label="sterling silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q421085" start="10088" end="10102" title="silver sulfide" label="silver sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="10136" end="10152" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503392" start="10381" end="10393" title="electroplating" label="electroplate"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="10569" end="10599" title="Guinness Book of World Records" label="Guinness Book of World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="10611" end="10625" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="10839" end="10847" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089" start="10852" end="10861" title="palladium" label="palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q190241" start="10943" end="10955" title="thermocouple" label="thermocouple"/>
<link wikidata="Q176140" start="10966" end="10975" title="electrode" label="electrode"/>
<link wikidata="Q193340" start="10990" end="11000" title="spark plug" label="spark plug"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11052" end="11071" title="Switch#Contacts" label="Electrical contacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q106603432" start="11102" end="11123" title="electrical resistance" label="electrical resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q332329" start="11142" end="11160" title="contact resistance" label="contact resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="11172" end="11181" title="corrosion" label="corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503392" start="11221" end="11235" title="electroplating" label="electroplating"/>
<link wikidata="Q324634" start="11318" end="11329" title="mammography" label="mammography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508667" start="11736" end="11746" title="Palo Verde Nuclear Generating Station" label="Palo Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q585302" start="12105" end="12116" title="noble metal" label="noble metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q711849" start="12254" end="12272" title="median lethal dose" label="median lethal dose"/>
<link wikidata="Q746186" start="12491" end="12536" title="Occupational Safety and Health Administration" label="Occupational Safety and Health Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376583" start="12575" end="12601" title="Permissible exposure limit" label="Permissible exposure limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q60346" start="12686" end="12739" title="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health" label="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302715" start="12760" end="12786" title="recommended exposure limit" label="recommended exposure limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q682341" start="12848" end="12887" title="immediately dangerous to life or health" label="immediately dangerous to life or health"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376583" start="12916" end="12919" title="Permissible exposure limit" label="PEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q60967345" start="12966" end="12988" title="2000s commodities boom" label="2000s commodities boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q113625020" start="12991" end="13013" title="2020s commodities boom" label="2020s commodities boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q557709" start="13016" end="13023" title="Bullion" label="Bullion"/>
<link wikidata="Q557728" start="13026" end="13038" title="Bullion coin" label="Bullion coin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13041" end="13058" title=":Category:Rhodium compounds" label="Rhodium compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988689" start="13113" end="13141" title="The Periodic Table of Videos" label="The Periodic Table of Videos"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25602" wikidata="Q1128" url="?curid=25602" title="Radium">
<text>Radium is a chemical element; it has symbol Ra and atomic number 88. It is the sixth element in group 2 of the periodic table, also known as the alkaline earth metals. Pure radium is silvery-white, but it readily reacts with nitrogen (rather than oxygen) upon exposure to air, forming a black surface layer of radium nitride (Ra3N2). All isotopes of radium are radioactive, the most stable isotope being radium-226 with a half-life of 1,600 years. When radium decays, it emits ionizing radiation as a by-product, which can excite fluorescent chemicals and cause radioluminescence. For this property, it was widely used in self-luminous paints following its discovery. Of the radioactive elements that occur in quantity, radium is considered particularly toxic, and it is carcinogenic due to the radioactivity of both it and its immediate decay product radon as well as its tendency to accumulate in the bones.

Radium, in the form of radium chloride, was discovered by Marie and Pierre Curie in 1898 from ore mined at Jáchymov. They extracted the radium compound from uraninite and published the discovery at the French Academy of Sciences five days later. Radium was isolated in its metallic state by Marie Curie and André-Louis Debierne through the electrolysis of radium chloride in 1910, and soon afterwards the metal started being produced on larger scales in Austria, the United States, and Belgium. However, the amount of radium produced globally has always been small in comparison to other elements, and by the 2010s, annual production of radium, mainly via extraction from spent nuclear fuel, was less than 100 grams.

In nature, radium is found in uranium ores in quantities as small as a seventh of a gram per ton of uraninite, and in thorium ores in trace amounts. Radium is not necessary for living organisms, and its radioactivity and chemical reactivity make adverse health effects likely when it is incorporated into biochemical processes because of its chemical mimicry of calcium. As of 2018, other than in nuclear medicine, radium has no commercial applications. Formerly, from the 1910s to the 1970s, it was used as a radioactive source for radioluminescent devices and also in radioactive quackery for its supposed curative power. In nearly all of its applications, radium has been replaced with less dangerous radioisotopes, with one of its few remaining non-medical uses being the production of actinium in nuclear reactors. 

==Bulk properties==
Radium is the heaviest known alkaline earth metal and is the only radioactive member of its group. Its physical and chemical properties most closely resemble its lighter congener, barium.

Pure radium is a volatile, lustrous silvery-white metal, even though its lighter congeners calcium, strontium, and barium have a slight yellow tint. Radium&#x27;s lustrous surface rapidly becomes black upon exposure to air, likely due to the formation of radium nitride (Ra3N2). Its melting point is either or and its boiling point is ; however, this is not well established. Both of these values are slightly lower than those of barium, confirming periodic trends down the group 2 elements.
Like barium and the alkali metals, radium crystallizes in the body-centered cubic structure at standard temperature and pressure: the radium–radium bond distance is 514.8 picometers.
Radium has a density of 5.5 g/cm, higher than that of barium, and the two elements have similar crystal structures (bcc at standard temperature and pressure).

==Isotopes==
Radium has 33 known isotopes with mass numbers from 202 to 234, all of which are radioactive. Four of these – Ra (half-life 11.4 days), Ra (3.64 days), Ra (1600 years), and Ra (5.75 years) – occur naturally in the decay chains of primordial thorium-232, uranium-235, and uranium-238 (Ra from uranium-235, Ra from uranium-238, and the other two from thorium-232). These isotopes nevertheless still have half-lives too short to be primordial radionuclides, and only exist in nature from these decay chains.
Together with the mostly artificial Ra (15 d), which occurs in nature only as a decay product of minute traces of neptunium-237,
these are the five most stable isotopes of radium. All other 27 known radium isotopes have half-lives under two hours, and the majority have half-lives under a minute. Of these, Ra (half-life 28 s) also occurs as a Np daughter, and Ra and Ra would be produced by the still-unobserved double beta decay of natural radon isotopes. At least 12 nuclear isomers have been reported, the most stable of which is radium-205m with a half-life between 130~230 milliseconds; this is still shorter than twenty-four ground-state radium isotopes.

Ra is the most stable isotope of radium and is the last isotope in the decay chain of uranium-238 with a half-life of over a millennium; it makes up almost all of natural radium. Its immediate decay product is the dense radioactive noble gas radon (specifically the isotope Rn), which is responsible for much of the danger of environmental radium. It is 2.7 million times more radioactive than the same molar amount of natural uranium (mostly uranium-238), due to its proportionally shorter half-life.

A sample of radium metal maintains itself at a higher temperature than its surroundings because of the radiation it emits. Natural radium (which is mostly Ra) emits mostly alpha particles, but other steps in its decay chain (the uranium or radium series) emit alpha or beta particles, and almost all particle emissions are accompanied by gamma rays.

Experimental nuclear physics studies have shown that nuclei of several radium isotopes, such as Ra, Ra and Ra, have reflection-asymmetric (&quot;pear-like&quot;) shapes. In particular, this experimental information on radium-224
has been obtained at ISOLDE using a technique called Coulomb excitation.

==Chemistry==
Radium only exhibits the oxidation state of +2 in solution. It forms the colorless Ra cation in aqueous solution, which is highly basic and does not form complexes readily. Most radium compounds are therefore simple ionic compounds, though participation from the 6s and 6p electrons (in addition to the valence 7s electrons) is expected due to relativistic effects and would enhance the covalent character of radium compounds such as RaF and RaAt. For this reason, the standard electrode potential for the half-reaction Ra (aq) + 2e → Ra (s) is −2.916 V, even slightly lower than the value −2.92 V for barium, whereas the values had previously smoothly increased down the group (Ca: −2.84 V; Sr: −2.89 V; Ba: −2.92 V). The values for barium and radium are almost exactly the same as those of the heavier alkali metals potassium, rubidium, and caesium.

===Compounds===
Solid radium compounds are white as radium ions provide no specific coloring, but they gradually turn yellow and then dark over time due to self-radiolysis from radium&#x27;s alpha decay. Insoluble radium compounds coprecipitate with all barium, most strontium, and most lead compounds.

Radium oxide (RaO) is poorly characterized, as the reaction of radium with air results in the formation of radium nitride. Radium hydroxide (Ra(OH)2) is formed via the reaction of radium metal with water, and is the most readily soluble among the alkaline earth hydroxides and a stronger base than its barium congener, barium hydroxide. It is also more soluble than actinium hydroxide and thorium hydroxide: these three adjacent hydroxides may be separated by precipitating them with ammonia.

Radium chloride (RaCl2) is a colorless, luminescent compound. It becomes yellow after some time due to self-damage by the alpha radiation given off by radium when it decays. Small amounts of barium impurities give the compound a rose color. Its It is soluble in water, though less so than barium chloride, and its solubility decreases with increasing concentration of hydrochloric acid. Crystallization from aqueous solution gives the dihydrate RaCl2·2H2O, isomorphous with its barium analog.

Radium bromide (RaBr2) is also a colorless, luminous compound. In water, it is more soluble than radium chloride. Like radium chloride, crystallization from aqueous solution gives the dihydrate RaBr2·2H2O, isomorphous with its barium analog. The ionizing radiation emitted by radium bromide excites nitrogen molecules in the air, making it glow. The alpha particles emitted by radium quickly gain two electrons to become neutral helium, which builds up inside and weakens radium bromide crystals. This effect sometimes causes the crystals to break or even explode.

Radium nitrate (Ra(NO3)2) is a white compound that can be made by dissolving radium carbonate in nitric acid. As the concentration of nitric acid increases, the solubility of radium nitrate decreases, an important property for the chemical purification of radium.

Radium forms much the same insoluble salts as its lighter congener barium: it forms the insoluble sulfate (RaSO4, the most insoluble known sulfate), chromate (RaCrO4), carbonate (RaCO3), iodate (Ra(IO3)2), tetrafluoroberyllate (RaBeF4), and nitrate (Ra(NO3)2). With the exception of the carbonate, all of these are less soluble in water than the corresponding barium salts, but they are all isostructural to their barium counterparts. Additionally, radium phosphate, oxalate, and sulfite are probably also insoluble, as they coprecipitate with the corresponding insoluble barium salts. The great insolubility of radium sulfate (at 20 °C, only 2.1 mg will dissolve in 1 kg of water) means that it is one of the less biologically dangerous radium compounds. The large ionic radius of Ra (148 pm) results in weak ability to form coordination complexes and poor extraction of radium from aqueous solutions when not at high pH.

==Occurrence==
All isotopes of radium have half-lives much shorter than the age of the Earth, so that any primordial radium would have decayed long ago. Radium nevertheless still occurs in the environment, as the isotopes Ra, Ra, Ra, and Ra are part of the decay chains of natural thorium and uranium isotopes; since thorium and uranium have very long half-lives, these daughters are continually being regenerated by their decay. Of these four isotopes, the longest-lived is Ra (half-life 1600 years), a decay product of natural uranium. Because of its relative longevity, Ra is the most common isotope of the element, making up about one part per trillion of the Earth&#x27;s crust; essentially all natural radium is Ra. Thus, radium is found in tiny quantities in the uranium ore uraninite and various other uranium minerals, and in even tinier quantities in thorium minerals. One ton of pitchblende typically yields about one seventh of a gram of radium. One kilogram of the Earth&#x27;s crust contains about 900 picograms of radium, and one liter of sea water contains about 89 femtograms of radium.

==History==

Radium was discovered by Marie Skłodowska-Curie and her husband Pierre Curie on 21 December 1898 in a uraninite (pitchblende) sample from Jáchymov. While studying the mineral earlier, the Curies removed uranium from it and found that the remaining material was still radioactive. In July 1898, while studying pitchblende, they isolated an element similar to bismuth which turned out to be polonium. They then isolated a radioactive mixture consisting of two components: compounds of barium, which gave a brilliant green flame color, and unknown radioactive compounds which gave carmine spectral lines that had never been documented before. The Curies found the radioactive compounds to be very similar to the barium compounds, except they were less soluble. This discovery made it possible for the Curies to isolate the radioactive compounds and discover a new element in them. The Curies announced their discovery to the French Academy of Sciences on 26 December 1898. The naming of radium dates to about 1899, from the French word &quot;radium&quot;, formed in Modern Latin from &quot;radius&quot; (&quot;ray&quot;): this was in recognition of radium&#x27;s emission of energy in the form of rays. The gaseous emissions of radium, radon, were recognized and studied extensively by Friedrich Ernst Dorn in the early 1900s, though at the time they were characterized as &quot;radium emanations&quot;.

In September 1910, Marie Curie and André-Louis Debierne announced that they had isolated radium as a pure metal through the electrolysis of pure radium chloride (RaCl2) solution using a mercury cathode, producing radium–mercury amalgam. This amalgam was then heated in an atmosphere of hydrogen gas to remove the mercury, leaving pure radium metal.
Later that same year, E. Ebler isolated radium metal by thermal decomposition of its azide, Ra(N3)2. Radium metal was first industrially produced at the beginning of the 20th century by Biraco, a subsidiary company of Union Minière du Haut Katanga (UMHK) in its Olen plant in Belgium. The metal became an important export of Belgium from 1922 up until World War II.

The general historical unit for radioactivity, the curie, is based on the radioactivity of Ra. it was originally defined as the radioactivity of one gram of radium-226, but the definition was later refined to be .

===Historical applications===
====Luminescent paint====

Radium was formerly used in self-luminous paints for watches, aircraft switches, clocks, and instrument dials and panels. A typical self-luminous watch that uses radium paint contains around 1 microgram of radium. In the mid-1920s, a lawsuit was filed against the United States Radium Corporation by five dying &quot;Radium Girls&quot; – dial painters who had painted radium-based luminous paint on the components of watches and clocks. The dial painters were instructed to lick their brushes to give them a fine point, thereby ingesting radium. Their exposure to radium caused serious health effects which included sores, anemia, and bone cancer.

During the litigation, it was determined that the company&#x27;s scientists and management had taken considerable precautions to protect themselves from the effects of radiation, but it did not seem to protect their employees. Additionally, for several years the companies had attempted to cover up the effects and avoid liability by insisting that the Radium Girls were instead suffering from syphilis.

As a result of the lawsuit, and an extensive study by the U.S. Public Health Service, the adverse effects of radioactivity became widely known, and radium-dial painters were instructed in proper safety precautions and provided with protective gear. Radium continued to be used in dials, especially in manufacturing during World War II, but from 1925 onward there were no further injuries to dial painters.
From the 1960s the use of radium paint was discontinued. In many cases luminous dials were implemented with non-radioactive fluorescent materials excited by light; such devices glow in the dark after exposure to light, but the glow fades. Where long-lasting self-luminosity in darkness was required, safer radioactive promethium-147 (half-life 2.6 years) or tritium (half-life 12 years) paint was used; both continue to be used as of 2018. These had the added advantage of not degrading the phosphor over time, unlike radium. Tritium as it is used in these applications is considered safer than radium, as it emits very low-energy beta radiation (even lower-energy than the beta radiation emitted by promethium) which cannot penetrate the skin, unlike the gamma radiation emitted by radium isotopes.

Clocks, watches, and instruments dating from the first half of the 20th century, often in military applications, may have been painted with radioactive luminous paint. They are usually no longer luminous; this is not due to radioactive decay of the radium (which has a half-life of 1600 years) but to the fluorescence of the zinc sulfide fluorescent medium being worn out by the radiation from the radium. 
Originally appearing as white, most radium paint from before the 1960s has tarnished to yellow over time. The radiation dose from an intact device is usually only a hazard when many devices are grouped together or if the device is disassembled or tampered with.

==== Use in electron tubes ====
Radium has been used in electron tubes, such as the Western Electric 346B tube. These devices contain a small amount of radium (in the form of radium bromide) to ionize the fill gas, typically a noble gas like neon or argon. This ionization ensures reliable and consistent operation by providing a steady current when a high voltage is applied, enhancing the device&#x27;s performance and stability. The radium is sealed within a glass envelope with two electrodes, one of which is coated with the radioactive material to create an ion path between the electrodes.

====Quackery====
Radium was once an additive in products such as cosmetics, soap, razor blades, and even beverages due to its supposed curative powers. Many contemporary products were falsely advertised as being radioactive. Such products soon fell out of vogue and were prohibited by authorities in many countries after it was discovered they could have serious adverse health effects. (See, for instance, &quot;Radithor&quot; or &quot;Revigator&quot; types of &quot;radium water&quot; or &quot;Standard Radium Solution for Drinking&quot;.) Spas featuring radium-rich water are still occasionally touted as beneficial, such as those in Misasa, Tottori, Japan, though the sources of radioactivity in these spas vary and may be attributed to radon and other radioisotopes.

====Medical and research uses====
Radium (usually in the form of radium chloride or radium bromide) was used in medicine to produce radon gas, which in turn was used as a cancer treatment. Several of these radon sources were used in Canada in the 1920s and 1930s. However, many treatments that were used in the early 1900s are not used anymore because of the harmful effects radium bromide exposure caused. Some examples of these effects are anaemia, cancer, and genetic mutations. As of 2011, safer gamma emitters such as Co, which is less costly and available in larger quantities, were usually used to replace the historical use of radium in this application, but factors including increasing costs of cobalt and risks of keeping radioactive sources on site have led to an increase in the use of linear particle accelerators for the same applications.

In the U.S., from 1940 through the 1960s, radium was used in nasopharyngeal radium irradiation, a treatment that was administered to children to treat hearing loss and chronic otitis. The procedure was also administered to airmen and submarine crew to treat barotrauma.

Early in the 1900s, biologists used radium to induce mutations and study genetics. As early as 1904, Daniel MacDougal used radium in an attempt to determine whether it could provoke sudden large mutations and cause major evolutionary shifts. Thomas Hunt Morgan used radium to induce changes resulting in white-eyed fruit flies. Nobel-winning biologist Hermann Muller briefly studied the effects of radium on fruit fly mutations before turning to more affordable x-ray experiments.

==Production==

Uranium had no large scale application in the late 19th century and therefore no large uranium mines existed. In the beginning, the silver mines in Jáchymov, Austria-Hungary (now Czech Republic) were the only large sources for uranium ore. The uranium ore was only a byproduct of the mining activities.

In the first extraction of radium, Curie used the residues after extraction of uranium from pitchblende. The uranium had been extracted by dissolution in sulfuric acid leaving radium sulfate, which is similar to barium sulfate but even less soluble in the residues. The residues also contained rather substantial amounts of barium sulfate which thus acted as a carrier for the radium sulfate. The first steps of the radium extraction process involved boiling with sodium hydroxide, followed by hydrochloric acid treatment to minimize impurities of other compounds. The remaining residue was then treated with sodium carbonate to convert the barium sulfate into barium carbonate (carrying the radium), thus making it soluble in hydrochloric acid. After dissolution, the barium and radium were reprecipitated as sulfates; this was then repeated to further purify the mixed sulfate. Some impurities that form insoluble sulfides were removed by treating the chloride solution with hydrogen sulfide, followed by filtering. When the mixed sulfates were pure enough, they were once more converted to mixed chlorides; barium and radium thereafter were separated by fractional crystallisation while monitoring the progress using a spectroscope (radium gives characteristic red lines in contrast to the green barium lines), and the electroscope.

After the isolation of radium by Marie and Pierre Curie from uranium ore from Jáchymov, several scientists started to isolate radium in small quantities. Later, small companies purchased mine tailings from Jáchymov mines and started isolating radium. In 1904, the Austrian government nationalised the mines and stopped exporting raw ore. Until 1912, when radium production increased, radium availability was low.

The formation of an Austrian monopoly and the strong urge of other countries to have access to radium led to a worldwide search for uranium ores. The United States took over as leading producer in the early 1910s, producing 70 g total from 1913 to 1920 in Pittsburgh alone.

The Curies&#x27; process was still used for industrial radium extraction in 1940, but mixed bromides were then used for the fractionation. If the barium content of the uranium ore is not high enough, additional barium can be added to carry the radium. These processes were applied to high grade uranium ores but may not have worked well with low grade ores. Small amounts of radium were still extracted from uranium ore by this method of mixed precipitation and ion exchange as late as the 1990s, but as of 2011, it is extracted only from spent nuclear fuel. Pure radium metal is isolated by reducing radium oxide with aluminium metal in a vacuum at 1,200 °C.

In 1954, the total worldwide supply of purified radium amounted to about . Zaire and Canada were briefly the largest producers of radium in the late 1970s. As of 1997 the chief radium-producing countries were Belgium, Canada, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, the United Kingdom, and Russia. The annual production of radium compounds was only about 100 g in total as of 1984; annual production of radium had reduced to less than 100 g by 2018.

==Modern applications==
Radium is seeing increasing use in the field of atomic, molecular, and optical physics. Symmetry breaking forces scale proportional to formula_1 which makes radium, the heaviest alkaline earth element, well suited for constraining new physics beyond the standard model. Some radium isotopes, such as radium-225, have octupole deformed parity doublets that enhance sensitivity to charge parity violating new physics by two to three orders of magnitude compared to Hg.

Radium is also a promising candidate for trapped ion optical clocks. The radium ion has two subhertz-linewidth transitions from the formula_2 ground state that could serve as the clock transition in an optical clock. A Ra+ trapped ion atomic clock has been demonstrated on the formula_2 to formula_4 transition, which has been considered for the creation of a transportable optical clock as all transitions necessary for clock operation can be addressed with direct diode lasers at common wavelengths.

Some of the few practical uses of radium are derived from its radioactive properties. More recently discovered radioisotopes, such as cobalt-60 and caesium-137, are replacing radium in even these limited uses because several of these isotopes are more powerful emitters, safer to handle, and available in more concentrated form.

The isotope Ra was approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration in 2013 for use in medicine as a cancer treatment of bone metastasis in the form of a solution including radium-223 chloride. The main indication of treatment is the therapy of bony metastases from castration-resistant prostate cancer.
Ra has also been used in experiments concerning therapeutic irradiation, as it is the only reasonably long-lived radium isotope which does not have radon as one of its daughters.

Radium was still used in 2007 as a radiation source in some industrial radiography devices to check for flawed metallic parts, similarly to X-ray imaging. When mixed with beryllium, radium acts as a neutron source. Up until at least 2004, radium-beryllium neutron sources were still sometimes used,
but other materials such as polonium and americium have become more common for use in neutron sources. RaBeF4-based (α, n) neutron sources have been deprecated despite the high number of neutrons they emit (1.84×10 neutrons per second) in favour of Am–Be sources. , the isotope Ra is mainly used to form Ac by neutron irradiation in a nuclear reactor.

==Hazards==
Radium is highly radioactive, as is its immediate decay product, radon gas. When ingested, 80% of the ingested radium leaves the body through the feces, while the other 20% goes into the bloodstream, mostly accumulating in the bones. This is because the body treats radium as calcium and deposits it in the bones, where radioactivity degrades marrow and can mutate bone cells. Exposure to radium, internal or external, can cause cancer and other disorders, because radium and radon emit alpha and gamma rays upon their decay, which kill and mutate cells. Radium is generally considered the most toxic of the radioactive elements. 

Some of the biological effects of radium include the first case of &quot;radium-dermatitis&quot;, reported in 1900, two years after the element&#x27;s discovery. The French physicist Antoine Becquerel carried a small ampoule of radium in his waistcoat pocket for six hours and reported that his skin became ulcerated. Pierre Curie attached a tube filled with radium to his arm for ten hours, which resulted in the appearance of a skin lesion, suggesting the use of radium to attack cancerous tissue as it had attacked healthy tissue.
Handling of radium has been blamed for Marie Curie&#x27;s death, due to aplastic anemia, though analysis of her levels of radium exposure done after her death find them within accepted safe levels and attribute her illness and death to her use of radiography. A significant amount of radium&#x27;s danger comes from its daughter radon, which as a gas can enter the body far more readily than can its parent radium.

===Regulation===

The first published recommendations for protection against radium and radiation in general were made by the British X-ray and Radium Protection Committee and were adopted internationally in 1928 at the first meeting of the International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP), following preliminary guidance written by the Röntgen Society. This meeting led to further developments of radiation protection programs coordinated across all countries represented by the commission.

Exposure to radium is still regulated internationally by the ICRP, alongside the World Health Organization. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) publishes safety standards and provides recommendations for the handling of and exposure to radium in its works on naturally occurring radioactive materials and the broader International Basic Safety Standards, which are not enforced by the IAEA but are available for adoption by members of the organization. In addition, in efforts to reduce the quantity of old radiotherapy devices that contain radium, the IAEA has worked since 2022 to manage and recycle disused Ra sources.

In several countries, further regulations exist and are applied beyond those recommended by the IAEA and ICRP. For example, in the United States, the Environmental Protection Agency-defined Maximum Contaminant Level for radium is 5 pCi/L for drinking water; at the time of the Manhattan Project in the 1940s, the &quot;tolerance level&quot; for workers was set at 0.1 micrograms of ingested radium. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration does not specifically set exposure limits for radium, and instead limits ionizing radiation exposure in units of roentgen equivalent man based on the exposed area of the body. Radium sources themselves, rather than worker exposures, are regulated more closely by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which requires licensing for anyone possessing Ra with activity of more than 0.01 μCi. The particular governing bodies that regulate radioactive materials and nuclear energy are documented by the Nuclear Energy Agency for member countries for instance, in the Republic of Korea, the nation&#x27;s radiation safety standards are managed by the Korea Radioisotope Institute, established in 1985, and the Korea Institute of Nuclear Safety, established in 1990 and the IAEA leads efforts in establishing governing bodies in locations that do not have government regulations on radioactive materials.

==Notes==
==References==
===Bibliography===
* 
* Alternate source: https://sgp.fas.org/othergov/doe/lanl/lib-www/books/rc000041.pdf

==Further reading==
* 
* 


==External links==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="0" end="6" title="Radium" label="Radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="12" end="28" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q102500" start="37" end="43" title="chemical symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="44" end="46" title="Radium" label="Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="51" end="64" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q19563" start="96" end="103" title="alkaline earth metal" label="group 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="111" end="125" title="periodic table" label="periodic table"/>
<link wikidata="Q19563" start="145" end="165" title="alkaline earth metal" label="alkaline earth metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q119443419" start="310" end="324" title="radium nitride" label="radium nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="338" end="346" title="isotopes" label="isotopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="361" end="372" title="radioactive" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387321" start="404" end="414" title="radium-226" label="radium-226"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="422" end="431" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q186161" start="477" end="495" title="ionizing radiation" label="ionizing radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="530" end="541" title="fluorescent" label="fluorescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q980416" start="562" end="579" title="radioluminescence" label="radioluminescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q266545" start="622" end="642" title="Self-luminous paint" label="self-luminous paints"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="675" end="695" title="Radionuclide" label="radioactive elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="754" end="759" title="Toxicity" label="toxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q187661" start="771" end="783" title="Carcinogen" label="carcinogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133" start="852" end="857" title="radon" label="radon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941583" start="885" end="908" title="Bone seeker" label="accumulate in the bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344375" start="934" end="949" title="radium chloride" label="radium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195325" start="955" end="965" title="discovery of the chemical elements" label="discovered"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186" start="969" end="974" title="Marie Curie" label="Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q37463" start="979" end="991" title="Pierre Curie" label="Pierre Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q830418" start="1018" end="1026" title="Jáchymov" label="Jáchymov"/>
<link wikidata="Q206467" start="1068" end="1077" title="uraninite" label="uraninite"/>
<link wikidata="Q188771" start="1113" end="1139" title="French Academy of Sciences" label="French Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="1184" end="1189" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q468371" start="1218" end="1238" title="André-Louis Debierne" label="André-Louis Debierne"/>
<link wikidata="Q64403" start="1251" end="1263" title="electrolysis" label="electrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="1365" end="1372" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1378" end="1391" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="1397" end="1404" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623868" start="1583" end="1601" title="spent nuclear fuel" label="spent nuclear fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="1659" end="1666" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115" start="1747" end="1754" title="thorium" label="thorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q96373581" start="1806" end="1822" title="Biological roles of the elements" label="living organisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="1991" end="1998" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q214963" start="2026" end="2042" title="nuclear medicine" label="nuclear medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q980416" start="2162" end="2178" title="radioluminescent" label="radioluminescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281229" start="2199" end="2219" title="radioactive quackery" label="radioactive quackery"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="2333" end="2346" title="radioisotopes" label="radioisotopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121" start="2419" end="2427" title="actinium" label="actinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="2431" end="2447" title="Nuclear reactor" label="nuclear reactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q19563" start="2500" end="2520" title="alkaline earth metal" label="alkaline earth metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="2537" end="2548" title="radioactive" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q900891" start="2641" end="2649" title="congener (chemistry)" label="congener"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112" start="2651" end="2657" title="barium" label="barium"/>
<link wikidata="Q908990" start="2677" end="2685" title="volatility (chemistry)" label="volatile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998326" start="2687" end="2695" title="Lustre (mineralogy)" label="lustrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="2751" end="2758" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q938" start="2760" end="2769" title="strontium" label="strontium"/>
<link wikidata="Q119443419" start="2915" end="2929" title="radium nitride" label="radium nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="2943" end="2956" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003183" start="2978" end="2991" title="boiling point" label="boiling point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622089" start="3109" end="3123" title="periodic trend" label="periodic trend"/>
<link wikidata="Q19557" start="3172" end="3184" title="alkali metal" label="alkali metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="3214" end="3233" title="body-centered cubic" label="body-centered cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q102145" start="3247" end="3280" title="standard temperature and pressure" label="standard temperature and pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q192274" start="3323" end="3332" title="picometer" label="picometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="3431" end="3449" title="Crystal structure" label="crystal structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="3451" end="3454" title="Cubic crystal system" label="bcc"/>
<link wikidata="Q101395" start="3542" end="3553" title="mass number" label="mass number"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="3589" end="3600" title="radioactive" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q18888805" start="3618" end="3620" title="radium-223" label="Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="3622" end="3631" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q191645" start="3722" end="3733" title="decay chain" label="decay chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885290" start="3749" end="3760" title="thorium-232" label="thorium-232"/>
<link wikidata="Q848497" start="3762" end="3773" title="uranium-235" label="uranium-235"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148503" start="3779" end="3790" title="uranium-238" label="uranium-238"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="3910" end="3920" title="half-lives" label="half-lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q759767" start="3937" end="3961" title="primordial nuclide" label="primordial radionuclides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194370" start="4038" end="4048" title="synthetic radioisotope" label="artificial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393673" start="4127" end="4140" title="neptunium-237" label="neptunium-237"/>
<link wikidata="Q901747" start="4426" end="4443" title="double beta decay" label="double beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334543" start="4455" end="4469" title="Isotopes of radon" label="radon isotopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q846110" start="4483" end="4497" title="nuclear isomer" label="nuclear isomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4480008" start="4645" end="4657" title="ground state" label="ground-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q19609" start="4908" end="4917" title="noble gas" label="noble gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133" start="4918" end="4923" title="radon" label="radon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387827" start="4950" end="4952" title="radon-222" label="Rn"/>
<link wikidata="Q104946" start="5079" end="5091" title="amount of substance" label="molar amount"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="5103" end="5110" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="5233" end="5244" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q103517" start="5351" end="5366" title="alpha particles" label="alpha particles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5408" end="5432" title="Decay chain#Uranium series" label="uranium or radium series"/>
<link wikidata="Q103531" start="5448" end="5462" title="beta particles" label="beta particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="5517" end="5527" title="gamma rays" label="gamma rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090829" start="5780" end="5786" title="ISOLDE" label="ISOLDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176151" start="5812" end="5830" title="Coulomb excitation" label="Coulomb excitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="5933" end="5939" title="cation" label="cation"/>
<link wikidata="Q906356" start="5943" end="5959" title="aqueous solution" label="aqueous solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11193" start="5977" end="5982" title="base (chemistry)" label="basic"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="6001" end="6010" title="coordination complex" label="complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q62500" start="6063" end="6068" title="ionic bond" label="ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q53859" start="6110" end="6129" title="Electron configuration" label="6s and 6p electrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330289" start="6191" end="6211" title="relativistic quantum chemistry" label="relativistic effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q127920" start="6234" end="6242" title="covalent bond" label="covalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q56355228" start="6281" end="6284" title="Radium fluoride" label="RaF"/>
<link wikidata="Q999" start="6291" end="6293" title="astatine" label="At"/>
<link wikidata="Q368639" start="6316" end="6344" title="standard electrode potential" label="standard electrode potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272343" start="6353" end="6366" title="half-reaction" label="half-reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q25250" start="6399" end="6400" title="volt" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="6665" end="6674" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q895" start="6676" end="6684" title="rubidium" label="rubidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="6690" end="6697" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q788463" start="6861" end="6871" title="radiolysis" label="radiolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179856" start="6891" end="6902" title="alpha decay" label="alpha decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q870531" start="6931" end="6944" title="Coprecipitation" label="coprecipitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q938" start="6967" end="6976" title="strontium" label="strontium"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="6987" end="6991" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q28771573" start="7004" end="7016" title="Radium oxide" label="Radium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q119443419" start="7111" end="7125" title="radium nitride" label="radium nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q4138111" start="7127" end="7143" title="Radium hydroxide" label="Radium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q407605" start="7323" end="7339" title="barium hydroxide" label="barium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7370" end="7388" title="actinium hydroxide" label="actinium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4138119" start="7393" end="7410" title="thorium hydroxide" label="thorium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="7488" end="7495" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344375" start="7498" end="7513" title="Radium chloride" label="Radium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q184240" start="7538" end="7549" title="Luminescence" label="luminescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q179856" start="7620" end="7635" title="alpha radiation" label="alpha radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q533047" start="7727" end="7737" title="Rose (color)" label="rose color"/>
<link wikidata="Q407270" start="7787" end="7802" title="barium chloride" label="barium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="7866" end="7883" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q902950" start="7955" end="7966" title="Isomorphism (crystallography)" label="isomorphous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653992" start="7992" end="8006" title="Radium bromide" label="Radium bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="8291" end="8299" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q103517" start="8342" end="8356" title="alpha particle" label="alpha particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="8421" end="8427" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q28771564" start="8558" end="8572" title="Radium nitrate" label="Radium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q28771566" start="8635" end="8651" title="radium carbonate" label="radium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="8655" end="8666" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4445816" start="8921" end="8928" title="radium sulfate" label="sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8972" end="8980" title="radium chromate" label="chromate"/>
<link wikidata="Q28771566" start="8991" end="9000" title="radium carbonate" label="carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202638" start="9010" end="9016" title="radium iodate" label="iodate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9029" end="9049" title="radium tetrafluoroberyllate" label="tetrafluoroberyllate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3803316" start="9214" end="9227" title="isostructural" label="isostructural"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9272" end="9288" title="radium phosphate" label="radium phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9290" end="9297" title="radium oxalate" label="oxalate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9303" end="9310" title="radium sulfite" label="sulfite"/>
<link wikidata="Q870531" start="9348" end="9361" title="coprecipitation" label="coprecipitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="9470" end="9472" title="milligram" label="mg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="9492" end="9494" title="kilogram" label="kg"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="9649" end="9671" title="Coordination complex" label="coordination complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q935310" start="9823" end="9839" title="age of the Earth" label="age of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281379" start="9933" end="9951" title="Radium and radon in the environment" label="in the environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q191637" start="10117" end="10126" title="decay product" label="daughters"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="10386" end="10403" title="parts per trillion" label="part per trillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q206467" start="10529" end="10538" title="uraninite" label="uraninite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="10565" end="10573" title="minerals" label="minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247037" start="10630" end="10633" title="ton" label="ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q206467" start="10637" end="10648" title="uraninite" label="pitchblende"/>
<link wikidata="Q41803" start="10689" end="10693" title="gram" label="gram"/>
<link wikidata="Q15316" start="10725" end="10743" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q846759" start="10763" end="10771" title="picogram" label="picogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q11582" start="10792" end="10797" title="liter" label="liter"/>
<link wikidata="Q184395" start="10801" end="10810" title="sea water" label="sea water"/>
<link wikidata="Q846759" start="10829" end="10838" title="femtogram" label="femtogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195325" start="10876" end="10886" title="discovery of the chemical elements" label="discovered"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186" start="10890" end="10912" title="Marie Curie" label="Marie Skłodowska-Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q37463" start="10929" end="10941" title="Pierre Curie" label="Pierre Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q206467" start="10967" end="10976" title="uraninite" label="uraninite"/>
<link wikidata="Q830418" start="11003" end="11011" title="Jáchymov" label="Jáchymov"/>
<link wikidata="Q942" start="11223" end="11230" title="bismuth" label="bismuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q979" start="11254" end="11262" title="polonium" label="polonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112" start="11348" end="11354" title="barium" label="barium"/>
<link wikidata="Q10296772" start="11443" end="11450" title="carmine (color)" label="carmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="11451" end="11464" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q188771" start="11787" end="11813" title="French Academy of Sciences" label="French Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q65191" start="12148" end="12168" title="Friedrich Ernst Dorn" label="Friedrich Ernst Dorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q468371" start="12302" end="12322" title="André-Louis Debierne" label="André-Louis Debierne"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="12373" end="12378" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q64403" start="12391" end="12403" title="electrolysis" label="electrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44791900" start="12419" end="12427" title="chloride" label="chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="12453" end="12460" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q175233" start="12461" end="12468" title="cathode" label="cathode"/>
<link wikidata="Q182574" start="12495" end="12502" title="amalgam (chemistry)" label="amalgam"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="12553" end="12561" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611095" start="12672" end="12693" title="thermal decomposition" label="thermal decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q407627" start="12701" end="12706" title="azide" label="azide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915581" start="12802" end="12808" title="Biraco" label="Biraco"/>
<link wikidata="Q763185" start="12834" end="12863" title="Union Minière du Haut Katanga" label="Union Minière du Haut Katanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q839044" start="12878" end="12882" title="Olen, Belgium" label="Olen"/>
<link wikidata="Q229354" start="13034" end="13039" title="Curie (unit)" label="curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q184240" start="13283" end="13296" title="luminescence" label="self-luminous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550753" start="13519" end="13551" title="United States Radium Corporation" label="United States Radium Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128589" start="13572" end="13584" title="Radium Girls" label="Radium Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q266545" start="13636" end="13650" title="luminous paint" label="luminous paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445" start="13878" end="13884" title="anemia" label="anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328805" start="13890" end="13901" title="bone cancer" label="bone cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="14298" end="14306" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="14631" end="14643" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809" start="15033" end="15043" title="promethium" label="promethium"/>
<link wikidata="Q54389" start="15073" end="15080" title="tritium" label="tritium"/>
<link wikidata="Q103531" start="15346" end="15360" title="beta radiation" label="beta radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="16242" end="16255" title="vacuum tube" label="electron tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653992" start="16361" end="16375" title="radium bromide" label="radium bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q654" start="16428" end="16432" title="neon" label="neon"/>
<link wikidata="Q696" start="16436" end="16441" title="argon" label="argon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3928885" start="17197" end="17205" title="Radithor" label="Radithor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281374" start="17221" end="17230" title="Revigator" label="Revigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528116" start="17326" end="17330" title="Destination spa" label="Spas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156186" start="17421" end="17436" title="Misasa, Tottori" label="Misasa, Tottori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133" start="17525" end="17530" title="radon" label="radon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344375" start="17622" end="17637" title="radium chloride" label="radium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="17669" end="17677" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="17728" end="17734" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445" start="17999" end="18006" title="anaemia" label="anaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="18020" end="18037" title="mutation" label="genetic mutations"/>
<link wikidata="Q932960" start="18080" end="18082" title="cobalt-60" label="Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q836828" start="18356" end="18383" title="linear particle accelerator" label="linear particle accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q174778" start="18474" end="18488" title="Pharynx" label="nasopharyngeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="18564" end="18576" title="hearing loss" label="hearing loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q480700" start="18589" end="18595" title="otitis" label="otitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q408832" start="18636" end="18642" title="Airman" label="airmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="18647" end="18656" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q808760" start="18671" end="18681" title="barotrauma" label="barotrauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="18757" end="18765" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q177681" start="18926" end="18944" title="Thomas Hunt Morgan" label="Thomas Hunt Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83598" start="19036" end="19050" title="Hermann Joseph Muller" label="Hermann Muller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="19314" end="19320" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q830418" start="19330" end="19338" title="Jáchymov" label="Jáchymov"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="19340" end="19355" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="19361" end="19375" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128255" start="19449" end="19458" title="byproduct" label="byproduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="19640" end="19653" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q309038" start="19698" end="19712" title="barium sulfate" label="barium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="19980" end="19997" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190227" start="20095" end="20111" title="sodium carbonate" label="sodium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="20463" end="20479" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q15045177" start="20643" end="20669" title="fractional crystallization (chemistry)" label="fractional crystallisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q912034" start="20708" end="20720" title="spectroscope" label="spectroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q130962" start="20808" end="20820" title="electroscope" label="electroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q830418" start="20901" end="20909" title="Jáchymov" label="Jáchymov"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="21107" end="21119" title="nationalization" label="nationalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="21493" end="21503" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500954" start="22248" end="22253" title="Zaire" label="Zaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151533" start="22686" end="22724" title="atomic, molecular, and optical physics" label="atomic, molecular, and optical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q903282" start="22726" end="22743" title="Symmetry breaking" label="Symmetry breaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q18338" start="22892" end="22906" title="Standard Model" label="standard model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027847" start="22955" end="22963" title="octupole" label="octupole"/>
<link wikidata="Q12794416" start="23017" end="23040" title="CP violation" label="charge parity violating"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23159" end="23173" title="Atomic clock#Optical clocks" label="optical clocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="23720" end="23732" title="radioisotope" label="radioisotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q932960" start="23743" end="23752" title="cobalt-60" label="cobalt-60"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154826" start="23757" end="23768" title="caesium-137" label="caesium-137"/>
<link wikidata="Q18888805" start="23951" end="23953" title="Radium-223" label="Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="23988" end="24016" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="24036" end="24044" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="24050" end="24056" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q181876" start="24075" end="24085" title="metastasis" label="metastasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q848085" start="24194" end="24209" title="Bone metastases" label="bony metastases"/>
<link wikidata="Q649912" start="24493" end="24515" title="industrial radiography" label="industrial radiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q245341" start="24573" end="24586" title="X-ray imaging" label="X-ray imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q569" start="24604" end="24613" title="beryllium" label="beryllium"/>
<link wikidata="Q926734" start="24632" end="24646" title="neutron source" label="neutron source"/>
<link wikidata="Q979" start="24760" end="24768" title="polonium" label="polonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872" start="24773" end="24782" title="americium" label="americium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885334" start="24981" end="24983" title="americium-241" label="Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121" start="25036" end="25038" title="actinium" label="Ac"/>
<link wikidata="Q901707" start="25042" end="25061" title="neutron irradiation" label="neutron irradiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133" start="25162" end="25167" title="radon" label="radon"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="25243" end="25248" title="feces" label="feces"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="25284" end="25295" title="bloodstream" label="bloodstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="25373" end="25380" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941583" start="25385" end="25409" title="bone seeker" label="deposits it in the bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q546523" start="25440" end="25446" title="bone marrow" label="marrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q913236" start="25462" end="25472" title="bone cells" label="bone cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="25594" end="25603" title="gamma ray" label="gamma ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q41269" start="25912" end="25929" title="Antoine Becquerel" label="Antoine Becquerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452285" start="26036" end="26045" title="Ulcer (dermatology)" label="ulcerated"/>
<link wikidata="Q846316" start="26335" end="26350" title="aplastic anemia" label="aplastic anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q245341" start="26510" end="26521" title="radiography" label="radiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667473" start="26920" end="26971" title="International Commission on Radiological Protection" label="International Commission on Radiological Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970124" start="27026" end="27041" title="Röntgen Society" label="Röntgen Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="27263" end="27288" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="27294" end="27328" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="International Atomic Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873354" start="27451" end="27491" title="naturally occurring radioactive material" label="naturally occurring radioactive material"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="27699" end="27711" title="radiotherapy" label="radiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="27965" end="27996" title="Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="28092" end="28109" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q746186" start="28218" end="28263" title="Occupational Safety and Health Administration" label="Occupational Safety and Health Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q260126" start="28377" end="28400" title="roentgen equivalent man" label="roentgen equivalent man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320326" start="28531" end="28560" title="Nuclear Regulatory Commission" label="Nuclear Regulatory Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="28822" end="28839" title="Republic of Korea" label="Republic of Korea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25603" wikidata="Q737" url="?curid=25603" title="Rhenium">
<text>Rhenium is a chemical element; it has symbol Re and atomic number 75. It is a silvery-gray, heavy, third-row transition metal in group 7 of the periodic table. With an estimated average concentration of 1 part per billion (ppb), rhenium is one of the rarest elements in the Earth&#x27;s crust. It has one of the highest melting and boiling points of any element. It resembles manganese and technetium chemically and is mainly obtained as a by-product of the extraction and refinement of molybdenum and copper ores. It shows in its compounds a wide variety of oxidation states ranging from −1 to +7.

Rhenium was originally discovered in 1908 by Masataka Ogawa, but he mistakenly assigned it as element 43 rather than element 75 and named it &quot;nipponium&quot;. It was rediscovered in 1925 by Walter Noddack, Ida Tacke and Otto Berg, who gave it its present name. It was named after the river Rhine in Europe, from which the earliest samples had been obtained and worked commercially.

Nickel-based superalloys of rhenium are used in combustion chambers, turbine blades, and exhaust nozzles of jet engines. These alloys contain up to 6% rhenium, making jet engine construction the largest single use for the element. The second-most important use is as a catalyst: it is an excellent catalyst for hydrogenation and isomerization, and is used for example in catalytic reforming of naphtha for use in gasoline (rheniforming process). Because of the low availability relative to demand, rhenium is expensive, with price reaching an all-time high in 2008–09 of US$10,600 per kilogram (US$4,800 per pound). As of 2018, its price had dropped to US$2,844 per kilogram (US$1,290 per pound) due to increased recycling and a drop in demand for rhenium catalysts.

==History==

In 1908, Japanese chemist Masataka Ogawa announced that he had discovered the 43rd element and named it &quot;nipponium&quot; (Np) after Japan (&quot;Nippon&quot; in Japanese). In fact, he had found element 75 (rhenium) instead of element 43: both elements are in the same group of the periodic table. Ogawa&#x27;s work was often incorrectly cited, because some of his key results were published only in Japanese; it is likely that his insistence on searching for element 43 prevented him from considering that he might have found element 75 instead. Just before Ogawa&#x27;s death in 1930, Kenjiro Kimura analysed Ogawa&#x27;s sample by X-ray spectroscopy at the Imperial University of Tokyo, and said to a friend that &quot;it was beautiful rhenium indeed&quot;. He did not reveal this publicly, because under the Japanese university culture before World War II it was frowned upon to point out the mistakes of one&#x27;s seniors, but the evidence became known to some Japanese news media regardless. As time passed with no repetitions of the experiments or new work on nipponium, Ogawa&#x27;s claim faded away. The symbol Np was later used for the element neptunium, and the name &quot;nihonium&quot;, also named after Japan, along with symbol Nh, was later used for element 113. Element 113 was also discovered by a team of Japanese scientists and was named in respectful homage to Ogawa&#x27;s work. Today, Ogawa&#x27;s claim is widely accepted as having been the discovery of element 75 in hindsight.

Rhenium ( meaning: &quot;Rhine&quot;) received its current name when it was rediscovered by Walter Noddack, Ida Noddack, and Otto Berg in Germany. In 1925 they reported that they had detected the element in platinum ore and in the mineral columbite. They also found rhenium in gadolinite and molybdenite. In 1928 they were able to extract 1 g of the element by processing 660 kg of molybdenite. It was estimated in 1968 that 75% of the rhenium metal in the United States was used for research and the development of refractory metal alloys. It took several years from that point before the superalloys became widely used.

The original mischaracterization by Ogawa in 1908 and final work in 1925 makes rhenium perhaps the last stable element to be understood. Hafnium was discovered in 1923 and all other new elements discovered since then, such as francium, are radioactive.

==Characteristics==
Rhenium is a silvery-white metal with one of the highest melting points of all elements, exceeded by only tungsten. (At standard pressure carbon sublimes rather than melts, though its sublimation point is comparable to the melting points of tungsten and rhenium.) It also has one of the highest boiling points of all elements, and the highest among stable elements. It is also one of the densest, exceeded only by platinum, iridium and osmium. Rhenium has a hexagonal close-packed crystal structure.

Its usual commercial form is a powder, but this element can be consolidated by pressing and sintering in a vacuum or hydrogen atmosphere. This procedure yields a compact solid having a density above 90% of the density of the metal. When annealed this metal is very ductile and can be bent, coiled, or rolled. Rhenium-molybdenum alloys are superconductive at 10 K; tungsten-rhenium alloys are also superconductive around 4–8 K, depending on the alloy. Rhenium metal superconducts at .

In bulk form and at room temperature and atmospheric pressure, the element resists alkalis, sulfuric acid, hydrochloric acid, nitric acid, and aqua regia. It will however, react with nitric acid upon heating.

===Isotopes===

Rhenium has one stable isotope, rhenium-185, which nevertheless occurs in minority abundance, a situation found only in two other elements (indium and tellurium). Naturally occurring rhenium is only 37.4% 185Re, and 62.6% 187Re, which is unstable but has a very long half-life (~1010 years). A kilogram of natural rhenium emits 1.07 MBq of radiation due to the presence of this isotope. This lifetime can be greatly affected by the charge state of the rhenium atom. The beta decay of 187Re is used for rhenium–osmium dating of ores. The available energy for this beta decay (2.6 keV) is the second lowest known among all radionuclides, only behind the decay from 115In to excited 115Sn* (0.147 keV). The isotope rhenium-186m is notable as being one of the longest lived metastable isotopes with a half-life of around 200,000 years. There are 33 other unstable isotopes that have been recognized, ranging from 160Re to 194Re, the longest-lived of which is 183Re with a half-life of 70 days.

===Compounds===
Rhenium compounds are known for all the oxidation states between −3 and +7 except −2. The oxidation states +7, +4, and +3 are the most common. Rhenium is most available commercially as salts of perrhenate, including sodium and ammonium perrhenates. These are white, water-soluble compounds. Tetrathioperrhenate anion [ReS4]− is possible.

====Halides and oxyhalides====
The most common rhenium chlorides are ReCl6, ReCl5, ReCl4, and ReCl3. The structures of these compounds often feature extensive Re-Re bonding, which is characteristic of this metal in oxidation states lower than VII. Salts of [Re2Cl8]2− feature a quadruple metal-metal bond. Although the highest rhenium chloride features Re(VI), fluorine gives the d0 Re(VII) derivative rhenium heptafluoride. Bromides and iodides of rhenium are also well known, including rhenium pentabromide and rhenium tetraiodide.

Like tungsten and molybdenum, with which it shares chemical similarities, rhenium forms a variety of oxyhalides. The oxychlorides are most common, and include ReOCl4, ReOCl3.

====Oxides and sulfides====
The most common oxide is the volatile yellow Re2O7. The red rhenium trioxide ReO3 adopts a perovskite-like structure. Other oxides include Re2O5, ReO2, and Re2O3. The sulfides are ReS2 and Re2S7. Perrhenate salts can be converted to tetrathioperrhenate by the action of ammonium hydrosulfide.

====Other compounds====
Rhenium diboride (ReB2) is a hard compound having a hardness similar to that of tungsten carbide, silicon carbide, titanium diboride or zirconium diboride.

====Organorhenium compounds====

Dirhenium decacarbonyl is the most common entry to organorhenium chemistry. Its reduction with sodium amalgam gives Na[Re(CO)5] with rhenium in the formal oxidation state −1. Dirhenium decacarbonyl can be oxidised with bromine to bromopentacarbonylrhenium(I):
:Re2(CO)10 + Br2 → 2 Re(CO)5Br

Reduction of this pentacarbonyl with zinc and acetic acid gives pentacarbonylhydridorhenium:
:Re(CO)5Br + Zn + HOAc → Re(CO)5H + ZnBr(OAc)

Methylrhenium trioxide (&quot;MTO&quot;), CH3ReO3 is a volatile, colourless solid that has been used as a catalyst in some laboratory experiments. It can be prepared by many routes, a typical method is the reaction of Re2O7 and tetramethyltin:
:Re2O7 + (CH3)4Sn → CH3ReO3 + (CH3)3SnOReO3
Analogous alkyl and aryl derivatives are known. MTO catalyses for the oxidations with hydrogen peroxide. Terminal alkynes yield the corresponding acid or ester, internal alkynes yield diketones, and alkenes give epoxides. MTO also catalyses the conversion of aldehydes and diazoalkanes into an alkene.

====Nonahydridorhenate====

A distinctive derivative of rhenium is nonahydridorhenate, originally thought to be the &quot;rhenide&quot; anion, Re−, but actually containing the anion in which the oxidation state of rhenium is +7.

===Occurrence===

Rhenium is one of the rarest elements in Earth&#x27;s crust with an average concentration of 1 ppb; other sources quote the number of 0.5 ppb making it the 77th most abundant element in Earth&#x27;s crust. Rhenium is probably not found free in nature (its possible natural occurrence is uncertain), but occurs in amounts up to 0.2% in the mineral molybdenite (which is primarily molybdenum disulfide), the major commercial source, although single molybdenite samples with up to 1.88% have been found. Chile has the world&#x27;s largest rhenium reserves, part of the copper ore deposits, and was the leading producer as of 2005. It was only recently (in 1994) that the first rhenium mineral was found and described, a rhenium sulfide mineral (ReS2) condensing from a fumarole on Kudriavy volcano, Iturup island, in the Kuril Islands. Kudriavy discharges up to 20–60 kg rhenium per year mostly in the form of rhenium disulfide. Named rheniite, this rare mineral commands high prices among collectors. 
==Production==

Approximately 80% of rhenium is extracted from porphyry molybdenum deposits. Some ores contain 0.001% to 0.2% rhenium. Roasting the ore volatilizes rhenium oxides. Rhenium(VII) oxide and perrhenic acid readily dissolve in water; they are leached from flue dusts and gasses and extracted by precipitating with potassium or ammonium chloride as the perrhenate salts, and purified by recrystallization. Total world production is between 40 and 50 tons/year; the main producers are in Chile, the United States, Peru, and Poland. Recycling of used Pt-Re catalyst and special alloys allow the recovery of another 10 tons per year. Prices for the metal rose rapidly in early 2008, from $1000–$2000 per kg in 2003–2006 to over $10,000 in February 2008. The metal form is prepared by reducing ammonium perrhenate with hydrogen at high temperatures:

:2 NH4ReO4 + 7 H2 → 2 Re + 8 H2O + 2 NH3

There are technologies for the associated extraction of rhenium from productive solutions of underground leaching of uranium ores.

==Applications==

Rhenium is added to high-temperature superalloys that are used to make jet engine parts, using 70% of the worldwide rhenium production. Another major application is in platinum–rhenium catalysts, which are primarily used in making lead-free, high-octane gasoline.

===Alloys===
The nickel-based superalloys have improved creep strength with the addition of rhenium. The alloys normally contain 3% or 6% of rhenium. Second-generation alloys contain 3%; these alloys were used in the engines for the F-15 and F-16, whereas the newer single-crystal third-generation alloys contain 6% of rhenium; they are used in the F-22 and F-35 engines. Rhenium is also used in the superalloys, such as CMSX-4 (2nd gen) and CMSX-10 (3rd gen) that are used in industrial gas turbine engines like the GE 7FA. Rhenium can cause superalloys to become microstructurally unstable, forming undesirable topologically close packed (TCP) phases. In 4th- and 5th-generation superalloys, ruthenium is used to avoid this effect. Among others the new superalloys are EPM-102 (with 3% Ru) and TMS-162 (with 6% Ru), as well as TMS-138 and TMS-174.

For 2006, the consumption is given as 28% for General Electric, 28% Rolls-Royce plc and 12% Pratt &amp; Whitney, all for superalloys, whereas the use for catalysts only accounts for 14% and the remaining applications use 18%. In 2006, 77% of rhenium consumption in the United States was in alloys. The rising demand for military jet engines and the constant supply made it necessary to develop superalloys with a lower rhenium content. For example, the newer CFM International CFM56 high-pressure turbine (HPT) blades will use Rene N515 with a rhenium content of 1.5% instead of Rene N5 with 3%.

Rhenium improves the properties of tungsten. Tungsten-rhenium alloys are more ductile at low temperature, allowing them to be more easily machined. The high-temperature stability is also improved. The effect increases with the rhenium concentration, and therefore tungsten alloys are produced with up to 27% of Re, which is the solubility limit. Tungsten-rhenium wire was originally created in efforts to develop a wire that was more ductile after recrystallization. This allows the wire to meet specific performance objectives, including superior vibration resistance, improved ductility, and higher resistivity. One application for the tungsten-rhenium alloys is X-ray sources. The high melting point of both elements, together with their high atomic mass, makes them stable against the prolonged electron impact. Rhenium tungsten alloys are also applied as thermocouples to measure temperatures up to 2200 °C.

The high temperature stability, low vapor pressure, good wear resistance and ability to withstand arc corrosion of rhenium are useful in self-cleaning electrical contacts. In particular, the discharge that occurs during electrical switching oxidizes the contacts. However, rhenium oxide Re2O7 is volatile (sublimes at ~360 °C) and therefore is removed during the discharge.

Rhenium has a high melting point and a low vapor pressure similar to tantalum and tungsten. Therefore, rhenium filaments exhibit a higher stability if the filament is operated not in vacuum, but in oxygen-containing atmosphere. Those filaments are widely used in mass spectrometers, ion gauges and photoflash lamps in photography.

===Catalysts===
Rhenium in the form of rhenium-platinum alloy is used as catalyst for catalytic reforming, which is a chemical process to convert petroleum refinery naphthas with low octane ratings into high-octane liquid products. Worldwide, 30% of catalysts used for this process contain rhenium. The olefin metathesis is the other reaction for which rhenium is used as catalyst. Normally Re2O7 on alumina is used for this process. Rhenium catalysts are very resistant to chemical poisoning from nitrogen, sulfur and phosphorus, and so are used in certain kinds of hydrogenation reactions.

===Other uses===
The isotopes 186Re and 188Re are radioactive and are used for treatment of liver cancer. They both have similar penetration depth in tissue (5 mm for 186Re and 11 mm for 188Re), but 186Re has the advantage of a longer half life (90 hours vs. 17 hours).

188Re is also being used experimentally in a novel treatment of pancreatic cancer where it is delivered by means of the bacterium &quot;Listeria monocytogenes&quot;. The 188Re isotope is also used for the rhenium-SCT (skin cancer therapy). The treatment uses the isotope&#x27;s properties as a beta emitter for brachytherapy in the treatment of basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the skin.

Related by periodic trends, rhenium has a similar chemistry to that of technetium; work done to label rhenium onto target compounds can often be translated to technetium. This is useful for radiopharmacy, where it is difficult to work with technetium – especially the technetium-99m isotope used in medicine – due to its expense and short half-life.

Rhenium is used in manufacturing high precision equipment like gyroscopes. Its high density, mechanical stability and corrosion resistance characteristics ensure the equipment&#x27;s durability and precise performance in demanding conditions. Rhenium cathodes are also used for their stability and precision in spectral analysis.

Rhenium is used in aerospace, nuclear, and electronic industries, and it shows potential for application in medical instrumentation. In the rocket industry, it is used in engine components for booster rockets. Additionally, rhenium was employed in the SP-100 program due to its low-temperature ductility.

Rhenium&#x27;s stiffness and high melting point makes it a common gasket material for high pressure experiments in diamond anvil cells.

==Precautions==
Very little is known about the toxicity of rhenium and its compounds because they are used in very small amounts. Soluble salts, such as the rhenium halides or perrhenates, could be hazardous due to elements other than rhenium or due to rhenium itself. Only a few compounds of rhenium have been tested for their acute toxicity; two examples are potassium perrhenate and rhenium trichloride, which were injected as a solution into rats. The perrhenate had an LD50 value of 2800 mg/kg after seven days (this is very low toxicity, similar to that of table salt) and the rhenium trichloride showed LD50 of 280 mg/kg.

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* Rhenium at &quot;The Periodic Table of Videos&quot; (University of Nottingham)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q737" start="0" end="7" title="Rhenium" label="Rhenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="13" end="29" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q102500" start="38" end="44" title="Symbol (chemistry)" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q737" start="45" end="47" title="Rhenium" label="Re"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="52" end="65" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q19588" start="109" end="125" title="transition metal" label="transition metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q202602" start="129" end="136" title="group 7 element" label="group 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="144" end="158" title="periodic table" label="periodic table"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="205" end="221" title="parts-per notation" label="part per billion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15316" start="274" end="292" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="376" end="385" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054" start="390" end="400" title="technetium" label="technetium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128255" start="440" end="450" title="by-product" label="by-product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="487" end="497" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="502" end="508" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="559" end="574" title="oxidation state" label="oxidation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q360352" start="645" end="659" title="Masataka Ogawa" label="Masataka Ogawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q62714" start="795" end="809" title="Walter Noddack" label="Walter Noddack"/>
<link wikidata="Q77529" start="811" end="820" title="Ida Noddack" label="Ida Tacke"/>
<link wikidata="Q85727" start="825" end="834" title="Otto Berg (scientist)" label="Otto Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="895" end="900" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="988" end="994" title="Nickel" label="Nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q637345" start="1001" end="1011" title="superalloy" label="superalloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="1096" end="1106" title="jet engine" label="jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="1257" end="1265" title="Catalysis" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q214166" start="1299" end="1312" title="hydrogenation" label="hydrogenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q743447" start="1359" end="1378" title="catalytic reforming" label="catalytic reforming"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="1573" end="1581" title="kilogram" label="kilogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="1654" end="1662" title="kilogram" label="kilogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1778" end="1783" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q360352" start="1795" end="1809" title="Masataka Ogawa" label="Masataka Ogawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1906" end="1911" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2360" end="2374" title="Kenjiro Kimura" label="Kenjiro Kimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q901775" start="2407" end="2425" title="X-ray spectroscopy" label="X-ray spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842" start="2433" end="2461" title="Imperial University of Tokyo" label="Imperial University of Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2620" end="2632" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105" start="2928" end="2937" title="neptunium" label="neptunium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2979" end="2996" title="Names of Japan#Nihon and Nippon" label="named after Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301" start="3039" end="3050" title="nihonium" label="element 113"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="3302" end="3307" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q62714" start="3369" end="3383" title="Walter Noddack" label="Walter Noddack"/>
<link wikidata="Q77529" start="3385" end="3396" title="Ida Tacke" label="Ida Noddack"/>
<link wikidata="Q85727" start="3402" end="3411" title="Otto Berg (scientist)" label="Otto Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="3415" end="3422" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q899841" start="3516" end="3525" title="columbite" label="columbite"/>
<link wikidata="Q410903" start="3554" end="3564" title="gadolinite" label="gadolinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q382994" start="3569" end="3580" title="molybdenite" label="molybdenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3734" end="3747" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q428932" start="3793" end="3809" title="refractory metal" label="refractory metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119" start="4037" end="4044" title="Hafnium" label="Hafnium"/>
<link wikidata="Q671" start="4126" end="4134" title="francium" label="francium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="4231" end="4244" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="4280" end="4288" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="4312" end="4318" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003183" start="4469" end="4483" title="boiling points" label="boiling points"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="4588" end="4596" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q877" start="4598" end="4605" title="iridium" label="iridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q751" start="4610" end="4616" title="osmium" label="osmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q844613" start="4767" end="4776" title="sintering" label="sintering"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="4792" end="4800" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q187360" start="4912" end="4920" title="Annealing (metallurgy)" label="annealed"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="5003" end="5008" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="5014" end="5029" title="Superconductivity" label="superconductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="5036" end="5037" title="Kelvin" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="5252" end="5265" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="5267" end="5284" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="5286" end="5297" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q174670" start="5303" end="5313" title="aqua regia" label="aqua regia"/>
<link wikidata="Q878130" start="5402" end="5408" title="Stable nuclide" label="stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094" start="5526" end="5532" title="indium" label="indium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100" start="5537" end="5546" title="tellurium" label="tellurium"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="5624" end="5632" title="Radionuclide" label="unstable"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="5653" end="5662" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q102573" start="5719" end="5722" title="Becquerel" label="MBq"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="5856" end="5866" title="beta decay" label="beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148046" start="5888" end="5909" title="rhenium–osmium dating" label="rhenium–osmium dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q83327" start="5965" end="5968" title="keV" label="keV"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="6007" end="6019" title="radionuclide" label="radionuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q846110" start="6156" end="6174" title="metastable isotope" label="metastable isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="6433" end="6449" title="oxidation states" label="oxidation states"/>
<link wikidata="Q12139897" start="6587" end="6597" title="perrhenate" label="perrhenate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592158" start="6609" end="6615" title="sodium perrhenate" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q778163" start="6620" end="6639" title="ammonium perrhenate" label="ammonium perrhenate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316104" start="6808" end="6813" title="Rhenium pentachloride" label="ReCl5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452855" start="6826" end="6831" title="Rhenium trichloride" label="ReCl3"/>
<link wikidata="Q901853" start="7010" end="7019" title="quadruple bond" label="quadruple"/>
<link wikidata="Q421025" start="7134" end="7155" title="rhenium heptafluoride" label="rhenium heptafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7220" end="7240" title="rhenium pentabromide" label="rhenium pentabromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202669" start="7245" end="7264" title="rhenium tetraiodide" label="rhenium tetraiodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115734" start="7368" end="7378" title="Oxohalide" label="oxyhalides"/>
<link wikidata="Q418325" start="7516" end="7521" title="rhenium(VII) oxide" label="Re2O7"/>
<link wikidata="Q418954" start="7531" end="7547" title="ReO3" label="rhenium trioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q409787" start="7562" end="7572" title="perovskite" label="perovskite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451840" start="7617" end="7621" title="Rhenium(IV) oxide" label="ReO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q221205" start="7638" end="7645" title="sulfide" label="sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4445872" start="7651" end="7655" title="rhenium disulfide" label="ReS2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4445877" start="7660" end="7665" title="Rhenium(VII) sulfide" label="Re2S7"/>
<link wikidata="Q197523" start="7741" end="7762" title="ammonium hydrosulfide" label="ammonium hydrosulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q425164" start="7789" end="7805" title="Rhenium diboride" label="Rhenium diboride"/>
<link wikidata="Q423265" start="7869" end="7885" title="tungsten carbide" label="tungsten carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q412356" start="7887" end="7902" title="silicon carbide" label="silicon carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093696" start="7904" end="7921" title="titanium diboride" label="titanium diboride"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161107" start="7925" end="7943" title="zirconium diboride" label="zirconium diboride"/>
<link wikidata="Q418221" start="7979" end="8001" title="Dirhenium decacarbonyl" label="Dirhenium decacarbonyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q182574" start="8081" end="8088" title="Amalgam (chemistry)" label="amalgam"/>
<link wikidata="Q879" start="8198" end="8205" title="bromine" label="bromine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512764" start="8209" end="8237" title="bromopentacarbonylrhenium(I)" label="bromopentacarbonylrhenium(I)"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="8308" end="8312" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="8317" end="8328" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164927" start="8335" end="8362" title="pentacarbonylhydridorhenium" label="pentacarbonylhydridorhenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q408705" start="8411" end="8433" title="Methylrhenium trioxide" label="Methylrhenium trioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="8517" end="8525" title="catalyst" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q413135" start="8639" end="8653" title="tetramethyltin" label="tetramethyltin"/>
<link wikidata="Q171877" start="8785" end="8802" title="hydrogen peroxide" label="hydrogen peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q159226" start="8813" end="8819" title="alkyne" label="alkyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q81406" start="8898" end="8904" title="alkene" label="alkene"/>
<link wikidata="Q101497" start="8958" end="8966" title="aldehyde" label="aldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q424424" start="8972" end="8983" title="diazoalkane" label="diazoalkane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089194" start="9069" end="9087" title="Potassium nonahydridorhenate" label="nonahydridorhenate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15316" start="9291" end="9309" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q382994" start="9597" end="9608" title="molybdenite" label="molybdenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q424257" start="9629" end="9649" title="molybdenum disulfide" label="molybdenum disulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="9751" end="9756" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="9932" end="9939" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q927407" start="9975" end="9990" title="sulfide mineral" label="sulfide mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q105880" start="10016" end="10024" title="fumarole" label="fumarole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585148" start="10028" end="10036" title="Kudriavy" label="Kudriavy"/>
<link wikidata="Q215727" start="10046" end="10052" title="Iturup" label="Iturup"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="10068" end="10081" title="Kuril Islands" label="Kuril Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q411587" start="10182" end="10190" title="rheniite" label="rheniite"/>
<link wikidata="Q337238" start="10313" end="10321" title="Porphyry (geology)" label="porphyry"/>
<link wikidata="Q418325" start="10430" end="10448" title="Rhenium(VII) oxide" label="Rhenium(VII) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710669" start="10453" end="10467" title="perrhenic acid" label="perrhenic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184630" start="10575" end="10584" title="potassium chloride" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q188543" start="10588" end="10605" title="ammonium chloride" label="ammonium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q12139897" start="10613" end="10623" title="perrhenate" label="perrhenate"/>
<link wikidata="Q61847" start="10647" end="10664" title="Recrystallization (chemistry)" label="recrystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="10961" end="10963" title="kilogram" label="kg"/>
<link wikidata="Q778163" start="11050" end="11069" title="ammonium perrhenate" label="ammonium perrhenate"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="11075" end="11083" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="11370" end="11380" title="jet engine" label="jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="11484" end="11492" title="catalyst" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="11530" end="11534" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q39558" start="11553" end="11561" title="gasoline" label="gasoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q637345" start="11594" end="11604" title="superalloy" label="superalloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q462188" start="11620" end="11634" title="Creep (deformation)" label="creep strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154115" start="11797" end="11810" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney F100" label="F-15 and F-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087856" start="11913" end="11917" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney F119" label="F-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368421" start="11922" end="11926" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney F135" label="F-35"/>
<link wikidata="Q193470" start="12052" end="12063" title="gas turbine" label="gas turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q637345" start="12107" end="12117" title="superalloy" label="superalloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104837" start="12210" end="12216" title="phase (matter)" label="phases"/>
<link wikidata="Q637345" start="12245" end="12255" title="superalloy" label="superalloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086" start="12258" end="12267" title="ruthenium" label="ruthenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q637345" start="12319" end="12329" title="superalloy" label="superalloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="12461" end="12477" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q243278" start="12483" end="12498" title="Rolls-Royce plc" label="Rolls-Royce plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q173150" start="12507" end="12526" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney" label="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574620" start="12874" end="12897" title="CFM International CFM56" label="CFM International CFM56"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="13047" end="13055" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="13677" end="13682" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q190241" start="13872" end="13884" title="thermocouple" label="thermocouple"/>
<link wikidata="Q25267" start="13922" end="13923" title="Celsius" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q617224" start="13983" end="13998" title="Wear" label="wear resistance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14077" end="14096" title="Switch#Contacts" label="electrical contacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123" start="14370" end="14378" title="tantalum" label="tantalum"/>
<link wikidata="Q180809" start="14564" end="14581" title="mass spectrometer" label="mass spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424019" start="14584" end="14593" title="ion gauge" label="ion gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q221836" start="14599" end="14609" title="photoflash" label="photoflash"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="14619" end="14630" title="photography" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q743447" start="14719" end="14738" title="catalytic reforming" label="catalytic reforming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178974" start="14798" end="14806" title="Petroleum naphtha" label="naphthas"/>
<link wikidata="Q193423" start="14816" end="14829" title="octane rating" label="octane rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q898959" start="14936" end="14953" title="olefin metathesis" label="olefin metathesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q177342" start="15033" end="15040" title="alumina" label="alumina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415463" start="15107" end="15125" title="catalyst poisoning" label="chemical poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q623031" start="15318" end="15330" title="liver cancer" label="liver cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306232" start="15355" end="15372" title="penetration depth" label="penetration depth"/>
<link wikidata="Q192102" start="15715" end="15726" title="skin cancer" label="skin cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="15791" end="15803" title="Beta decay" label="beta emitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q896687" start="15808" end="15821" title="brachytherapy" label="brachytherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q809758" start="15842" end="15862" title="Basal-cell carcinoma" label="basal cell carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783924" start="15867" end="15890" title="Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck" label="squamous cell carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622089" start="15916" end="15931" title="periodic trends" label="periodic trends"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054" start="15976" end="15986" title="technetium" label="technetium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373354" start="16173" end="16187" title="technetium-99m" label="technetium-99m"/>
<link wikidata="Q483400" start="16319" end="16329" title="gyroscopes" label="gyroscopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="16340" end="16347" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="16374" end="16383" title="corrosion" label="corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q10269116" start="16439" end="16449" title="durability" label="durability"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392177" start="16839" end="16845" title="SP-100" label="SP-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241719" start="16979" end="17004" title="high pressure experiments" label="high pressure experiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208616" start="17008" end="17027" title="Diamond anvil cell" label="diamond anvil cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q711849" start="17504" end="17508" title="Median lethal dose" label="LD50"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988689" start="17744" end="17772" title="The Periodic Table of Videos" label="The Periodic Table of Videos"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25604" wikidata="Q1133" url="?curid=25604" title="Radon">
<text>Radon is a chemical element; it has symbol Rn and atomic number 86. It is a radioactive noble gas and is colorless and odorless. Of the three naturally occurring radon isotopes, only Rn has a sufficiently long half-life (3.825 days) for it to be released from the soil and rock where it is generated. Radon isotopes are the immediate decay products of radium isotopes. The instability of Rn, its most stable isotope, makes radon one of the rarest elements. Radon will be present on Earth for several billion more years despite its short half-life, because it is constantly being produced as a step in the decay chains of U and Th, both of which are abundant radioactive nuclides with half-lives of at least several billion years. The decay of radon produces many other short-lived nuclides, known as &quot;radon daughters&quot;, ending at stable isotopes of lead. Rn occurs in significant quantities as a step in the normal radioactive decay chain of U, also known as the uranium series, which slowly decays into a variety of radioactive nuclides and eventually decays into stable Pb. Rn occurs in minute quantities as an intermediate step in the decay chain of Th, also known as the thorium series, which eventually decays into stable Pb. 

Radon was discovered in 1899 by Ernest Rutherford and Robert B. Owens at McGill University in Montreal, and was the fifth radioactive element to be discovered. First known as &quot;emanation&quot;, the radioactive gas was identified during experiments with radium, thorium oxide, and actinium by Friedrich Ernst Dorn, Rutherford and Owens, and André-Louis Debierne, respectively, and each element&#x27;s emanation was considered to be a separate substance: radon, thoron, and actinon. Sir William Ramsay and Robert Whytlaw-Gray considered that the radioactive emanations may contain a new element of the noble gas family, and isolated &quot;radium emanation&quot; in 1909 to determine its properties. In 1911, the element Ramsay and Whytlaw-Gray isolated was accepted by the International Commission for Atomic Weights, and in 1923, the International Committee for Chemical Elements and the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) chose radon as the accepted name for the element&#x27;s most stable isotope, Rn; thoron and actinon were also recognized by IUPAC as distinct isotopes of the element.

Under standard conditions, radon is gaseous and can be easily inhaled, posing a health hazard. However, the primary danger comes not from radon itself, but from its decay products, known as radon daughters. These decay products, often existing as single atoms or ions, can attach themselves to airborne dust particles. Although radon is a noble gas and does not adhere to lung tissue (meaning it is often exhaled before decaying), the radon daughters attached to dust are more likely to stick to the lungs. This increases the risk of harm, as the radon daughters can cause damage to lung tissue. Radon and its daughters are, taken together, often the single largest contributor to an individual&#x27;s background radiation dose, but due to local differences in geology, the level of exposure to radon gas differs by location. A common source of environmental radon is uranium-containing minerals in the ground; it therefore accumulates in subterranean areas such as basements. Radon can also occur in ground water, such as spring waters and hot springs. Radon trapped in permafrost may be released by climate-change-induced thawing of permafrosts, and radon may also be released into groundwater and the atmosphere following seismic events leading to earthquakes, which has led to its investigation in the field of earthquake prediction. It is possible to test for radon in buildings, and to use techniques such as sub-slab depressurization for mitigation.

Epidemiological studies have shown a clear association between breathing high concentrations of radon and incidence of lung cancer. Radon is a contaminant that affects indoor air quality worldwide. According to the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), radon is the second most frequent cause of lung cancer, after cigarette smoking, causing 21,000 lung cancer deaths per year in the United States. About 2,900 of these deaths occur among people who have never smoked. While radon is the second most frequent cause of lung cancer, it is the number one cause among non-smokers, according to EPA policy-oriented estimates. Significant uncertainties exist for the health effects of low-dose exposures.

== Characteristics ==
=== Physical properties ===

Radon is a colorless, odorless, and tasteless gas and therefore is not detectable by human senses alone. At standard temperature and pressure, it forms a monatomic gas with a density of 9.73 kg/m3, about 8 times the density of the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere at sea level, 1.217 kg/m3. It is one of the densest gases at room temperature (a few are denser, e.g. CF3(CF2)2CF3 and WF6) and is the densest of the noble gases. Although colorless at standard temperature and pressure, when cooled below its freezing point of , it emits a brilliant radioluminescence that turns from yellow to orange-red as the temperature lowers. Upon condensation, it glows because of the intense radiation it produces. It is sparingly soluble in water, but more soluble than lighter noble gases. It is appreciably more soluble in organic liquids than in water. Its solubility equation is as follows:

: formula_1

where formula_2 is the molar fraction of radon, formula_3 is the absolute temperature, and formula_4 and formula_5 are solvent constants.

=== Chemical properties ===
Radon is a member of the zero-valence elements that are called noble gases, and is chemically not very reactive. The 3.8-day half-life of Rn makes it useful in physical sciences as a natural tracer. Because radon is a gas at standard conditions, unlike its decay-chain parents, it can readily be extracted from them for research.

It is inert to most common chemical reactions, such as combustion, because the outer valence shell contains eight electrons. This produces a stable, minimum energy configuration in which the outer electrons are tightly bound. Its first ionization energy—the minimum energy required to extract one electron from it—is 1037 kJ/mol. In accordance with periodic trends, radon has a lower electronegativity than the element one period before it, xenon, and is therefore more reactive. Early studies concluded that the stability of radon hydrate should be of the same order as that of the hydrates of chlorine () or sulfur dioxide (), and significantly higher than the stability of the hydrate of hydrogen sulfide ().

Because of its cost and radioactivity, experimental chemical research is seldom performed with radon, and as a result there are very few reported compounds of radon, all either fluorides or oxides. Radon can be oxidized by powerful oxidizing agents such as fluorine, thus forming radon difluoride (). It decomposes back to its elements at a temperature of above , and is reduced by water to radon gas and hydrogen fluoride: it may also be reduced back to its elements by hydrogen gas. It has a low volatility and was thought to be . Because of the short half-life of radon and the radioactivity of its compounds, it has not been possible to study the compound in any detail. Theoretical studies on this molecule predict that it should have a Rn–F bond distance of 2.08 ångströms (Å), and that the compound is thermodynamically more stable and less volatile than its lighter counterpart xenon difluoride (). The octahedral molecule  was predicted to have an even lower enthalpy of formation than the difluoride. The [RnF]+ ion is believed to form by the following reaction:

: Rn (g) + 2 (s) → (s) + 2 (g)

For this reason, antimony pentafluoride together with chlorine trifluoride and have been considered for radon gas removal in uranium mines due to the formation of radon–fluorine compounds. Radon compounds can be formed by the decay of radium in radium halides, a reaction that has been used to reduce the amount of radon that escapes from targets during irradiation. Additionally, salts of the [RnF]+ cation with the anions , , and are known. Radon is also oxidised by dioxygen difluoride to at .

Radon oxides are among the few other reported compounds of radon; only the trioxide () has been confirmed. The higher fluorides and have been claimed and are calculated to be stable, but their identification is unclear. They may have been observed in experiments where unknown radon-containing products distilled together with xenon hexafluoride: these may have been , , or both. Trace-scale heating of radon with xenon, fluorine, bromine pentafluoride, and either sodium fluoride or nickel fluoride was claimed to produce a higher fluoride as well which hydrolysed to form . While it has been suggested that these claims were really due to radon precipitating out as the solid complex [RnF][NiF6]2−, the fact that radon coprecipitates from aqueous solution with has been taken as confirmation that was formed, which has been supported by further studies of the hydrolysed solution. That [RnO3F]− did not form in other experiments may have been due to the high concentration of fluoride used. Electromigration studies also suggest the presence of cationic [HRnO3]+ and anionic [HRnO4]− forms of radon in weakly acidic aqueous solution (pH &gt; 5), the procedure having previously been validated by examination of the homologous xenon trioxide.

The decay technique has also been used. Avrorin et al. reported in 1982 that 212Fr compounds cocrystallised with their caesium analogues appeared to retain chemically bound radon after electron capture; analogies with xenon suggested the formation of RnO3, but this could not be confirmed.

It is likely that the difficulty in identifying higher fluorides of radon stems from radon being kinetically hindered from being oxidised beyond the divalent state because of the strong ionicity of radon difluoride () and the high positive charge on radon in RnF+; spatial separation of molecules may be necessary to clearly identify higher fluorides of radon, of which is expected to be more stable than due to spin–orbit splitting of the 6p shell of radon (RnIV would have a closed-shell 6s6p configuration). Therefore, while should have a similar stability to xenon tetrafluoride (), would likely be much less stable than xenon hexafluoride (): radon hexafluoride would also probably be a regular octahedral molecule, unlike the distorted octahedral structure of , because of the inert pair effect. Because radon is quite electropositive for a noble gas, it is possible that radon fluorides actually take on highly fluorine-bridged structures and are not volatile. Extrapolation down the noble gas group would suggest also the possible existence of RnO, RnO2, and RnOF4, as well as the first chemically stable noble gas chlorides RnCl2 and RnCl4, but none of these have yet been found.

Radon carbonyl (RnCO) has been predicted to be stable and to have a linear molecular geometry. The molecules and RnXe were found to be significantly stabilized by spin-orbit coupling. Radon caged inside a fullerene has been proposed as a drug for tumors. Despite the existence of Xe(VIII), no Rn(VIII) compounds have been claimed to exist; should be highly unstable chemically (XeF8 is thermodynamically unstable). It is predicted that the most stable Rn(VIII) compound would be barium perradonate (Ba2RnO6), analogous to barium perxenate. The instability of Rn(VIII) is due to the relativistic stabilization of the 6s shell, also known as the inert pair effect.

Radon reacts with the liquid halogen fluorides ClF, , , , , and to form . In halogen fluoride solution, radon is nonvolatile and exists as the RnF+ and Rn2+ cations; addition of fluoride anions results in the formation of the complexes and , paralleling the chemistry of beryllium(II) and aluminium(III). The standard electrode potential of the Rn2+/Rn couple has been estimated as +2.0 V, although there is no evidence for the formation of stable radon ions or compounds in aqueous solution.

=== Isotopes ===
Radon has no stable isotopes. Thirty-nine radioactive isotopes have been characterized, with mass numbers ranging from 193 to 231. Six of them, from 217 to 222 inclusive, occur naturally. The most stable isotope is Rn (half-life 3.82 days), which is a decay product of Ra, the latter being itself a decay product of U. A trace amount of the (highly unstable) isotope Rn (half-life about 35 milliseconds) is also among the daughters of Rn. The isotope Rn would be produced by the double beta decay of natural Po; while energetically possible, this process has however never been seen.

Three other radon isotopes have a half-life of over an hour: Rn (about 15 hours), Rn (2.4 hours) and Rn (about 1.8 hours). However, none of these three occur naturally. Rn, also called thoron, is a natural decay product of the most stable thorium isotope (Th). It has a half-life of 55.6 seconds and also emits alpha radiation. Similarly, Rn is derived from the most stable isotope of actinium (Ac)—named &quot;actinon&quot;—and is an alpha emitter with a half-life of 3.96 seconds. 
=== Daughters ===

Rn belongs to the radium and uranium-238 decay chain, and has a half-life of 3.8235 days. Its first four products (excluding marginal decay schemes) are very short-lived, meaning that the corresponding disintegrations are indicative of the initial radon distribution. Its decay goes through the following sequence:
* Rn, 3.82 days, alpha decaying to...
* Po, 3.10 minutes, alpha decaying to...
* Pb, 26.8 minutes, beta decaying to...
* Bi, 19.9 minutes, beta decaying to...
* Po, 0.1643 ms, alpha decaying to...
* Pb, which has a much longer half-life of 22.3 years, beta decaying to...
* Bi, 5.013 days, beta decaying to...
* Po, 138.376 days, alpha decaying to...
* Pb, stable.

The radon equilibrium factor is the ratio between the activity of all short-period radon progenies (which are responsible for most of radon&#x27;s biological effects), and the activity that would be at equilibrium with the radon parent.

If a closed volume is constantly supplied with radon, the concentration of short-lived isotopes will increase until an equilibrium is reached where the overall decay rate of the decay products equals that of the radon itself. The equilibrium factor is 1 when both activities are equal, meaning that the decay products have stayed close to the radon parent long enough for the equilibrium to be reached, within a couple of hours. Under these conditions, each additional pCi/L of radon will increase exposure by 0.01 &quot;working level&quot; (WL, a measure of radioactivity commonly used in mining). These conditions are not always met; in many homes, the equilibrium factor is typically 40%; that is, there will be 0.004 WL of daughters for each pCi/L of radon in the air. Pb takes much longer to come in equilibrium with radon, dependent on environmental factors, but if the environment permits accumulation of dust over extended periods of time, 210Pb and its decay products may contribute to overall radiation levels as well. Several studies on the radioactive equilibrium of elements in the environment find it more useful to use the ratio of other Rn decay products with Pb, such as Po, in measuring overall radiation levels.

Because of their electrostatic charge, radon progenies adhere to surfaces or dust particles, whereas gaseous radon does not. Attachment removes them from the air, usually causing the equilibrium factor in the atmosphere to be less than 1. The equilibrium factor is also lowered by air circulation or air filtration devices, and is increased by airborne dust particles, including cigarette smoke. The equilibrium factor found in epidemiological studies is 0.4.

== History and etymology ==
Radon was discovered in 1899 by Ernest Rutherford and Robert B. Owens at McGill University in Montreal. It was the fifth radioactive element to be discovered, after uranium, thorium, radium, and polonium. In 1899, Pierre and Marie Curie observed that the gas emitted by radium remained radioactive for a month. Later that year, Rutherford and Owens noticed variations when trying to measure radiation from thorium oxide. Rutherford noticed that the compounds of thorium continuously emit a radioactive gas that remains radioactive for several minutes, and called this gas &quot;emanation&quot; (from , to flow out, and , expiration), and later &quot;thorium emanation&quot; (&quot;Th Em&quot;). In 1900, Friedrich Ernst Dorn reported some experiments in which he noticed that radium compounds emanate a radioactive gas he named &quot;radium emanation&quot; (&quot;Ra Em&quot;). In 1901, Rutherford and Harriet Brooks demonstrated that the emanations are radioactive, but credited the Curies for the discovery of the element. In 1903, similar emanations were observed from actinium by André-Louis Debierne, and were called &quot;actinium emanation&quot; (&quot;Ac Em&quot;).

Several shortened names were soon suggested for the three emanations: &quot;exradio&quot;, &quot;exthorio&quot;, and &quot;exactinio&quot; in 1904; &quot;radon&quot; (Ro), &quot;thoron&quot; (To), and &quot;akton&quot; or &quot;acton&quot; (Ao) in 1918; &quot;radeon&quot;, &quot;thoreon&quot;, and &quot;actineon&quot; in 1919, and eventually &quot;radon&quot;, &quot;thoron&quot;, and &quot;actinon&quot; in 1920. (The name radon is not related to that of the Austrian mathematician Johann Radon.) The likeness of the spectra of these three gases with those of argon, krypton, and xenon, and their observed chemical inertia led Sir William Ramsay to suggest in 1904 that the &quot;emanations&quot; might contain a new element of the noble-gas family.

In 1909, Ramsay and Robert Whytlaw-Gray isolated radon and determined its melting temperature and approximate density. In 1910, they determined that it was the heaviest known gas. They wrote that &quot;&quot; (&quot;the expression &#x27;radium emanation&#x27; is very awkward&quot;) and suggested the new name niton (Nt) (from , shining) to emphasize the radioluminescence property, and in 1912 it was accepted by the International Commission for Atomic Weights. In 1923, the International Committee for Chemical Elements and International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) chose the name of the most stable isotope, radon, as the name of the element. The isotopes thoron and actinon were later renamed Rn and Rn. This has caused some confusion in the literature regarding the element&#x27;s discovery as while Dorn had discovered radon the isotope, he was not the first to discover radon the element.

As late as the 1960s, the element was also referred to simply as &quot;emanation&quot;. The first synthesized compound of radon, radon fluoride, was obtained in 1962. Even today, the word &quot;radon&quot; may refer to either the element or its isotope 222Rn, with &quot;thoron&quot; remaining in use as a short name for 220Rn to stem this ambiguity. The name &quot;actinon&quot; for 219Rn is rarely encountered today, probably due to the short half-life of that isotope.

The danger of high exposure to radon in mines, where exposures can reach 1,000,000 Bq/m3, has long been known. In 1530, Paracelsus described a wasting disease of miners, the &quot;mala metallorum&quot;, and Georg Agricola recommended ventilation in mines to avoid this mountain sickness (&quot;Bergsucht&quot;). In 1879, this condition was identified as lung cancer by Harting and Hesse in their investigation of miners from Schneeberg, Germany. The first major studies with radon and health occurred in the context of uranium mining in the Joachimsthal region of Bohemia. In the US, studies and mitigation only followed decades of health effects on uranium miners of the Southwestern US employed during the early Cold War; standards were not implemented until 1971.

In the early 20th century in the US, gold contaminated with the radon daughter 210Pb entered the jewelry industry. This was from gold brachytherapy seeds that had held 222Rn, which were melted down after the radon had decayed.

The presence of radon in indoor air was documented as early as 1950. Beginning in the 1970s, research was initiated to address sources of indoor radon, determinants of concentration, health effects, and mitigation approaches. In the US, the problem of indoor radon received widespread publicity and intensified investigation after a widely publicized incident in 1984. During routine monitoring at a Pennsylvania nuclear power plant, a worker was found to be contaminated with radioactivity. A high concentration of radon in his home was subsequently identified as responsible.

== Occurrence ==
=== Concentration units ===
Discussions of radon concentrations in the environment refer to 222Rn, the decay product of uranium and radium. While the average rate of production of 220Rn (from the thorium decay series) is about the same as that of 222Rn, the amount of 220Rn in the environment is much less than that of 222Rn because of the short half-life of 220Rn (55 seconds, versus 3.8 days respectively).

Radon concentration in the atmosphere is usually measured in becquerel per cubic meter (Bq/m3), the SI derived unit. Another unit of measurement common in the US is picocuries per liter (pCi/L); 1 pCi/L = 37 Bq/m3. Typical domestic exposures average about 48 Bq/m3 indoors, though this varies widely, and 15 Bq/m3 outdoors.

In the mining industry, the exposure is traditionally measured in &quot;working level&quot; (WL), and the cumulative exposure in &quot;working level month&quot; (WLM); 1 WL equals any combination of short-lived 222Rn daughters (218Po, 214Pb, 214Bi, and 214Po) in 1 liter of air that releases 1.3 × 105 MeV of potential alpha energy; 1 WL is equivalent to 2.08 × 10−5 joules per cubic meter of air (J/m3). The SI unit of cumulative exposure is expressed in joule-hours per cubic meter (J·h/m3). One WLM is equivalent to 3.6 × 10−3 J·h/m3. An exposure to 1 WL for 1 working-month (170 hours) equals 1 WLM cumulative exposure. The International Commission on Radiological Protection recommends an annual limit of 4.8WLM for miners. Assuming 2000 hours of work per year, this corresponds to a concentration of 1500  Bq/m3.

222Rn decays to 210Pb and other radioisotopes. The levels of 210Pb can be measured. The rate of deposition of this radioisotope is weather-dependent.

Radon concentrations found in natural environments are much too low to be detected by chemical means. A 1,000 Bq/m3 (relatively high) concentration corresponds to 0.17 picogram per cubic meter (pg/m3). The average concentration of radon in the atmosphere is about 6 molar percent, or about 150 atoms in each milliliter of air. The radon activity of the entire Earth&#x27;s atmosphere originates from only a few tens of grams of radon, consistently replaced by decay of larger amounts of radium, thorium, and uranium.

=== Natural ===
Radon is produced by the radioactive decay of radium-226, which is found in uranium ores, phosphate rock, shales, igneous and metamorphic rocks such as granite, gneiss, and schist, and to a lesser degree, in common rocks such as limestone. Every square mile of surface soil, to a depth of 6 inches (2.6 km to a depth of 15 cm), contains about 1 gram of radium, which releases radon in small amounts to the atmosphere. It is estimated that 2.4 billion curies (90 EBq) of radon are released from soil annually worldwide. This is equivalent to some .

Radon concentration can differ widely from place to place. In the open air, it ranges from 1 to 100 Bq/m, even less (0.1 Bq/m) above the ocean. In caves or ventilated mines, or poorly ventilated houses, its concentration climbs to 20–2,000 Bq/m.

Radon concentration can be much higher in mining contexts. Ventilation regulations instruct to maintain radon concentration in uranium mines under the &quot;working level&quot;, with 95th percentile levels ranging up to nearly 3 WL (546 pCi Rn per liter of air; 20.2 kBq/m, measured from 1976 to 1985).
The concentration in the air at the (unventilated) Gastein Healing Gallery averages 43 kBq/m (1.2 nCi/L) with maximal value of 160 kBq/m (4.3 nCi/L).

Radon mostly appears with the radium/uranium series (decay chain) (Rn), and marginally with the thorium series (Rn). The element emanates naturally from the ground, and some building materials, all over the world, wherever traces of uranium or thorium are found, and particularly in regions with soils containing granite or shale, which have a higher concentration of uranium. Not all granitic regions are prone to high emissions of radon. Being a rare gas, it usually migrates freely through faults and fragmented soils, and may accumulate in caves or water. Owing to its very short half-life (four days for Rn), radon concentration decreases very quickly when the distance from the production area increases. Radon concentration varies greatly with season and atmospheric conditions. For instance, it has been shown to accumulate in the air if there is a meteorological inversion and little wind.

High concentrations of radon can be found in some spring waters and hot springs. The towns of Boulder, Montana; Misasa; Bad Kreuznach, Germany; and the country of Japan have radium-rich springs that emit radon. To be classified as a radon mineral water, radon concentration must be above 2 nCi/L (74 kBq/m). The activity of radon mineral water reaches 2 MBq/m in Merano and 4 MBq/m in Lurisia (Italy).

Natural radon concentrations in the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere are so low that radon-rich water in contact with the atmosphere will continually lose radon by volatilization. Hence, ground water has a higher concentration of Rn than surface water, because radon is continuously produced by radioactive decay of Ra present in rocks. Likewise, the saturated zone of a soil frequently has a higher radon content than the unsaturated zone because of diffusional losses to the atmosphere.

In 1971, Apollo 15 passed above the Aristarchus plateau on the Moon, and detected a significant rise in alpha particles thought to be caused by the decay of Rn. The presence of Rn has been inferred later from data obtained from the Lunar Prospector alpha particle spectrometer.

Radon is found in some petroleum. Because radon has a similar pressure and temperature curve to propane, and oil refineries separate petrochemicals based on their boiling points, the piping carrying freshly separated propane in oil refineries can become contaminated because of decaying radon and its products.

Residues from the petroleum and natural gas industry often contain radium and its daughters. The sulfate scale from an oil well can be radium rich, while the water, oil, and gas from a well often contains radon. Radon decays to form solid radioisotopes that form coatings on the inside of pipework.

===Accumulation in buildings===
Measurement of radon levels in the first decades of its discovery was mainly done to determine the presence of radium and uranium in geological surveys. In 1956, most likely the first indoor survey of radon decay products was performed in Sweden, with the intent of estimating the public exposure to radon and its decay products. From 1975 up until 1984, small studies in Sweden, Austria, the United States and Norway aimed to measure radon indoors and in metropolitan areas.

High concentrations of radon in homes were discovered by chance in 1984 after the stringent radiation testing conducted at the new Limerick Generating Station nuclear power plant in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, United States revealed that Stanley Watras, a construction engineer at the plant, was contaminated by radioactive substances even though the reactor had never been fueled and Watras had been decontaminated each evening. It was determined that radon levels in his home&#x27;s basement were in excess of 100,000 Bq/m3 (2.7 nCi/L); he was told that living in the home was the equivalent of smoking 135 packs of cigarettes a day, and he and his family had increased their risk of developing lung cancer by 13 or 14 percent. The incident dramatized the fact that radon levels in particular dwellings can occasionally be orders of magnitude higher than typical. Since the incident in Pennsylvania, millions of short-term radon measurements have been taken in homes in the United States. Outside the United States, radon measurements are typically performed over the long term.

In the United States, typical domestic exposures are of approximately 100 Bq/m3 (2.7 pCi/L) indoors. Some level of radon will be found in all buildings. Radon mostly enters a building directly from the soil through the lowest level in the building that is in contact with the ground. High levels of radon in the water supply can also increase indoor radon air levels. Typical entry points of radon into buildings are cracks in solid foundations and walls, construction joints, gaps in suspended floors and around service pipes, cavities inside walls, and the water supply. Radon concentrations in the same place may differ by double/half over one hour, and the concentration in one room of a building may be significantly different from the concentration in an adjoining room.

The distribution of radon concentrations will generally differ from room to room, and the readings are averaged according to regulatory protocols. Indoor radon concentration is usually assumed to follow a log-normal distribution on a given territory. Thus, the geometric mean is generally used for estimating the &quot;average&quot; radon concentration in an area. The mean concentration ranges from less than 10 Bq/m3 to over 100 Bq/m3 in some European countries.

Some of the highest radon hazard in the US is found in Iowa and in the Appalachian Mountain areas in southeastern Pennsylvania. Iowa has the highest average radon concentrations in the US due to significant glaciation that ground the granitic rocks from the Canadian Shield and deposited it as soils making up the rich Iowa farmland. Many cities within the state, such as Iowa City, have passed requirements for radon-resistant construction in new homes. The second highest readings in Ireland were found in office buildings in the Irish town of Mallow, County Cork, prompting local fears regarding lung cancer.

Since radon is a colorless, odorless gas, the only way to know how much is present in the air or water is to perform tests. In the US, radon test kits are available to the public at retail stores, such as hardware stores, for home use, and testing is available through licensed professionals, who are often home inspectors. Efforts to reduce indoor radon levels are called radon mitigation. In the US, the EPA recommends all houses be tested for radon. In the UK, under the Housing Health &amp; Safety Rating System, property owners have an obligation to evaluate potential risks and hazards to health and safety in a residential property. Alpha-radiation monitoring over the long term is a method of testing for radon that is more common in countries outside the United States.

=== Industrial production ===
Radon is obtained as a by-product of uraniferous ores processing after transferring into 1% solutions of hydrochloric or hydrobromic acids. The gas mixture extracted from the solutions contains , , He, Rn, , and hydrocarbons. The mixture is purified by passing it over copper at to remove the and the , and then KOH and  are used to remove the acids and moisture by sorption. Radon is condensed by liquid nitrogen and purified from residue gases by sublimation.

Radon commercialization is regulated, but it is available in small quantities for the calibration of 222Rn measurement systems. In 2008 it was priced at almost per milliliter of radium solution (which only contains about 15 picograms of actual radon at any given moment). Radon is produced commercially by a solution of radium-226 (half-life of 1,600 years). Radium-226 decays by alpha-particle emission, producing radon that collects over samples of radium-226 at a rate of about 1 mm3/day per gram of radium; equilibrium is quickly achieved and radon is produced in a steady flow, with an activity equal to that of the radium (50 Bq). Gaseous 222Rn (half-life of about four days) escapes from the capsule through diffusion. Radon sources have also been produced for scientific purposes through the implantation of radium-226 into solid stainless steel.

=== Concentration scale ===
== Applications ==

=== Medical ===

==== Hormesis ====

An early-20th-century form of quackery was the treatment of maladies in a radiotorium. It was a small, sealed room for patients to be exposed to radon for its &quot;medicinal effects&quot;. The carcinogenic nature of radon due to its ionizing radiation became apparent later. Radon&#x27;s molecule-damaging radioactivity has been used to kill cancerous cells, but it does not increase the health of healthy cells. The ionizing radiation causes the formation of free radicals, which results in cell damage, causing increased rates of illness, including cancer.

Exposure to radon has been suggested to mitigate autoimmune diseases such as arthritis in a process known as radiation hormesis. As a result, in the late 20th century and early 21st century, &quot;health mines&quot; established in Basin, Montana, attracted people seeking relief from health problems such as arthritis through limited exposure to radioactive mine water and radon. The practice is discouraged because of the well-documented ill effects of high doses of radiation on the body.

Radioactive water baths have been applied since 1906 in Jáchymov, Czech Republic, but even before radon discovery they were used in Bad Gastein, Austria. Radium-rich springs are also used in traditional Japanese onsen in Misasa, Tottori Prefecture. Drinking therapy is applied in Bad Brambach, Germany, and during the early 20th century, water from springs with radon in them was bottled and sold (this water had little to no radon in it by the time it got to consumers due to radon&#x27;s short half-life). Inhalation therapy is carried out in Gasteiner-Heilstollen, Austria; Świeradów-Zdrój, Czerniawa-Zdrój, Kowary, Lądek-Zdrój, Poland; Harghita Băi, Romania; and Boulder, Montana. In the US and Europe, there are several &quot;radon spas&quot;, where people sit for minutes or hours in a high-radon atmosphere, such as at Bad Schmiedeberg, Germany.

==== Nuclear medicine ====

Radon has been produced commercially for use in radiation therapy, but for the most part has been replaced by radionuclides made in particle accelerators and nuclear reactors. Radon has been used in implantable seeds, made of gold or glass, primarily used to treat cancers, known as brachytherapy. The gold seeds were produced by filling a long tube with radon pumped from a radium source, the tube being then divided into short sections by crimping and cutting. The gold layer keeps the radon within, and filters out the alpha and beta radiations, while allowing the gamma rays to escape (which kill the diseased tissue). The activities might range from 0.05 to 5 millicuries per seed (2 to 200 MBq). The gamma rays are produced by radon and the first short-lived elements of its decay chain (218Po, 214Pb, 214Bi, 214Po).

After 11 half-lives (42 days), radon radioactivity is at 1/2,048 of its original level. At this stage, the predominant residual activity of the seed originates from the radon decay product 210Pb, whose half-life (22.3 years) is 2,000 times that of radon and its descendants 210Bi and 210Po.

211Rn can be used to generate 211At, which has uses in targeted alpha therapy.

=== Scientific ===
Radon emanation from the soil varies with soil type and with surface uranium content, so outdoor radon concentrations can be used to track air masses to a limited degree. Because of radon&#x27;s rapid loss to air and comparatively rapid decay, radon is used in hydrologic research that studies the interaction between groundwater and streams. Any significant concentration of radon in a river may be an indicator that there are local inputs of groundwater.

Radon soil concentration has been used to map buried close-subsurface geological faults because concentrations are generally higher over the faults. Similarly, it has found some limited use in prospecting for geothermal gradients.

Some researchers have investigated changes in groundwater radon concentrations for earthquake prediction. Increases in radon were noted before the 1966 Tashkent and 1994 Mindoro earthquakes. Radon has a half-life of approximately 3.8 days, which means that it can be found only shortly after it has been produced in the radioactive decay chain. For this reason, it has been hypothesized that increases in radon concentration is due to the generation of new cracks underground, which would allow increased groundwater circulation, flushing out radon. The generation of new cracks might not unreasonably be assumed to precede major earthquakes. In the 1970s and 1980s, scientific measurements of radon emissions near faults found that earthquakes often occurred with no radon signal, and radon was often detected with no earthquake to follow. It was then dismissed by many as an unreliable indicator. As of 2009, it was under investigation as a possible earthquake precursor by NASA; further research into the subject has suggested that abnormalities in atmospheric radon concentrations can be an indicator of seismic movement.

Radon is a known pollutant emitted from geothermal power stations because it is present in the material pumped from deep underground. It disperses rapidly, and no radiological hazard has been demonstrated in various investigations. In addition, typical systems re-inject the material deep underground rather than releasing it at the surface, so its environmental impact is minimal. In 1989, a survey of the collective dose received due to radon in geothermal fluids was measured at 2 man-sieverts per gigawatt-year of electricity produced, in comparison to the 2.5 man-sieverts per gigawatt-year produced from C emissions in nuclear power plants.

In the 1940s and 1950s, radon produced from a radium source was used for industrial radiography. Other X-ray sources such as Co and Ir became available after World War II and quickly replaced radium and thus radon for this purpose, being of lower cost and hazard.

== Health risks ==
{{Main|Health effects of radon}}

=== In mines ===
{{sup|222}}Rn decay products have been classified by the International Agency for Research on Cancer as being carcinogenic to humans, and as a gas that can be inhaled, lung cancer is a particular concern for people exposed to elevated levels of radon for sustained periods. During the 1940s and 1950s, when safety standards requiring expensive ventilation in mines were not widely implemented, radon exposure was linked to lung cancer among non-smoking miners of uranium and other hard rock materials in what is now the Czech Republic, and later among miners from the Southwestern US and South Australia. Despite these hazards being known in the early 1950s, this occupational hazard remained poorly managed in many mines until the 1970s. During this period, several entrepreneurs opened former uranium mines in the US to the general public and advertised alleged health benefits from breathing radon gas underground. Health benefits claimed included relief from pain, sinus problems, asthma, and arthritis, but the government banned such advertisements in 1975, and subsequent works have debated the truth of such claimed health effects, citing the documented ill effects of radiation on the body.

Since that time, ventilation and other measures have been used to reduce radon levels in most affected mines that continue to operate. In recent years, the average annual exposure of uranium miners has fallen to levels similar to the concentrations inhaled in some homes. This has reduced the risk of occupationally-induced cancer from radon, although health issues may persist for those who are currently employed in affected mines and for those who have been employed in them in the past. As the relative risk for miners has decreased, so has the ability to detect excess risks among that population.

Residues from processing of uranium ore can also be a source of radon. Radon resulting from the high radium content in uncovered dumps and tailing ponds can be easily released into the atmosphere and affect people living in the vicinity. The release of radon may be mitigated by covering tailings with soil or clay, though other decay products may leach into groundwater supplies.

Non-uranium mines may pose higher risks of radon exposure, as workers are not continuously monitored for radiation, and regulations specific to uranium mines do not apply. A review of radon level measurements across non-uranium mines found the highest concentrations of radon in non-metal mines, such as phosphorus and salt mines. However, older or abandoned uranium mines without ventilation may still have extremely high radon levels.

In addition to lung cancer, researchers have theorized a possible increased risk of leukemia due to radon exposure. Empirical support from studies of the general population is inconsistent; a study of uranium miners found a correlation between radon exposure and chronic lymphocytic leukemia, and current research supports a link between indoor radon exposure and poor health outcomes (i.e., an increased risk of lung cancer or childhood leukemia). Legal actions taken by those involved in nuclear industries, including miners, millers, transporters, nuclear site workers, and their respective unions have resulted in compensation for those affected by radon and radiation exposure under programs such as the compensation scheme for radiation-linked diseases (in the United Kingdom) and the Radiation Exposure Compensation Act (in the United States).

=== Domestic-level exposure ===
Radon has been considered the second leading cause of lung cancer in the United States and leading environmental cause of cancer mortality by the EPA, with the first one being smoking. Others have reached similar conclusions for the United Kingdom and France. Radon exposure in buildings may arise from subsurface rock formations and certain building materials (e.g., some granites). The greatest risk of radon exposure arises in buildings that are airtight, insufficiently ventilated, and have foundation leaks that allow air from the soil into basements and dwelling rooms. In some regions, such as Niška Banja, Serbia and Ullensvang, Norway, outdoor radon concentrations may be exceptionally high, though compared to indoors, where people spend more time and air is not dispersed and exchanged as often, outdoor exposure to radon is not considered a significant health risk.

Radon exposure (mostly radon daughters) has been linked to lung cancer in case-control studies performed in the US, Europe and China. There are approximately 21,000 deaths per year in the US (0.0063% of a population of 333 million) due to radon-induced lung cancers. In Europe, 2% of all cancers have been attributed to radon; in Slovenia in particular, a country with a high concentration of radon, about 120 people (0.0057% of a population of 2.11 million) die yearly because of radon. One of the most comprehensive radon studies performed in the US by epidemiologist R. William Field and colleagues found a 50% increased lung cancer risk even at the protracted exposures at the EPA&#x27;s action level of 4 pCi/L. North American and European pooled analyses further support these findings. However, the conclusion that exposure to low levels of radon leads to elevated risk of lung cancer has been disputed, and analyses of the literature point towards elevated risk only when radon accumulates indoors and at levels above 100 Bq/m3.

Thoron (220Rn) is less studied than {{Sup|222}}Rn in regards to domestic exposure due to its shorter half-life. However, it has been measured at comparatively high concentrations in buildings with earthen architecture, such as traditional half-timbered houses and modern houses with clay wall finishes, and in regions with thorium- and monazite-rich soil and sand. Thoron is a minor contributor to the overall radiation dose received due to indoor radon exposure, and can interfere with {{Sup|222}}Rn measurements when not taken into account.

==== Action and reference level ====
WHO presented in 2009 a recommended reference level (the national reference level), 100 Bq/m3, for radon in dwellings. The recommendation also says that where this is not possible, 300 Bq/m3 should be selected as the highest level. A national reference level should not be a limit, but should represent the maximum acceptable annual average radon concentration in a dwelling.

The actionable concentration of radon in a home varies depending on the organization doing the recommendation, for example, the EPA encourages that action be taken at concentrations as low as 74 Bq/m3 (2 pCi/L), and the European Union recommends action be taken when concentrations reach 400 Bq/m3 (11 pCi/L) for old houses and 200 Bq/m3 (5 pCi/L) for new ones. On 8 July 2010, the UK&#x27;s Health Protection Agency issued new advice setting a &quot;Target Level&quot; of 100 Bq/m3 whilst retaining an &quot;Action Level&quot; of 200 Bq/m3. Similar levels (as in the UK) are published by Norwegian Radiation and Nuclear Safety Authority (DSA) with the maximum limit for schools, kindergartens, and new dwellings set at 200 Bq/m3, where 100 Bq/m3 is set as the action level.

==== Inhalation and smoking ====
Results from epidemiological studies indicate that the risk of lung cancer increases with exposure to residential radon. A well known example of source of error is smoking, the main risk factor for lung cancer. In the US, cigarette smoking is estimated to cause 80% to 90% of all lung cancers.

According to the EPA, the risk of lung cancer for smokers is significant due to synergistic effects of radon and smoking. For this population about 62 people in a total of 1,000 will die of lung cancer compared to 7 people in a total of 1,000 for people who have never smoked. It cannot be excluded that the risk of non-smokers should be primarily explained by an effect of radon.

Radon, like other known or suspected external risk factors for lung cancer, is a threat for smokers and former smokers. This was demonstrated by the European pooling study. A commentary to the pooling study stated: &quot;it is not appropriate to talk simply of a risk from radon in homes. The risk is from smoking, compounded by a synergistic effect of radon for smokers. Without smoking, the effect seems to be so small as to be insignificant.&quot;

According to the European pooling study, there is a difference in risk for the histological subtypes of lung cancer and radon exposure. Small-cell lung carcinoma, which has a high correlation with smoking, has a higher risk after radon exposure. For other histological subtypes such as adenocarcinoma, the type that primarily affects non-smokers, the risk from radon appears to be lower.

A study of radiation from post-mastectomy radiotherapy shows that the simple models previously used to assess the combined and separate risks from radiation and smoking need to be developed. This is also supported by new discussion about the calculation method, the linear no-threshold model, which routinely has been used.

A study from 2001, which included 436 non-smokers with lung cancer and a control group of 1649 non-smokers without lung cancer, showed that exposure to radon increased the risk of lung cancer in non-smokers. The group that had been exposed to tobacco smoke in the home appeared to have a much higher risk, while those who were not exposed to passive smoking did not show any increased risk with increasing radon exposure.

==== Absorption and ingestion from water ====
The effects of radon if ingested are unknown, although studies have found that its biological half-life ranges from 30 to 70 minutes, with 90% removal at 100 minutes. In 1999, the US National Research Council investigated the issue of radon in drinking water. The risk associated with ingestion was considered almost negligible; Water from underground sources may contain significant amounts of radon depending on the surrounding rock and soil conditions, whereas surface sources generally do not. Radon is also released from water when temperature is increased, pressure is decreased and when water is aerated. Optimum conditions for radon release and exposure in domestic living from water occurred during showering. Water with a radon concentration of 104 pCi/L can increase the indoor airborne radon concentration by 1 pCi/L under normal conditions. However, the concentration of radon released from contaminated groundwater to the air has been measured at 5 orders of magnitude less than the original concentration in water. 

Ocean surface concentrations of radon exchange within the atmosphere, causing 222Rn to increase through the air-sea interface. Although areas tested were very shallow, additional measurements in a wide variety of coastal regimes should help define the nature of 222Rn observed.

=== Testing and mitigation ===
{{Main|Radon mitigation}}
There are relatively simple tests for radon gas. In some countries these tests are methodically done in areas of known systematic hazards. Radon detection devices are commercially available. Digital radon detectors provide ongoing measurements giving both daily, weekly, short-term and long-term average readouts via a digital display. Short-term radon test devices used for initial screening purposes are inexpensive, in some cases free. There are important protocols for taking short-term radon tests and it is imperative that they be strictly followed. The kit includes a collector that the user hangs in the lowest habitable floor of the house for two to seven days. The user then sends the collector to a laboratory for analysis. Long term kits, taking collections for up to one year or more, are also available. An open-land test kit can test radon emissions from the land before construction begins. Radon concentrations can vary daily, and accurate radon exposure estimates require long-term average radon measurements in the spaces where an individual spends a significant amount of time.

Radon levels fluctuate naturally, due to factors like transient weather conditions, so an initial test might not be an accurate assessment of a home&#x27;s average radon level. Radon levels are at a maximum during the coolest part of the day when pressure differentials are greatest. Therefore, a high result (over 4 pCi/L) justifies repeating the test before undertaking more expensive abatement projects. Measurements between 4 and 10 pCi/L warrant a long-term radon test. Measurements over 10 pCi/L warrant only another short-term test so that abatement measures are not unduly delayed. The EPA has advised purchasers of real estate to delay or decline a purchase if the seller has not successfully abated radon to 4 pCi/L or less.

Because the half-life of radon is only 3.8 days, removing or isolating the source will greatly reduce the hazard within a few weeks. Another method of reducing radon levels is to modify the building&#x27;s ventilation. Generally, the indoor radon concentrations increase as ventilation rates decrease. In a well-ventilated place, the radon concentration tends to align with outdoor values (typically 10 Bq/m3, ranging from 1 to 100 Bq/m3).

The four principal ways of reducing the amount of radon accumulating in a house are:
* Sub-slab depressurization (soil suction) by increasing under-floor ventilation;
* Improving the ventilation of the house and avoiding the transport of radon from the basement into living rooms;
* Installing a radon sump system in the basement;
* Installing a positive pressurization or positive supply ventilation system.

According to the EPA, the method to reduce radon &quot;...primarily used is a vent pipe system and fan, which pulls radon from beneath the house and vents it to the outside&quot;, which is also called sub-slab depressurization, active soil depressurization, or soil suction. Generally indoor radon can be mitigated by sub-slab depressurization and exhausting such radon-laden air to the outdoors, away from windows and other building openings. &quot;[The] EPA generally recommends methods which prevent the entry of radon. Soil suction, for example, prevents radon from entering your home by drawing the radon from below the home and venting it through a pipe, or pipes, to the air above the home where it is quickly diluted&quot; and the &quot;EPA does not recommend the use of sealing alone to reduce radon because, by itself, sealing has not been shown to lower radon levels significantly or consistently&quot;.

Positive-pressure ventilation systems can be combined with a heat exchanger to recover energy in the process of exchanging air with the outside, and simply exhausting basement air to the outside is not necessarily a viable solution as this can actually draw radon gas into a dwelling. Homes built on a crawl space may benefit from a radon collector installed under a &quot;radon barrier&quot; (a sheet of plastic that covers the crawl space). For crawl spaces, the EPA states that &quot;[a]n effective method to reduce radon levels in crawl space homes involves covering the earth floor with a high-density plastic sheet. A vent pipe and fan are used to draw the radon from under the sheet and vent it to the outdoors. This form of soil suction is called submembrane suction, and when properly applied is the most effective way to reduce radon levels in crawl space homes.&quot;

== See also ==
{{Portal|Chemistry}}
* International Radon Project
* Lucas cell
* Pleochroic halo (aka radiohalo)
* Radiation Exposure Compensation Act
{{Subject bar
|book1=Radon
|book2=Period 6 elements
|book3=Noble gases
|book4=Chemical elements (sorted alphabetically)
|book5=Chemical elements (sorted by number)
== Notes ==
{{Notelist}}

== References ==
{{Reflist}}

== External links ==
{{Commons}}
{{Wiktionary}}
{{Wikiversity|Radon atom}}
* Radon at the United States Environmental Protection Agency
* Global Radon Map
* Radon at &quot;The Periodic Table of Videos&quot; (University of Nottingham)
* Radon and Lung Health from the American Lung Association
* The Geology of Radon, James K. Otton, Linda C.S. Gundersen, and R. Randall Schumann
* Home Buyer&#x27;s and Seller&#x27;s Guide to Radon An article by the International Association of Certified Home Inspectors (InterNACHI)
* Toxicological Profile for Radon, Draft for Public Comment, Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, September 2008
{{Periodic table (navbox)}}
{{Authority control}}</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1133" start="0" end="5" title="Radon" label="Radon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="11" end="27" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q102500" start="36" end="42" title="Symbol (chemistry)" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133" start="43" end="45" title="Radon" label="Rn"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="50" end="63" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="76" end="87" title="radioactive decay" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q19609" start="88" end="97" title="noble gas" label="noble gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387827" start="183" end="185" title="radon-222" label="Rn"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="210" end="219" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q191637" start="334" end="347" title="decay product" label="decay product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="352" end="358" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148503" start="621" end="622" title="uranium-238" label="U"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885290" start="627" end="629" title="thorium-232" label="Th"/>
<link wikidata="Q108149" start="781" end="788" title="nuclide" label="nuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="858" end="862" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387827" start="864" end="866" title="Radon-222" label="Rn"/>
<link wikidata="Q191645" start="936" end="947" title="decay chain" label="decay chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q191645" start="972" end="986" title="uranium series" label="uranium series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372384" start="1081" end="1083" title="lead-206" label="Pb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334543" start="1085" end="1087" title="Radon-220" label="Rn"/>
<link wikidata="Q191645" start="1184" end="1198" title="thorium series" label="thorium series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372384" start="1236" end="1238" title="lead-208" label="Pb"/>
<link wikidata="Q9123" start="1274" end="1291" title="Ernest Rutherford" label="Ernest Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342248" start="1296" end="1311" title="Robert Bowie Owens" label="Robert B. Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="1315" end="1332" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="1336" end="1344" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q65191" start="1538" end="1558" title="Friedrich Ernst Dorn" label="Friedrich Ernst Dorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q468371" start="1586" end="1606" title="André-Louis Debierne" label="André-Louis Debierne"/>
<link wikidata="Q950726" start="1731" end="1745" title="William Ramsay" label="William Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q321345" start="1750" end="1769" title="Robert Whytlaw-Gray" label="Robert Whytlaw-Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q15647945" start="2017" end="2060" title="Commission on Isotopic Abundances and Atomic Weights" label="International Commission for Atomic Weights"/>
<link wikidata="Q33438" start="2133" end="2190" title="International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry" label="International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="2333" end="2341" title="isotope" label="isotopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185086" start="3061" end="3081" title="background radiation" label="background radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q124714" start="3382" end="3388" title="Spring (hydrosphere)" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q179918" start="3430" end="3440" title="permafrost" label="permafrost"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="3460" end="3474" title="climate change" label="climate-change"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3483" end="3505" title="Permafrost#Impacts of climate change" label="thawing of permafrosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="3610" end="3620" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q606654" start="3674" end="3695" title="earthquake prediction" label="earthquake prediction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281570" start="3804" end="3814" title="Radon mitigation" label="mitigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q133805" start="3817" end="3832" title="Epidemiology" label="Epidemiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="3936" end="3947" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q905504" start="3985" end="4003" title="indoor air quality" label="indoor air quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="4032" end="4077" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q102145" start="4691" end="4724" title="standard temperature and pressure" label="standard temperature and pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656117" start="4737" end="4750" title="monatomic gas" label="monatomic gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="4814" end="4837" title="Atmosphere of Earth" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375325" start="4940" end="4952" title="perfluorobutane" label="CF3(CF2)2CF3"/>
<link wikidata="Q418962" start="4957" end="4960" title="tungsten hexafluoride" label="WF6"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="5080" end="5094" title="freezing point" label="freezing point"/>
<link wikidata="Q980416" start="5121" end="5138" title="radioluminescence" label="radioluminescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q166583" start="5208" end="5220" title="condensation" label="condensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="5293" end="5300" title="soluble" label="soluble"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="5388" end="5402" title="organic liquid" label="organic liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q171407" start="5669" end="5676" title="Valence (chemistry)" label="valence"/>
<link wikidata="Q778774" start="5742" end="5750" title="Reactivity (chemistry)" label="reactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q903539" start="5830" end="5836" title="Radioactive tracer" label="tracer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11136680" start="5976" end="5981" title="Inert gas" label="inert"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="6025" end="6035" title="combustion" label="combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q107414" start="6055" end="6068" title="valence shell" label="valence shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="6084" end="6092" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q483769" start="6200" end="6223" title="first ionization energy" label="first ionization energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="6319" end="6334" title="Periodic table" label="periodic trends"/>
<link wikidata="Q78974" start="6354" end="6371" title="electronegativity" label="electronegativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106" start="6411" end="6416" title="xenon" label="xenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q462174" start="6502" end="6509" title="hydrate" label="hydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="6565" end="6573" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="6580" end="6594" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="6661" end="6677" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q44793182" start="6860" end="6868" title="fluoride" label="fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q50690" start="6873" end="6878" title="oxide" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="6894" end="6902" title="Oxidation" label="oxidized"/>
<link wikidata="Q650" start="6940" end="6948" title="fluorine" label="fluorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271877" start="6963" end="6979" title="radon difluoride" label="radon difluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="7154" end="7162" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q908990" start="7181" end="7191" title="volatility (chemistry)" label="volatility"/>
<link wikidata="Q863695" start="7430" end="7443" title="Bond length" label="bond distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q81454" start="7452" end="7460" title="ångström" label="ångström"/>
<link wikidata="Q411225" start="7569" end="7585" title="xenon difluoride" label="xenon difluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630364" start="7594" end="7613" title="Octahedral molecular geometry" label="octahedral molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135021" start="7614" end="7614" title="Radon hexafluoride" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q721706" start="7651" end="7672" title="enthalpy of formation" label="enthalpy of formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="7705" end="7708" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q411381" start="7806" end="7828" title="antimony pentafluoride" label="antimony pentafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q411305" start="7843" end="7863" title="chlorine trifluoride" label="chlorine trifluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q328381" start="7914" end="7927" title="Uranium mining" label="uranium mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737837" start="8143" end="8154" title="irradiation" label="irradiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q420640" start="8258" end="8277" title="dioxygen difluoride" label="dioxygen difluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q115550483" start="8333" end="8351" title="Radon compounds" label="compounds of radon"/>
<link wikidata="Q411142" start="8614" end="8632" title="xenon hexafluoride" label="xenon hexafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q417069" start="8718" end="8739" title="bromine pentafluoride" label="bromine pentafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q407520" start="8752" end="8767" title="sodium fluoride" label="sodium fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q416623" start="8771" end="8786" title="nickel fluoride" label="nickel fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="8842" end="8852" title="Hydrolysis" label="hydrolysed"/>
<link wikidata="Q870531" start="9008" end="9022" title="Coprecipitation" label="coprecipitates"/>
<link wikidata="Q906356" start="9028" end="9044" title="aqueous solution" label="aqueous solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319010" start="9280" end="9296" title="Electromigration" label="Electromigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634792" start="9391" end="9404" title="Weak Acid" label="weakly acidic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65061144" start="9536" end="9551" title="decay technique" label="decay technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q671" start="9612" end="9614" title="francium" label="Fr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271877" start="10021" end="10037" title="radon difluoride" label="radon difluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570979" start="10235" end="10245" title="Spin–orbit interaction" label="spin–orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q409288" start="10386" end="10405" title="xenon tetrafluoride" label="xenon tetrafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q411142" start="10448" end="10466" title="xenon hexafluoride" label="xenon hexafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135021" start="10471" end="10489" title="radon hexafluoride" label="radon hexafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630364" start="10515" end="10533" title="octahedral molecular geometry" label="regular octahedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497909" start="10606" end="10623" title="inert pair effect" label="inert pair effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q201479" start="11019" end="11027" title="carbonyl" label="carbonyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226179" start="11081" end="11106" title="linear molecular geometry" label="linear molecular geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272968" start="11176" end="11195" title="Angular momentum coupling" label="spin-orbit coupling"/>
<link wikidata="Q178026" start="11218" end="11227" title="fullerene" label="fullerene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="11260" end="11266" title="tumors" label="tumors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180043" start="11542" end="11551" title="perxenate" label="perxenate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330289" start="11595" end="11607" title="relativistic quantum chemistry" label="relativistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497909" start="11657" end="11674" title="inert pair effect" label="inert pair effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q907670" start="11706" end="11723" title="interhalogen" label="halogen fluorides"/>
<link wikidata="Q569" start="11948" end="11957" title="beryllium" label="beryllium"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="11966" end="11975" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q368639" start="11986" end="12014" title="standard electrode potential" label="standard electrode potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q878130" start="12201" end="12215" title="stable isotope" label="stable isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q101395" start="12281" end="12292" title="mass number" label="mass number"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387321" start="12457" end="12459" title="radium-226" label="Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148503" start="12504" end="12505" title="uranium-238" label="U"/>
<link wikidata="Q723733" start="12578" end="12589" title="millisecond" label="millisecond"/>
<link wikidata="Q901747" start="12667" end="12684" title="double beta decay" label="double beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q179856" start="13084" end="13099" title="alpha radiation" label="alpha radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121" start="13158" end="13166" title="actinium" label="actinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q191638" start="13410" end="13422" title="decay scheme" label="decay scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q179856" start="13608" end="13619" title="alpha decay" label="alpha decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q979" start="13631" end="13633" title="Polonium" label="Po"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="13672" end="13674" title="Lead" label="Pb"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="13690" end="13700" title="beta decay" label="beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q942" start="13712" end="13714" title="Bismuth" label="Bi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403252" start="14716" end="14729" title="working level" label="working level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111" start="15444" end="15464" title="electrostatic charge" label="electrostatic charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9123" start="15948" end="15965" title="Ernest Rutherford" label="Ernest Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342248" start="15970" end="15985" title="Robert B. Owens" label="Robert B. Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="15989" end="16006" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="16010" end="16018" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37463" start="16130" end="16136" title="Pierre Curie" label="Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186" start="16141" end="16152" title="Marie Curie" label="Marie Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q65191" start="16620" end="16640" title="Friedrich Ernst Dorn" label="Friedrich Ernst Dorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q469259" start="16818" end="16832" title="Harriet Brooks" label="Harriet Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q468371" start="17000" end="17020" title="André-Louis Debierne" label="André-Louis Debierne"/>
<link wikidata="Q78580" start="17576" end="17588" title="Johann Radon" label="Johann Radon"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="17611" end="17618" title="Spectral line" label="spectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q950726" start="17725" end="17739" title="William Ramsay" label="William Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q321345" start="17865" end="17884" title="Robert Whytlaw-Gray" label="Robert Whytlaw-Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="17919" end="17938" title="Melting point" label="melting temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="17955" end="17962" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q15647945" start="18263" end="18306" title="Commission on Isotopic Abundances and Atomic Weights" label="International Commission for Atomic Weights"/>
<link wikidata="Q33438" start="18371" end="18420" title="International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry" label="International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334543" start="18558" end="18560" title="Radon-220" label="Rn"/>
<link wikidata="Q102573" start="19314" end="19316" title="Becquerel" label="Bq"/>
<link wikidata="Q83428" start="19351" end="19361" title="Paracelsus" label="Paracelsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q76579" start="19438" end="19452" title="Georg Agricola" label="Georg Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q830418" start="19772" end="19784" title="Jáchymov" label="Joachimsthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="19795" end="19802" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="19903" end="19918" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwestern US"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="19945" end="19953" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q896687" start="20133" end="20146" title="brachytherapy" label="brachytherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q102573" start="21294" end="21303" title="becquerel" label="becquerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q208469" start="21333" end="21348" title="SI derived unit" label="SI derived unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q229354" start="21398" end="21407" title="Curie (unit)" label="picocurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403252" start="21630" end="21643" title="working level" label="working level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667473" start="22186" end="22237" title="International Commission on Radiological Protection" label="International Commission on Radiological Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q131299" start="22697" end="22705" title="pico-" label="picogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817343" start="22795" end="22808" title="molar percent" label="molar percent"/>
<link wikidata="Q254835" start="24213" end="24220" title="Bad Gastein" label="Gastein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="24350" end="24357" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="24626" end="24633" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q751300" start="24637" end="24642" title="shale" label="shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q190096" start="25170" end="25194" title="Inversion (meteorology)" label="meteorological inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q967035" start="25307" end="25323" title="Boulder, Montana" label="Boulder, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156186" start="25325" end="25331" title="Misasa, Tottori" label="Misasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047" start="25333" end="25346" title="Bad Kreuznach" label="Bad Kreuznach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="25652" end="25675" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171494" start="25771" end="25785" title="volatilization" label="volatilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="25794" end="25806" title="ground water" label="ground water"/>
<link wikidata="Q752112" start="25845" end="25858" title="surface water" label="surface water"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="25958" end="25972" title="aquifer" label="saturated zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479708" start="26030" end="26046" title="vadose zone" label="unsaturated zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q163214" start="26058" end="26067" title="diffusion" label="diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q194068" start="26106" end="26115" title="Apollo 15" label="Apollo 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q542806" start="26133" end="26152" title="Aristarchus (crater)" label="Aristarchus plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="26160" end="26164" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q103517" start="26201" end="26215" title="alpha particle" label="alpha particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q590245" start="26329" end="26345" title="Lunar Prospector" label="Lunar Prospector"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="26399" end="26408" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q131189" start="26472" end="26479" title="propane" label="propane"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353044" start="26485" end="26499" title="oil refineries" label="oil refineries"/>
<link wikidata="Q817114" start="26630" end="26642" title="radioactive contamination" label="contaminated"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="26720" end="26731" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q587682" start="26807" end="26815" title="oil well" label="oil well"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516266" start="27628" end="27655" title="Limerick Generating Station" label="Limerick Generating Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126611" start="27740" end="27754" title="Stanley Watras" label="Stanley Watras"/>
<link wikidata="Q518730" start="28327" end="28346" title="Order of magnitude" label="orders of magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q826116" start="29567" end="29590" title="log-normal distribution" label="log-normal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q185049" start="29623" end="29637" title="geometric mean" label="geometric mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="29883" end="29887" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="29899" end="29919" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="30035" end="30045" title="glaciation" label="glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76034" start="30086" end="30101" title="Canadian Shield" label="Canadian Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q487977" start="30200" end="30209" title="Iowa City" label="Iowa City"/>
<link wikidata="Q922247" start="30374" end="30393" title="Mallow, County Cork" label="Mallow, County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912198" start="30748" end="30762" title="home inspector" label="home inspector"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281570" start="30814" end="30830" title="radon mitigation" label="radon mitigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542864" start="31288" end="31304" title="Uranium ore deposits" label="uraniferous ores"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="31356" end="31368" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric"/>
<link wikidata="Q423245" start="31372" end="31388" title="hydrobromic acid" label="hydrobromic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="31463" end="31474" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q132298" start="31563" end="31566" title="potassium hydroxide" label="KOH"/>
<link wikidata="Q369309" start="31571" end="31571" title="Phosphorus pentoxide" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q898533" start="31617" end="31625" title="sorption" label="sorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q131800" start="31700" end="31711" title="sublimation (phase transition)" label="sublimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q163214" start="32429" end="32438" title="diffusion" label="diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="32552" end="32567" title="stainless steel" label="stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468920" start="32685" end="32693" title="quackery" label="quackery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281229" start="32729" end="32740" title="radiotorium" label="radiotorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="33116" end="33129" title="free radicals" label="free radicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058184" start="33148" end="33159" title="cell damage" label="cell damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="33207" end="33213" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084905" start="33265" end="33283" title="autoimmune disease" label="autoimmune disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q170990" start="33293" end="33302" title="arthritis" label="arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10747346" start="33325" end="33343" title="radiation hormesis" label="radiation hormesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q967057" start="33447" end="33461" title="Basin, Montana" label="Basin, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q830418" start="33764" end="33772" title="Jáchymov" label="Jáchymov"/>
<link wikidata="Q254835" start="33840" end="33851" title="Bad Gastein" label="Bad Gastein"/>
<link wikidata="Q655311" start="33920" end="33925" title="onsen" label="onsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156186" start="33929" end="33935" title="Misasa, Tottori" label="Misasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q133935" start="33937" end="33955" title="Tottori Prefecture" label="Tottori Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q46501" start="33988" end="34000" title="Bad Brambach" label="Bad Brambach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34253" end="34274" title="Gasteiner-Heilstollen" label="Gasteiner-Heilstollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q387561" start="34285" end="34300" title="Świeradów-Zdrój" label="Świeradów-Zdrój"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34302" end="34317" title="Czerniawa-Zdrój" label="Czerniawa-Zdrój"/>
<link wikidata="Q985656" start="34319" end="34325" title="Kowary" label="Kowary"/>
<link wikidata="Q995889" start="34327" end="34338" title="Lądek-Zdrój" label="Lądek-Zdrój"/>
<link wikidata="Q193420" start="34348" end="34360" title="Harghita Băi" label="Harghita Băi"/>
<link wikidata="Q967035" start="34375" end="34391" title="Boulder, Montana" label="Boulder, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q522557" start="34534" end="34550" title="Bad Schmiedeberg" label="Bad Schmiedeberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q130825" start="34722" end="34742" title="particle accelerator" label="particle accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="34748" end="34763" title="nuclear reactor" label="nuclear reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q896687" start="34873" end="34886" title="brachytherapy" label="brachytherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="35158" end="35167" title="gamma ray" label="gamma ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q23021051" start="35761" end="35783" title="targeted alpha therapy" label="targeted alpha therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q216823" start="35944" end="35952" title="air mass" label="air mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q42250" start="36066" end="36076" title="hydrology" label="hydrologic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47521" start="36139" end="36145" title="stream" label="stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="36344" end="36350" title="fault (geology)" label="faults"/>
<link wikidata="Q636340" start="36472" end="36491" title="geothermal gradient" label="geothermal gradient"/>
<link wikidata="Q606654" start="36578" end="36599" title="earthquake prediction" label="earthquake prediction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120993" start="36642" end="36655" title="1966 Tashkent earthquake" label="1966 Tashkent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589576" start="36660" end="36672" title="1994 Mindoro earthquake" label="1994 Mindoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="37471" end="37475" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215493" start="37662" end="37687" title="Geothermal power" label="geothermal power stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088432" start="38029" end="38044" title="collective dose" label="collective dose"/>
<link wikidata="Q103246" start="38110" end="38117" title="sievert" label="sievert"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38123" end="38136" title="Kilowatt-hour#Multiples" label="gigawatt-year"/>
<link wikidata="Q840660" start="38232" end="38233" title="carbon-14" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q134447" start="38247" end="38267" title="nuclear power plants" label="nuclear power plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q649912" start="38343" end="38365" title="industrial radiography" label="industrial radiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q932960" start="38395" end="38397" title="Cobalt-60" label="Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q18883042" start="38402" end="38404" title="Iridium-192" label="Ir"/>
<link wikidata="Q552168" start="38662" end="38705" title="International Agency for Research on Cancer" label="International Agency for Research on Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q187661" start="38715" end="38727" title="carcinogenic" label="carcinogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="39193" end="39208" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433185" start="39269" end="39288" title="occupational hazard" label="occupational hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899710" start="40548" end="40555" title="Uranium tailings" label="tailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="40768" end="40779" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="41095" end="41105" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12148489" start="41110" end="41120" title="salt mines" label="salt mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="41313" end="41321" title="leukemia" label="leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088156" start="41492" end="41520" title="chronic lymphocytic leukemia" label="chronic lymphocytic leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="41667" end="41675" title="leukemia" label="leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28135043" start="41938" end="41987" title="compensation scheme for radiation-linked diseases" label="compensation scheme for radiation-linked diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416465" start="42020" end="42055" title="Radiation Exposure Compensation Act" label="Radiation Exposure Compensation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q662860" start="42289" end="42296" title="smoking" label="smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q954986" start="42714" end="42725" title="Niška Banja" label="Niška Banja"/>
<link wikidata="Q484077" start="42738" end="42748" title="Ullensvang" label="Ullensvang"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="43322" end="43330" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274120" start="43562" end="43578" title="R. William Field" label="R. William Field"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44269" end="44289" title="Timber framing#Half-timbering" label="half-timbered houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="44313" end="44317" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q422011" start="44366" end="44374" title="monazite" label="monazite"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="45208" end="45222" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q540614" start="46172" end="46183" title="Synergy" label="synergistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168" start="47005" end="47017" title="Histology" label="histological"/>
<link wikidata="Q738170" start="47062" end="47087" title="Small-cell lung carcinoma" label="Small-cell lung carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q356033" start="47212" end="47226" title="adenocarcinoma" label="adenocarcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q848318" start="47346" end="47356" title="mastectomy" label="mastectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="47357" end="47369" title="radiotherapy" label="radiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q772939" start="47581" end="47606" title="linear no-threshold model" label="linear no-threshold model"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233780" start="48292" end="48317" title="National Research Council (United States)" label="National Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024207" start="53079" end="53108" title="Positive pressure ventilation" label="Positive-pressure ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189124" start="53140" end="53154" title="heat exchanger" label="heat exchanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052633" start="53997" end="54024" title="International Radon Project" label="International Radon Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067891" start="54027" end="54037" title="Lucas cell" label="Lucas cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387546" start="54040" end="54055" title="Pleochroic halo" label="Pleochroic halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416465" start="54074" end="54109" title="Radiation Exposure Compensation Act" label="Radiation Exposure Compensation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="54420" end="54465" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988689" start="54502" end="54530" title="The Periodic Table of Videos" label="The Periodic Table of Videos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54836" end="54846" title="InterNACHI" label="InterNACHI"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25607" wikidata="Q218935" url="?curid=25607" title="Ruby (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[ruby]] is a red gemstone.

Ruby may also refer to:

==Places==
* Ruby, Alaska
* Ruby, Arizona
* Ruby, Copiah County, Mississippi
* Ruby, Leflore County, Mississippi
* Ruby, Nebraska
* Ruby, New York
* Ruby, South Carolina
* Ruby, United States Virgin Islands
* Ruby, Virginia
* Ruby, Washington, a ghost town
* Ruby, Wisconsin, a town
** Ruby (community), Wisconsin, an unincorporated community
* Ruby Beach, Washington
* Ruby Canyon, on the Colorado-Utah border
* Ruby Creek (disambiguation)
* Ruby Falls, an underground waterfall within Lookout Mountain, Tennessee
* Ruby Mountain, a stratovolcano in British Columbia, Canada
* Ruby Mountains, a mountain range in Nevada
** Ruby Dome, the highest peak of the Ruby Mountains
* Ruby Ridge, Idaho, site of a violent confrontation and siege
* Ruby Valley, Nevada
* Ruby City (disambiguation), several US ghost towns

==Arts and entertainment==
===Fictional characters===
* Ruby Allen, &quot;EastEnders&quot; character played by Louisa Lytton
* Ruby Buckton, &quot;Home and Away&quot; character played by Rebecca Breeds
* Ruby Crescent, an &quot;O-Parts Hunter&quot; character
* Ruby Dennis, the protagonist of the film &quot;Dear Mr. Wonderful&quot;
* Ruby Gillman, the main character of 2023 animated fantasy film &quot;Ruby Gillman, Teenage Kraken&quot;
* Ruby Hale, a recurring character in MARVEL&#x27;s &quot;Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.&quot; played by Dove Cameron
* Ruby Heart, protagonist of &quot;Marvel vs. Capcom 2&quot;
* Ruby Hoshino, &quot;Oshi no Ko&quot;; see List of Oshi no Ko characters
* Ruby Kurosawa, a fictional character from the mixed-media project &quot;Love Live! Sunshine!!&quot;
* Ruby Moon, a character from &quot;Cardcaptor Sakura&quot; manga and anime
* Ruby Ramirez, a character from Treehouse&#x27;s &quot;Rusty Rivets&quot;
* Ruby Marshall, a character from the preschool TV series &quot;Dot.&quot;
* Ruby Rhod, a character (played by Tucker) in the late 1990s film &quot;The Fifth Element&quot;
* Ruby Rose (RWBY character), the protagonist of the Japanese animated webseries &quot;RWBY&quot;
* Ruby Thewes, a character in the novel &quot;Cold Mountain&quot; by Charles Frazier and in the film
* Ruby Trollman, a &quot;Trollz&quot; character
* Ruby, one of the identical twins in the Jacqueline Wilson novel &quot;Double Act&quot;
* Ruby (&quot;Jewelpet&quot;)
* Ruby (&quot;Pokémon&quot;)
* Ruby (&quot;Once Upon a Time&quot;) (better known as Red Riding Hood), a character from the ABC television drama &quot;Once Upon a Time&quot;
* Ruby (&quot;Steven Universe&quot;)
* Ruby (&quot;Supernatural&quot;)
* Ruby (&quot;The Land Before Time&quot;)
* Ruby, an &quot;According to Jim&quot; character
* Ruby, a promotional character created by ATI Technologies
* Ruby, an anthro rabbit in the &quot;Max &amp; Ruby&quot; book and television series
* Ruby, the protagonist of the radio drama &quot;Ruby the Galactic Gumshoe&quot;
* Ruby, the protagonist of the Canadian TV series &quot;Ruby Gloom&quot;
* Ruby, a fictional potato in the British animated series &quot;Small Potatoes&quot;
* Ruby, an anthro mouse in the British children&#x27;s series &quot;Big &amp; Small&quot;
* Ruby, a fictional character portrayed by Amrita Singh in the 1985 Indian film &quot;Mard&quot;

===Films===
* &quot;Ruby&quot; (1977 film), a supernatural horror
* &quot;Ruby&quot; (1992 film), about Jack Ruby

===Games===
* &quot;Pokémon Ruby&quot;, released in 2002 for Japan and 2003 internationally
* &quot;Pokémon Omega Ruby&quot;, a remake of Pokémon Ruby

===Television===
* &quot;Ruby&quot; (talk show), a British late night talk show
* &quot;Ruby&quot; (2008 TV series), a Style Network program
* &quot;Ruby&quot; (2012 TV series), an Arab dramatic series
* Ruby Gallagher, a character of the ABC Family TV series &quot;Ruby &amp; The Rockits&quot;
* The Ruby, the diner in Canadian series &quot;Corner Gas&quot;, as well as the film and animated versions

===Literature===
* &quot;Ruby&quot; (novel), a 1994 novel by V. C. Andrews

===Music===
====Albums====
* &quot;Ruby&quot; (The Killjoys album), 1990
* &quot;Ruby&quot; (Macy Gray album), 2018
* &quot;Ruby&quot; (Ruby album), 1976
* &quot;Ruby&quot; (Sirsy album), 2004
* &quot;Ruby&quot; (Archie Roach, Ruby Hunter, Paul Grabowsky and Australian Art Orchestra album), 2005
* &quot;Ruby&quot; (Jennie album), 2025
* &quot;The Ruby&quot;, an EP by April, 2018

====Songs====
* &quot;Ruby&quot; (&quot;Ruby Gentry&quot; theme), from the 1952 film &quot;Ruby Gentry&quot;, also performed by Ray Charles in 1960
* &quot;Ruby&quot; (Kaiser Chiefs song), by Kaiser Chiefs, from the album &quot;Yours Truly, Angry Mob&quot;
* &quot;Ruby, Don&#x27;t Take Your Love to Town&quot; and the album of the same name by Kenny Rogers and The First Edition
* &quot;Ruby&quot;, a song by Janis Ian, from the album &quot;Revenge&quot;
* &quot;Ruby&quot;, a song by Kristin Hersh, from the album &quot;Sunny Border Blue&quot;
* &quot;Ruby&quot;, a song by Queenadreena, from the album &quot;Djin&quot;
* &quot;Ruby&quot;, a song by Twenty One Pilots
* &quot;Ruby&quot;, a song by Boyzone, from the album &quot;Brother&quot;
* &quot;Ruby&quot;, a song by Camille, from the album &quot;Le Sac des Filles&quot;
* &quot;Ruby, My Dear&quot;, a song by &quot;Thelonious Monk&quot;
* &quot;Ruby&quot; (루비), a song by Fin.K.L, from the album &quot;Blue Rain&quot;

====Artists and record labels====
*Ruby (British band), an alternative group formed in 1994
* Ruby &amp; the Romantics, an American R&amp;B group
* Ruby Records, a record label
*Ruby (American band), an American rock band featuring Tom Fogerty
* Ruby (Egyptian singer) (born 1981), singer and actress
* Ruby, a performer in the English hip pop quintet KING
* Ruby Frost, New Zealand singer

==People==
* Ruby (given name)
* Ruby (surname)
* Ruby (Egyptian singer)
* Ruby (actress) (born 1972), American pornographic actress

==Programming==
* Ruby (hardware description language)
* Ruby (programming language)
* Ruby, an early development name for Visual Basic (classic)
* Ruby MRI, the C reference implementation of the Ruby language

==Ships==
*, several vessels of the Royal Navy
*, several paddle steamers
*, a converted yacht in service with the US Navy
*, several merchant ships

==Other uses==
* Ruby (annotation), small-print pronunciation guide for logographic writing
* Ruby (car), an inter-war French manufacturer of light cars and proprietary engines
* Ruby (typography), the British English form of agate-size type
* Ruby (color), a color based on that of the gemstone
* Ruby chocolate
* Ruby (mango), a deep-red mango fruit
* &#x27;Ruby Red&#x27; and &#x27;Star Ruby&#x27;, varieties of grapefruit
* Ruby (elephant)
* Rubies (Super Fours), a women&#x27;s cricket team that competed in the Super Fours
* &quot;Project Ruby&quot;, a 1946 joint Anglo-American program to test a range of bunker-buster bombs
* Brazilian ruby, &quot;Clytolaema rubricauda&quot;, a species of hummingbird
* Little Ruby, a common name of &quot;Alternanthera brasiliana&quot; var. &quot;villosa&quot; in the amaranth family
* Ruby Corp., the parent company of the Ashley Madison online dating service
* Ruby Leaf, a common name of &quot;Alternanthera brasiliana&quot;
* J.W. Ruby Memorial Hospital, or Ruby, in Morgantown, West Virginia
* Ruby Tuesday (restaurant), an international restaurant chain
* List of storms named Ruby

==See also==
* 
* Rubygate, a sex scandal involving Silvio Berlusconi
* Ruby pistol
* Rubi (disambiguation)
* Rubin (disambiguation)
* Rubis (rocket), a rocket system
* &quot;RWBY&quot;, an animated web series
* Ruby Rose (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q218935" start="2" end="10" title="Ruby (disambiguation)" label="[[ruby]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q218935" start="31" end="35" title="Ruby (disambiguation)" label="Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q79807" start="69" end="81" title="Ruby, Alaska" label="Ruby, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376229" start="84" end="97" title="Ruby, Arizona" label="Ruby, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376231" start="100" end="132" title="Ruby, Copiah County, Mississippi" label="Ruby, Copiah County, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376236" start="135" end="168" title="Ruby, Leflore County, Mississippi" label="Ruby, Leflore County, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17596472" start="171" end="185" title="Ruby, Nebraska" label="Ruby, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q39050578" start="188" end="202" title="Ruby, New York" label="Ruby, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784249" start="205" end="225" title="Ruby, South Carolina" label="Ruby, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376241" start="228" end="262" title="Ruby, United States Virgin Islands" label="Ruby, United States Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q14713165" start="265" end="279" title="Ruby, Virginia" label="Ruby, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16882352" start="282" end="298" title="Ruby, Washington" label="Ruby, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887162" start="315" end="330" title="Ruby, Wisconsin" label="Ruby, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887162" start="342" end="369" title="Ruby (community), Wisconsin" label="Ruby (community), Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q682162" start="401" end="411" title="Ruby Beach" label="Ruby Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376286" start="426" end="437" title="Ruby Canyon" label="Ruby Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376293" start="469" end="496" title="Ruby Creek (disambiguation)" label="Ruby Creek (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376312" start="499" end="509" title="Ruby Falls" label="Ruby Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376352" start="573" end="586" title="Ruby Mountain" label="Ruby Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446571" start="634" end="648" title="Ruby Mountains" label="Ruby Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376306" start="680" end="689" title="Ruby Dome" label="Ruby Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604442" start="732" end="742" title="Ruby Ridge" label="Ruby Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376402" start="795" end="806" title="Ruby Valley" label="Ruby Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376289" start="817" end="843" title="Ruby City (disambiguation)" label="Ruby City (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376267" start="925" end="935" title="Ruby Allen" label="Ruby Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376285" start="996" end="1008" title="Ruby Buckton" label="Ruby Buckton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592616" start="1073" end="1086" title="Ruby Crescent" label="Ruby Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246911" start="1177" end="1195" title="Dear Mr. Wonderful" label="Dear Mr. Wonderful"/>
<link wikidata="Q117188308" start="1273" end="1301" title="Ruby Gillman, Teenage Kraken" label="Ruby Gillman, Teenage Kraken"/>
<link wikidata="Q537911" start="1366" end="1388" title="Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." label="Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D."/>
<link wikidata="" start="1453" end="1472" title="Marvel vs. Capcom 2: New Age of Heroes" label="Marvel vs. Capcom 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q123600776" start="1523" end="1552" title="List of Oshi no Ko characters" label="List of Oshi no Ko characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q25340071" start="1627" end="1648" title="Love Live! Sunshine!!" label="Love Live! Sunshine!!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715945" start="1657" end="1666" title="Ruby Moon" label="Ruby Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q24192010" start="1733" end="1745" title="Ruby Ramirez" label="Ruby Ramirez"/>
<link wikidata="Q27536555" start="1870" end="1874" title="Dot." label="Dot."/>
<link wikidata="Q106506" start="1954" end="1971" title="The Fifth Element" label="The Fifth Element"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211537" start="1980" end="2006" title="Ruby Rose (RWBY character)" label="Ruby Rose (RWBY character)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499287" start="2122" end="2135" title="Cold Mountain (novel)" label="Cold Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083674" start="2179" end="2192" title="Ruby Trollman" label="Ruby Trollman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299647" start="2297" end="2307" title="Double Act (novel)" label="Double Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189600" start="2316" end="2343" title="Ruby (Jewelpet)" label="Ruby (&amp;quot;Jewelpet&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q964721" start="2346" end="2372" title="Ruby (Pokémon)" label="Ruby (&amp;quot;Pokémon&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900260" start="2375" end="2410" title="Ruby (Once Upon a Time)" label="Ruby (&amp;quot;Once Upon a Time&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100949" start="2519" end="2553" title="Ruby (Steven Universe)" label="Ruby (&amp;quot;Steven Universe&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987013" start="2556" end="2587" title="Ruby (Supernatural)" label="Ruby (&amp;quot;Supernatural&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q940419" start="2590" end="2629" title="Ruby (The Land Before Time)" label="Ruby (&amp;quot;The Land Before Time&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q757318" start="2647" end="2663" title="According to Jim" label="According to Jim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2723" end="2739" title="ATI Technologies#Products" label="ATI Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q374037" start="2778" end="2792" title="Max &amp;amp; Ruby" label="Max &amp;amp; Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376422" start="2875" end="2900" title="Ruby the Galactic Gumshoe" label="Ruby the Galactic Gumshoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165339" start="2963" end="2973" title="Ruby Gloom" label="Ruby Gloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021125" start="3044" end="3058" title="Small Potatoes (2011 TV series)" label="Small Potatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631698" start="3133" end="3148" title="Big &amp;amp; Small" label="Big &amp;amp; Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758599" start="3241" end="3245" title="Mard (1985 film)" label="Mard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376250" start="3267" end="3295" title="Ruby (1977 film)" label="&amp;quot;Ruby&amp;quot; (1977 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280332" start="3321" end="3349" title="Ruby (1992 film)" label="&amp;quot;Ruby&amp;quot; (1992 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q721822" start="3388" end="3400" title="Pokémon Ruby" label="Pokémon Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q16773658" start="3468" end="3486" title="Pokémon Omega Ruby" label="Pokémon Omega Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q85798115" start="3539" end="3567" title="Ruby (talk show)" label="&amp;quot;Ruby&amp;quot; (talk show)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376259" start="3602" end="3635" title="Ruby (2008 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Ruby&amp;quot; (2008 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12213820" start="3663" end="3696" title="Ruby (2012 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Ruby&amp;quot; (2012 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3724" end="3738" title="Ruby &amp;amp; The Rockits#Cast" label="Ruby Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276079" start="3862" end="3872" title="Corner Gas" label="Corner Gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q275955" start="3942" end="3966" title="Ruby (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Ruby&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111915348" start="4028" end="4065" title="Ruby (The Killjoys album)" label="&amp;quot;Ruby&amp;quot; (The Killjoys album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56274250" start="4074" end="4108" title="Ruby (Macy Gray album)" label="&amp;quot;Ruby&amp;quot; (Macy Gray album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376257" start="4117" end="4146" title="Ruby (Ruby album)" label="&amp;quot;Ruby&amp;quot; (Ruby album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446555" start="4155" end="4185" title="Ruby (Sirsy album)" label="&amp;quot;Ruby&amp;quot; (Sirsy album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747599" start="4194" end="4289" title="Ruby (Archie Roach, Ruby Hunter, Paul Grabowsky and Australian Art Orchestra album)" label="&amp;quot;Ruby&amp;quot; (Archie Roach, Ruby Hunter, Paul Grabowsky and Australian Art Orchestra album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q131909420" start="4298" end="4329" title="Ruby (Jennie album)" label="&amp;quot;Ruby&amp;quot; (Jennie album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q58811427" start="4344" end="4352" title="The Ruby" label="The Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457868" start="4398" end="4446" title="Ruby (Ruby Gentry theme)" label="&amp;quot;Ruby&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Ruby Gentry&amp;quot; theme)"/>
<link wikidata="Q595623" start="4532" end="4569" title="Ruby (Kaiser Chiefs song)" label="&amp;quot;Ruby&amp;quot; (Kaiser Chiefs song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376232" start="4647" end="4686" title="Ruby, Don&amp;#x27;t Take Your Love to Town" label="Ruby, Don&amp;#x27;t Take Your Love to Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376233" start="4701" end="4723" title="Ruby, Don&amp;#x27;t Take Your Love to Town (album)" label="album of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734124" start="4727" end="4761" title="Kenny Rogers and The First Edition" label="Kenny Rogers and The First Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q108919590" start="4824" end="4831" title="Revenge (Janis Ian album)" label="Revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962329" start="4904" end="4921" title="Sunny Border Blue" label="Sunny Border Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032999" start="4993" end="4997" title="Djin (album)" label="Djin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857806" start="5034" end="5051" title="Twenty One Pilots" label="Twenty One Pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006616" start="5106" end="5125" title="Brother (Boyzone album)" label="&amp;quot;Brother&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576194" start="5186" end="5203" title="Le Sac des Filles" label="Le Sac des Filles"/>
<link wikidata="Q109612" start="5255" end="5270" title="Thelonious Monk" label="Thelonious Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q12581056" start="5342" end="5351" title="Blue Rain (album)" label="Blue Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376260" start="5394" end="5413" title="Ruby (British band)" label="Ruby (British band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171699" start="5453" end="5477" title="Ruby &amp;amp; the Romantics" label="Ruby &amp;amp; the Romantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942184" start="5507" end="5519" title="Ruby Records" label="Ruby Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376265" start="5537" end="5557" title="Ruby (American band)" label="Ruby (American band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734530" start="5605" end="5627" title="Ruby (Egyptian singer)" label="Ruby (Egyptian singer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q339216" start="5711" end="5715" title="King (pop band)" label="KING"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376317" start="5718" end="5728" title="Ruby Frost" label="Ruby Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061262" start="5763" end="5780" title="Ruby (given name)" label="Ruby (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16879845" start="5783" end="5797" title="Ruby (surname)" label="Ruby (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734530" start="5800" end="5822" title="Ruby (Egyptian singer)" label="Ruby (Egyptian singer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509201" start="5825" end="5839" title="Ruby (actress)" label="Ruby (actress)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376262" start="5902" end="5938" title="Ruby (hardware description language)" label="Ruby (hardware description language)"/>
<link wikidata="Q161053" start="5941" end="5968" title="Ruby (programming language)" label="Ruby (programming language)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378" start="6007" end="6029" title="Visual Basic (classic)" label="Visual Basic (classic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446568" start="6032" end="6040" title="Ruby MRI" label="Ruby MRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064154" start="6262" end="6279" title="Ruby (annotation)" label="Ruby (annotation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171701" start="6339" end="6349" title="Ruby (car)" label="Ruby (car)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691480" start="6424" end="6441" title="Ruby (typography)" label="Ruby (typography)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446513" start="6489" end="6501" title="Ruby (color)" label="Ruby (color)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417413" start="6543" end="6557" title="Ruby chocolate" label="Ruby chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376263" start="6560" end="6572" title="Ruby (mango)" label="Ruby (mango)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6660" end="6670" title="Grapefruit#Varieties" label="grapefruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376264" start="6673" end="6688" title="Ruby (elephant)" label="Ruby (elephant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105409630" start="6691" end="6711" title="Rubies (Super Fours)" label="Rubies (Super Fours)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6857" end="6876" title="Disney bomb#After the war" label="bunker-buster bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q868051" start="6879" end="6893" title="Brazilian ruby" label="Brazilian ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q125331647" start="6987" end="7048" title="Alternanthera brasiliana var. villosa" label="&amp;quot;Alternanthera brasiliana&amp;quot; var. &amp;quot;villosa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q725958" start="7112" end="7126" title="Ashley Madison" label="Ashley Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840379" start="7185" end="7209" title="Alternanthera brasiliana" label="Alternanthera brasiliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q104860988" start="7218" end="7245" title="J.W. Ruby Memorial Hospital" label="J.W. Ruby Memorial Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376400" start="7287" end="7312" title="Ruby Tuesday (restaurant)" label="Ruby Tuesday (restaurant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846101" start="7350" end="7375" title="List of storms named Ruby" label="List of storms named Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096610" start="7395" end="7403" title="Rubygate" label="Rubygate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488537" start="7449" end="7460" title="Ruby pistol" label="Ruby pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161318" start="7463" end="7484" title="Rubi (disambiguation)" label="Rubi (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q295582" start="7487" end="7509" title="Rubin (disambiguation)" label="Rubin (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419024" start="7512" end="7526" title="Rubis (rocket)" label="Rubis (rocket)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479326" start="7552" end="7556" title="RWBY" label="RWBY"/>
<link wikidata="Q84000621" start="7589" end="7615" title="Ruby Rose (disambiguation)" label="Ruby Rose (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25609" wikidata="Q854280" url="?curid=25609" title="KTH Royal Institute of Technology">
<text>The KTH Royal Institute of Technology (), abbreviated KTH, is a public research university in Stockholm, Sweden. KTH conducts research and education in engineering and technology and is Sweden&#x27;s largest technical university. Since 2018, KTH consists of five schools with four campuses in and around Stockholm.

KTH was established in 1827 as the &quot;Teknologiska institutet&quot; (Institute of Technology) and had its roots in the &quot;Mekaniska skolan&quot; (School of Mechanics) that was established in 1798 in Stockholm. But the origin of KTH dates back to the predecessor of the &quot;Mekaniska skolan&quot;, the &quot;Laboratorium mechanicum&quot;, which was established in 1697 by the Swedish scientist and innovator Christopher Polhem. The &quot;Laboratorium mechanicum&quot; combined education technology, a laboratory, and an exhibition space for innovations. In 1877, KTH received its current name, &quot;Kungliga Tekniska högskolan&quot; (KTH Royal Institute of Technology). The Swedish king, His Majesty Carl XVI Gustaf, is the patron of KTH.


KTH is ranked 73rd in the world among all universities in the 2024 QS World University Rankings, which is higher than any other university in the Nordic countries.

==History==
KTH&#x27;s earliest Swedish predecessor was the Laboratorium Mechanicum, a collection of mechanical models for teaching created in 1697 by Christopher Polhem. Polhem is considered to be the father of mechanics in Sweden. He founded the laboratorium as a school and research facility in the engineering field of mechanics after his extensive trips, studies and research abroad. The mechanical models that formed the basis of the education were used intermittently for teaching practical mechanics by different masters until the School of Mechanics (&quot;Mekaniska skolan&quot;) was founded in 1798. In 1827 the School of Mechanics was transformed into the Technological Institute (&quot;Teknologiska institutet&quot;), following the establishment of polytechnical schools in many European countries the early years of the 19th century, often based on the model of École polytechnique in Paris.

The institute had one professor in chemistry and one in physics, and one class in mechanical engineering and one in chemical engineering. During the first years, however, teaching was at a very elementary level, and more aimed at craftsmanship rather than engineering as such. The institute was also plagued by conflicts between the faculty and the founder and head of the institute, Gustaf Magnus Schwartz, who was responsible for the artisanal focus of the institute. A government committee was appointed in 1844 to solve the issues, which led to removing Schwartz in 1845. Instead, Joachim Åkerman, the head of the School of Mining in Falun and a former professor of chemistry at KTH, took over. He led a full reorganisation of the institute in 1846–1848, after which he returned to his post in Falun. An entrance test and a minimum age of 16 for students was introduced, which led to creating proper engineering training at the institute. In 1851, the engineering program was extended from two years to three.

In the late 1850s, the institute entered a time of expansion. In 1863, it received its own purpose-built buildings on Drottninggatan. In 1867, its regulations were again overhauled, to state explicitly that the institute should provide scientific training to its students. In 1869, the School of Mining in Falun was moved to Stockholm and merged with the institute. In 1871, the institute took over the civil engineering course formerly arranged by the Higher Artillery College in Marieberg.

In 1877, the name was changed into the current one, which changed KTH&#x27;s status from Institute (&quot;institut&quot;) to College (&quot;högskola&quot;), and some courses were extended from three years to four. Architecture was also added to the curriculum.

In 1915, the degree titles conferred by KTH received legal protection. In the late 19th century, it had become common to use the title &quot;civilingenjör&quot; (literally &quot;civil engineer&quot;) for most KTH-trained engineers, and not just those who studied building and construction-related subjects. The only exception was the mining engineers, which called themselves &quot;bergsingenjör&quot; (&quot;mountain engineer&quot;). For a while, the title &quot;civilingenjör&quot; was equal to &quot;KTH graduate&quot; but in 1937, Chalmers in Gothenburg became the second Swedish engineering college which were allowed to confirm these titles.

In 1917, the first buildings of KTH&#x27;s new campus on Valhallavägen were completed, and still constitute its main campus.

Although the engineering education of the late 19th and early 20th century were scientifically founded, until the early 20th century, research as such was not seen as a central activity of an Institute of Technology. Those engineering graduates who went on to academic research had to earn their doctorates, typically in physics or chemistry, at a regular university. In 1927, KTH was finally granted the right to confer its own doctorates, under the designation &quot;Teknologie doktor&quot; (Doctor of Technology), and the first five doctors were created in 1929.

In 1984, the &quot;civilingenjör&quot; programs at all Swedish universities were extended from four years to 4.5. From 1989, the shorter programs in technology arranged by the municipal polytechnical schools in Sweden was gradually extended and moved into the university system, from 1989 as two-year programs and from 1995 alternatively as three-year programs. For KTH, this meant that additional campuses around the Stockholm area were added.

In the present-day, KTH provides one-third of Sweden&#x27;s research and engineering education. In 2019, there were a total of 13,500 undergraduate students, 1,700 doctoral students, and 3,600 staff members at the university.

===R1 nuclear reactor===
After the American deployment of nuclear weapons at the end of World War II, the Swedish military leadership recognized the need for nuclear weapons to be thoroughly investigated and researched to provide Sweden with the knowledge to defend itself from a nuclear attack. With the mission to &quot;make something with neutrons&quot;, the Swedish team, with scientists like Rolf Maximilian Sievert, set out to research the subject and eventually build a nuclear reactor for testing.

After a few years of basic research, they started building a 300 kW (later expanded to 1 MW) reactor, named &quot;Reaktor 1&quot; (&quot;R1&quot;), in a reactor hall 25 meters under the surface right underneath KTH. Today this might seem ill-considered, since approximately 40,000 people lived within a 1 km radius. It was risky, but was deemed tolerable since the reactor was an important research tool for scientists at the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences (&quot;Ingenjörsvetenskapsakademien&quot;).

At 18:59 on 13 July 1954, the reactor achieved criticality and sustained Sweden&#x27;s first nuclear reaction. R1 was to be the main site for almost all Swedish nuclear research until 1970 when the reactor was finally decommissioned, mostly due to the increased awareness of the risks associated with operating a reactor in a densely populated area of Stockholm.

===Motto===
The motto of KTH, &quot;Vetenskap och konst,&quot; is directly translated as &quot;Science and Art.&quot; Here, the word &quot;konst&quot; (art) does not necessarily refer to creative art as the word typically does in its English usage. Rather, &quot;konst&quot; paired with &quot;vetenskap&quot; (science) more precisely describes the &quot;konst&quot; of putting scientific knowledge into practice; that is, through &quot;ingenjörskonst&quot; (engineering, literally &quot;art of engineering&quot;). Hence, another possible translation of the motto is &quot;Science and the Art of its Application.&quot;

==Schools==
KTH is organized into five schools individually responsible for education and research activities. Each of the schools head a number of departments, centres of excellence, and study programmes. The schools are:

* School of Architecture and the Built Environment
* School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
* School of Engineering Sciences
* School of Engineering Sciences in Chemistry, Biotechnology and Health
* School of Industrial Engineering and Management

==International and national ranking==
=== Overall rankings ===
KTH was 73rd worldwide in the QS WUR 2024, 97th worldwide in the THE WUR 2024, 201–300th worldwide in ARWU 2022, and 207th worldwide in the USNEWS rankings.

KTH was the 138th best-ranked universities worldwide in 2022 in terms of aggregate performance across QS, THE, and ARWU, as reported by ARTU.

It was ranked 3rd in Sweden and 79th worldwide in the Times Higher Education World Reputation Rankings 2025.

===Subject/Area Rankings===
In the QS rankings by subject 2023:

In the Times Higher Education subject rankings 2023:
== Campuses ==

===KTH Campus===
KTH Campus is the main campus of KTH located in the area of Östermalm. The main buildings by architect Erik Lallerstedt, were completed in 1917. The bells of the clock-tower were completed ten years later in 1927 at the 10 year anniversary of the transformation of the School of Mechanics to the Technological Institute. The buildings and surroundings were decorated by prominent early 20th-century Swedish artists such as Carl Milles, Axel Törneman, Georg Pauli, Tore Strindberg and Ivar Johnsson. The older buildings on the campus were renovated heavily in 1994. While the original campus was large at the time of construction, KTH very soon outgrew it, and the campus has since been expanded with new buildings. KTH Campus is still the base for most of the university&#x27;s operations.

===KTH Kista===
In the 1980s, the predecessor to the current School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (at KTH) located some of their operations to a campus in Kista, Stockholm. Kista is situated north of central Stockholm and is Sweden&#x27;s largest corporate center and one of the most important ICT clusters in the world. The area is home to over a thousand companies in the ICT sector, for example Ericsson, Volvo, IBM, Tele2, TietoEnator, Microsoft, Intel and Oracle.

===KTH Flemingsberg===
Since 2002, the current School of Engineering Sciences in Chemistry, Biotechnology and Health (at KTH) has had a part of its activities in Flemingsberg, Stockholm. Flemingsberg is an area of high academic density and one of northern Europe&#x27;s most important areas for biotechnology, both in terms of research and industrial activities. Södertörn University and the Karolinska Institute also conducts education and research in Flemingsberg, often in collaboration with KTH.

===KTH Södertälje===

KTH Södertälje is the southernmost and smallest KTH campus, located in the city of Södertälje. Education at KTH Södertälje is constantly developed via a close co-operation with the town&#x27;s business community and in particular major Södertälje companies such as Scania and AstraZeneca. KTH offers both bachelor&#x27;s and master&#x27;s level courses on the campus, mainly focused on mechanical engineering, logistics, production and product development.

==KTH Library==

The library at the Royal Institute of Technology (&quot;Kungliga Tekniska högskolans bibliotek&quot;, KTHB) is Sweden&#x27;s largest library for technology and basic sciences. The foundation for the library was laid in 1827, when KTH was founded in Stockholm. The main library is located on KTH&#x27;s main campus in central Stockholm. The KTH library is a central academic meeting place at KTH, and an arena for collaboration. The library also has two branch libraries, in Kista and Södertälje.

KTH Library supports the academic and digital skills of students and researchers. The library promotes open access publishing and provides the university with analyses that support and make it easier to make strategic decisions. One of the goals is to increase the awareness of KTH&#x27;s research. The library&#x27;s main purpose is to strengthen the quality of education and research.

===History===

The foundation for the library was created in 1827 when the Institute of Technology was founded in Stockholm. The institute&#x27;s first director, Gustav Magnus Schwartz, made a study trip to France, Germany and England, where he bought books for the institute&#x27;s library. The first collection of 800 books consisted mainly of books on crafts. In 1845, Professor Joachim Åkerman became the institute&#x27;s new director. During his time, the library focused entirely on scientific literature. In 1869, Falu Bergsskola was transferred to the institute, and 2 000 books in metallurgy and chemistry were incorporated into the library collection.

In 2013, KTH library was visited by US president Barack Obama.

===The collections===

The library currently focuses on electronic books and journals, and it is also responsible for the KTH part of DiVA, the institutional repository for research publications, where all KTH publications are collected.
The library has extensive printed collections that have been built up over time. The rare books collection consists of 60,000 volumes from 1827 to 1960 and is located in the main library.

===The building===

The main library is housed in a building from 1917 designed by architect Erik Lallerstedt, who also designed the rest of the university&#x27;s then new campus. 
The building was later rebuilt several times, and in the 1950s the former open courtyard was built in. During the period 2000–2002, the building was rebuilt according to drawings by architect Per Ahrbom. The extension from the 1950s was demolished and a new entrance and office building with a glass facade were erected. 
The courtyard is the library&#x27;s central room, and the rest of the library is grouped around the courtyard. Old facades have been renovated, both towards the courtyard and towards the streets. Inside, the old part of the house has been renovated and regained much of the original architecture.

The renovation and extension of the library has won several architectural awards. In 2004, Per Ahrbom was awarded the &quot;Helgopriset&quot;.

==Directors ==
The title was &quot;överdirektor&quot; first, then &quot;föreståndare&quot; and from the beginning of the 20th century &quot;rektor&quot;.

=== For Teknologiska institutet===
:1825–1845: 
:1845–1848: , (acting)
:1848–1855: 
:1856–1877(1890): 

=== For KTH ===
:(1856)1877–1890: 
:1890–1902: (acting)
:1902–1909: Anders Lindstedt
:1909–1922: 
:1922–1927: 
:1927–1931: 
:1931–1943: Henrik Kreüger
:1942: , (acting)
:1943–1964: 
:1964–1968: 
:1968–1974: 
:1974–1980: 
:1980–1988: 
:1988–1998: 
:1998–2007: Anders Flodström
:2007: 
:2007-2016: 
:2016-2022: Sigbritt Karlsson
:2022 -: Anders Söderholm

==Notable alumni==
Many prominent former students have attended KTH, including;

*Salomon August Andrée, Arctic explorer
*Ernst Alexanderson, inventor
*Joe Armstrong, creator of the programming language Erlang
*Karl Johan Åström, control engineer, IEEE Medal of Honor recipient (1993)
*Kurt Atterberg, composer (graduated 1911)
*Peter Arvai, CEO and co-founder of Prezi, graduated 2006
*Karl-Birger Blomdahl, composer
*Halldóra Briem, architect
*Samir Brikho, chief executive of AMEC
*Georg Theodor von Chiewitz, architect
*Magnus Egerstedt, professor at Georgia Institute of Technology
*Daniel Ek, entrepreneur and technologist who started Spotify (did not graduate)
*Börje Ekholm, previously CEO of Investor AB and after that CEO of Ericsson AB
*Carl Daniel Ekman, pioneer in producing wood pulp for paper
*Erik Engstrom, chief executive of Reed Elsevier
*Knut Frænkel, Arctic explorer
*Christer Fuglesang, ESA astronaut, first Swedish citizen in space, physicist
*Ali Ghodsi, co-founder and CEO of Databricks
*Ivar Jacobson, inventor of sequence diagrams, and Unified Modeling Language (UML)
*Ivar Kreuger, industrialist
*Gustaf Larson, co-founder of Volvo
*Peter Lindgren, former guitarist of Opeth
*Fredrik Ljungström, inventor, KTH Great Prize recipient
*Emma Lundberg, cell biologist, professor at KTH Royal Institute of Technology 
*Dolph Lundgren, actor
*Carl Munters, inventor
*Immanuel Nobel, inventor and industrialist
*Claudia Olsson, founder and CEO of Stellar Capacity
*Helge Palmcrantz, inventor
*Kristin Persson, materials scientist, Founder of The Materials Project
*Baltzar von Platen, inventor
*Maja Reichard, Paralympian
*Tinga Seisay, diplomat
*Max Tegmark, full professor of cosmology at Massachusetts Institute of Technology
*Inger Thorén (née Bildt), Swedish engineer and food chemist, in 1938, the first woman assistant appointed at KTH.
*Almida de Val, Olympian
*Gunnar Widforss, Swedish-American artist
*Greta Woxén (née Westberg) Sweden&#x27;s first female civil engineer when she graduated in 1928.
*Niklas Zennström, co-founder of Skype

==Notable faculty==

*Hannes Alfvén, Nobel Prize laureate and plasma physicist (1908–1995)
*Lennart Carleson, Abel Prize laureate
*Carl-Gunne Fälthammar, plasma physicist
*Hilding Faxén, former professor of mechanics and known for Faxén&#x27;s law in fluid dynamics
*Elena Gutierrez-Farewik, professor of biomechanics
*Sven Ove Hansson
*Johan Håstad, two-time Gödel Prize winner
*Arne Kaijser
*Ari Laptev, professor of mathematics at KTH and chair in pure mathematics at Imperial College London, president of the European Mathematical Society
*Peter Pohl, author and university lecturer in numerical analysis, joint recipient of the 1992 August Prize (&quot;Augustpriset&quot;)
*Kai Siegbahn, Nobel Prize laureate and physicist (1918–2007)
*Stanislav Smirnov, Fields Medal winner
*Subra Suresh, former guest professor, director of the National Science Foundation, professor of engineering at Massachusetts Institute of Technology

==KTH Great Prize==
KTH Great Prize is a prize annually awarded by KTH. The distributed amount was SEK 1,200,000 in 2019.

The prize is awarded to:

* A person who invented significant innovative applications of scientific knowledge in practical areas,
* A person who, through scientific research, found particularly valuable principles or methods useful for applications
* A person who, through artistic efforts, has exercised a powerful influence on the soul and life of people.

The recipient of the award must also be a Swedish citizen. Usually, the prize is awarded to a single prize winner, but it has happened that two or three prize winners have shared the prize. The list of recipients is at KTH:s stora pris.

== International links ==
KTH has been awarded the title &quot;European University&quot; by the European Commission. Together with six other European technical universities, KTH has formed the alliance UNITE! (University Network for Innovation, Technology and Engineering). The aim of the network is to create a trans-European campus, to introduce trans-European curricula, to promote scientific cooperation between the members and to strengthen knowledge transfer between the countries. The alliance includes the Technische Universität Darmstadt, Aalto University, KTH, the Polytechnic University of Turin, the Polytechnic University of Catalonia and the University of Lisbon.

==See also==

*Blandaren
*List of universities in Sweden
*List of forestry universities and colleges
*ESDP-Network
*Top Industrial Managers for Europe

== References ==
==External links==
*KTH Royal Institute of Technology – Obama saw future fuel cell from EE </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q854280" start="4" end="37" title="KTH Royal Institute of Technology" label="KTH Royal Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q854280" start="54" end="57" title="KTH Royal Institute of Technology" label="KTH"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="64" end="70" title="Public university" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="71" end="90" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="94" end="103" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371037" start="152" end="178" title="Institute of technology" label="engineering and technology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="263" end="270" title="#Schools" label="schools"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="281" end="289" title="#Campuses" label="campuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q353693" start="731" end="749" title="Christopher Polhem" label="Christopher Polhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q45068" start="1024" end="1039" title="Carl XVI Gustaf" label="Carl XVI Gustaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790510" start="1132" end="1160" title="QS World University Rankings" label="QS World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="1211" end="1227" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q353693" start="1381" end="1399" title="Christopher Polhem" label="Christopher Polhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q41217" start="1442" end="1451" title="mechanics" label="mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q273626" start="2106" end="2125" title="École polytechnique" label="École polytechnique"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="2172" end="2181" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="2193" end="2200" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q101333" start="2219" end="2241" title="mechanical engineering" label="mechanical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q83588" start="2253" end="2273" title="chemical engineering" label="chemical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q26509" start="2775" end="2780" title="Falun" label="Falun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066219" start="3270" end="3284" title="Drottninggatan, Stockholm" label="Drottninggatan"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="3555" end="3572" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355046" start="3633" end="3642" title="Marieberg, Stockholm" label="Marieberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q836805" start="4442" end="4450" title="Chalmers University of Technology" label="Chalmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="4454" end="4464" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4613" end="4626" title=":sv:Valhallavägen" label="Valhallavägen"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6010" end="6022" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q345283" start="6319" end="6342" title="Rolf Maximilian Sievert" label="Rolf Maximilian Sievert"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="6399" end="6414" title="nuclear reactor" label="nuclear reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394637" start="6855" end="6900" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008131" start="6993" end="7004" title="Criticality (status)" label="criticality"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="7497" end="7509" title="Art" label="creative art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318318" start="8858" end="8883" title="World Reputation Rankings" label="World Reputation Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q298489" start="9102" end="9111" title="Östermalm" label="Östermalm"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9145" end="9161" title=":sv:Erik Lallerstedt (arkitekt)" label="Erik Lallerstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q48548" start="9465" end="9476" title="Carl Milles" label="Carl Milles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353143" start="9478" end="9491" title="Axel Törneman" label="Axel Törneman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381512" start="9493" end="9504" title="Georg Pauli" label="Georg Pauli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436537" start="9506" end="9521" title="Tore Strindberg" label="Tore Strindberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9526" end="9539" title="Ivar Johnsson" label="Ivar Johnsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245744" start="10005" end="10010" title="Kista" label="Kista"/>
<link wikidata="Q52618" start="10248" end="10256" title="Ericsson" label="Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q163810" start="10258" end="10263" title="Volvo" label="Volvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="10265" end="10268" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q309865" start="10270" end="10275" title="Tele2" label="Tele2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423707" start="10277" end="10288" title="TietoEnator" label="TietoEnator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="10290" end="10299" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="10301" end="10306" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19900" start="10311" end="10317" title="Oracle Corporation" label="Oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117115" start="10482" end="10494" title="Flemingsberg" label="Flemingsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110979" start="10683" end="10703" title="Södertörn University" label="Södertörn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q219564" start="10712" end="10732" title="Karolinska Institute" label="Karolinska Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q26518" start="10926" end="10936" title="Södertälje" label="Södertälje"/>
<link wikidata="Q219960" start="11108" end="11114" title="Scania AB" label="Scania"/>
<link wikidata="Q731938" start="11119" end="11130" title="AstraZeneca" label="AstraZeneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q491167" start="14629" end="14645" title="Anders Lindstedt" label="Anders Lindstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5716397" start="14697" end="14711" title="Henrik Kreüger" label="Henrik Kreüger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753775" start="14820" end="14836" title="Anders Flodström" label="Anders Flodström"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958171" start="14870" end="14887" title="Sigbritt Karlsson" label="Sigbritt Karlsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753936" start="14897" end="14913" title="Anders Söderholm" label="Anders Söderholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q350420" start="14997" end="15018" title="Salomon August Andrée" label="Salomon August Andrée"/>
<link wikidata="Q472510" start="15037" end="15055" title="Ernst Alexanderson" label="Ernst Alexanderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691321" start="15067" end="15080" title="Joe Armstrong (Programming)" label="Joe Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q334879" start="15118" end="15124" title="Erlang (programming language)" label="Erlang"/>
<link wikidata="Q462685" start="15126" end="15143" title="Karl Johan Åström" label="Karl Johan Åström"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917288" start="15145" end="15161" title="control engineer" label="control engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q678414" start="15163" end="15182" title="IEEE Medal of Honor" label="IEEE Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q440388" start="15201" end="15215" title="Kurt Atterberg" label="Kurt Atterberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172567" start="15244" end="15255" title="Peter Arvai" label="Peter Arvai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208405" start="15302" end="15322" title="Karl-Birger Blomdahl" label="Karl-Birger Blomdahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q28382429" start="15334" end="15348" title="Halldóra Briem" label="Halldóra Briem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409488" start="15361" end="15373" title="Samir Brikho" label="Samir Brikho"/>
<link wikidata="Q295118" start="15394" end="15398" title="AMEC" label="AMEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q287270" start="15400" end="15426" title="Georg Theodor von Chiewitz" label="Georg Theodor von Chiewitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732087" start="15439" end="15455" title="Magnus Egerstedt" label="Magnus Egerstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q864855" start="15470" end="15501" title="Georgia Institute of Technology" label="Georgia Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q901670" start="15503" end="15512" title="Daniel Ek" label="Daniel Ek"/>
<link wikidata="Q689141" start="15556" end="15563" title="Spotify" label="Spotify"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629910" start="15584" end="15596" title="Börje Ekholm" label="Börje Ekholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671804" start="15616" end="15627" title="Investor AB" label="Investor AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q52618" start="15650" end="15658" title="Ericsson" label="Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040021" start="15663" end="15680" title="Carl Daniel Ekman" label="Carl Daniel Ekman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5388565" start="15724" end="15737" title="Erik Engstrom" label="Erik Engstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q998470" start="15758" end="15771" title="Reed Elsevier" label="Reed Elsevier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341315" start="15773" end="15785" title="Knut Frænkel" label="Knut Frænkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q317382" start="15804" end="15822" title="Christer Fuglesang" label="Christer Fuglesang"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016890" start="15882" end="15892" title="Ali Ghodsi" label="Ali Ghodsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350420" start="15916" end="15926" title="Databricks" label="Databricks"/>
<link wikidata="Q92857" start="15928" end="15941" title="Ivar Jacobson" label="Ivar Jacobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391624" start="15955" end="15971" title="sequence diagram" label="sequence diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q169411" start="15978" end="16003" title="Unified Modeling Language" label="Unified Modeling Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q703091" start="16011" end="16023" title="Ivar Kreuger" label="Ivar Kreuger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393629" start="16040" end="16053" title="Gustaf Larson" label="Gustaf Larson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014441" start="16076" end="16090" title="Peter Lindgren (musician)" label="Peter Lindgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q18557" start="16112" end="16117" title="Opeth" label="Opeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453287" start="16119" end="16137" title="Fredrik Ljungström" label="Fredrik Ljungström"/>
<link wikidata="Q88816458" start="16176" end="16189" title="Emma Lundberg (scientist)" label="Emma Lundberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q181678" start="16256" end="16270" title="Dolph Lundgren" label="Dolph Lundgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q389828" start="16279" end="16291" title="Carl Munters" label="Carl Munters"/>
<link wikidata="Q726590" start="16303" end="16317" title="Immanuel Nobel" label="Immanuel Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q54357947" start="16347" end="16361" title="Claudia Olsson" label="Claudia Olsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5704564" start="16400" end="16416" title="Helge Palmcrantz" label="Helge Palmcrantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q58678819" start="16428" end="16443" title="Kristin Persson" label="Kristin Persson"/>
<link wikidata="Q105085929" start="16481" end="16498" title="Materials Project" label="Materials Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q805827" start="16500" end="16518" title="Baltzar von Platen (1898-1984)" label="Baltzar von Platen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974360" start="16530" end="16543" title="Maja Reichard" label="Maja Reichard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808119" start="16558" end="16570" title="Tinga Seisay" label="Tinga Seisay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076321" start="16582" end="16593" title="Max Tegmark" label="Max Tegmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="16613" end="16622" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="16626" end="16663" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q90495317" start="16665" end="16677" title="Inger Thorén" label="Inger Thorén"/>
<link wikidata="Q56451491" start="16780" end="16793" title="Almida de Val" label="Almida de Val"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619161" start="16805" end="16820" title="Gunnar Widforss" label="Gunnar Widforss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4990733" start="16847" end="16858" title="Greta Woxén" label="Greta Woxén"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582652" start="16901" end="16915" title="civil engineer" label="civil engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q92634" start="16945" end="16961" title="Niklas Zennström" label="Niklas Zennström"/>
<link wikidata="Q54945" start="17006" end="17019" title="Hannes Alfvén" label="Hannes Alfvén"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="17021" end="17032" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q343420" start="17076" end="17092" title="Lennart Carleson" label="Lennart Carleson"/>
<link wikidata="Q188184" start="17094" end="17104" title="Abel Prize" label="Abel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039762" start="17115" end="17136" title="Carl-Gunne Fälthammar" label="Carl-Gunne Fälthammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726562" start="17156" end="17169" title="Hilding Faxén" label="Hilding Faxén"/>
<link wikidata="Q73706100" start="17251" end="17274" title="Elena Gutierrez-Farewik" label="Elena Gutierrez-Farewik"/>
<link wikidata="Q5789676" start="17303" end="17319" title="Sven Ove Hansson" label="Sven Ove Hansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q92756" start="17321" end="17333" title="Johan Håstad" label="Johan Håstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417143" start="17344" end="17355" title="Gödel Prize" label="Gödel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794599" start="17364" end="17376" title="Arne Kaijser" label="Arne Kaijser"/>
<link wikidata="Q653786" start="17378" end="17388" title="Ari Laptev" label="Ari Laptev"/>
<link wikidata="Q189022" start="17455" end="17478" title="Imperial College London" label="Imperial College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376788" start="17497" end="17526" title="European Mathematical Society" label="European Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462615" start="17528" end="17538" title="Peter Pohl" label="Peter Pohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569495" start="17551" end="17570" title="university lecturer" label="university lecturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11216" start="17574" end="17592" title="numerical analysis" label="numerical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192712" start="17663" end="17675" title="Kai Siegbahn" label="Kai Siegbahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="17677" end="17688" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q333948" start="17725" end="17742" title="Stanislav Smirnov" label="Stanislav Smirnov"/>
<link wikidata="Q28835" start="17744" end="17756" title="Fields Medal" label="Fields Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q68711545" start="17765" end="17777" title="Subra Suresh" label="Subra Suresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="17819" end="17846" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="17876" end="17913" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18616" end="18632" title=":sv:KTH:s stora pris" label="KTH:s stora pris"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="18731" end="18750" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q310695" start="19149" end="19181" title="Technische Universität Darmstadt" label="Technische Universität Darmstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q300980" start="19183" end="19199" title="Aalto University" label="Aalto University"/>
<link wikidata="Q392897" start="19210" end="19241" title="Polytechnic University of Turin" label="Polytechnic University of Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640731" start="19247" end="19282" title="Polytechnic University of Catalonia" label="Polytechnic University of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122926" start="19291" end="19311" title="University of Lisbon" label="University of Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10430942" start="19329" end="19338" title="Blandaren" label="Blandaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853405" start="19340" end="19370" title="List of universities in Sweden" label="List of universities in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621074" start="19372" end="19414" title="List of forestry universities and colleges" label="List of forestry universities and colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413239" start="19416" end="19428" title="ESDP-Network" label="ESDP-Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351882" start="19430" end="19464" title="Top Industrial Managers for Europe" label="Top Industrial Managers for Europe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25610" wikidata="Q7315043" url="?curid=25610" title="Rescuing Prometheus">
<text>Rescuing Prometheus: Four Monumental Projects That Changed the Modern World (1998) is a book by Thomas P. Hughes. The book uses four extremely large engineering projects of the late 20th century as examples to explore how the limits of modern system engineering are stressed by real life projects. It also traces the development of the management of large technical system development.

The book documents four massively-cooperative projects:

* Semi-Automatic Ground Environment (SAGE), a computer- and radar-based air-defense system
* The Atlas project, which produced America&#x27;s first ICBM
* Boston&#x27;s Central Artery/Tunnel Project, a traffic-unclogging system of highways, tunnels and bridges originally scheduled for completion in 2004
* ARPANET, an interactive computer-based information network that paved the way for the Internet

==See also ==
*Large Technical System

==References==

*&quot;Rescuing Prometheus: Four Monumental Projects That Changed the Modern World&quot; () by Thomas P. Hughes, 2000.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3525467" start="96" end="112" title="Thomas P. Hughes" label="Thomas P. Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q682496" start="243" end="261" title="system engineering" label="system engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935523" start="446" end="479" title="Semi-Automatic Ground Environment" label="Semi-Automatic Ground Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578232" start="541" end="546" title="Atlas (missile)" label="Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="592" end="596" title="ICBM" label="ICBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="599" end="605" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q858785" start="613" end="642" title="Central Artery/Tunnel Project" label="Central Artery/Tunnel Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q177524" start="751" end="758" title="ARPANET" label="ARPANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274827" start="862" end="884" title="Large Technical System" label="Large Technical System"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25611" wikidata="Q965439" url="?curid=25611" title="Riddarfjärden">
<text>Riddarfjärden (, &quot;The Knight Firth&quot;) is the easternmost bay of Lake Mälaren in central Stockholm. Stockholm was founded in 1252 on an island in the stream where Lake Mälaren (from the west) drains into the Baltic Sea (to the east); today the island is called Stadsholmen and constitutes Stockholm&#x27;s Old Town.

The panorama picture featured in this article was taken from the heights of Södermalm, west of Stadsholmen, looking down on Riddarfjärden. Left to right are viewable:
* Västerbron bridge
* Kungsholmen Island
* Stockholm City Hall, a red brick building with a bell tower, where the Nobel Prize dinner is served
* The tower of Klara Kyrka on Norrmalm, with its green copper roof
* five white sky scrapers between Sergels torg and Hötorget
* construction cranes
* iron tower of Riddarholmen Church on Riddarholmen Island
* yellow tower of Storkyrkan on Stadsholmen, in front of the flat roof of the Stockholm Palace
* narrow tower of Tyska Kyrkan on Stadsholmen
* distant radio and TV tower Kaknästornet

==Seasons==
Riddarfjärden throughout the year.
== See also ==
* Geography of Stockholm

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q965439" start="0" end="13" title="Riddarfjärden" label="Riddarfjärden"/>
<link wikidata="Q184492" start="73" end="85" title="Mälaren" label="Lake Mälaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="97" end="106" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="216" end="226" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284547" start="269" end="280" title="Stadsholmen" label="Stadsholmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q579854" start="297" end="322" title="Gamla stan" label="Stockholm&amp;#x27;s Old Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q41363" start="329" end="337" title="panorama" label="panorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q740149" start="401" end="410" title="Södermalm" label="Södermalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q580518" start="494" end="504" title="Västerbron" label="Västerbron"/>
<link wikidata="Q666729" start="514" end="525" title="Kungsholmen" label="Kungsholmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q648483" start="535" end="554" title="Stockholm City Hall" label="Stockholm City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="606" end="617" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="650" end="661" title="Klara Kyrka" label="Klara Kyrka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026676" start="665" end="673" title="Norrmalm" label="Norrmalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q844426" start="736" end="748" title="Sergels torg" label="Sergels torg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608760" start="753" end="761" title="Hötorget" label="Hötorget"/>
<link wikidata="Q657118" start="800" end="819" title="Riddarholmen Church" label="Riddarholmen Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q904462" start="823" end="835" title="Riddarholmen" label="Riddarholmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q750444" start="921" end="937" title="Stockholm Palace" label="Stockholm Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284547" start="972" end="983" title="Stadsholmen" label="Stadsholmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721899" start="1013" end="1025" title="Kaknästornet" label="Kaknästornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q278367" start="1091" end="1113" title="Geography of Stockholm" label="Geography of Stockholm"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25612" wikidata="Q218825" url="?curid=25612" title="Random access">
<text>Random access (also called direct access) is the ability to access an arbitrary element of a sequence in equal time or any datum from a population of addressable elements roughly as easily and efficiently as any other, no matter how many elements may be in the set. In computer science it is typically contrasted to sequential access which requires data to be retrieved in the order it was stored.

For example, data might be stored notionally in a single sequence like a row, in two dimensions like rows and columns on a surface, or in multiple dimensions. However, given all the coordinates, a program can access each record about as quickly and easily as any other. In this sense, the choice of datum is arbitrary in the sense that no matter which item is sought, all that is needed to find it is its address, i.e. the coordinates at which it is located, such as its row and column (or its track and record number on a magnetic drum). At first, the term &quot;random access&quot; was used because the process had to be capable of finding records no matter in which sequence they were required. However, soon the term &quot;direct access&quot; gained favour because one could directly retrieve a record, no matter what its position might be. The operative attribute, however, is that the device can access any required record immediately on demand. The opposite is sequential access, where a remote element takes longer time to access.

A typical illustration of this distinction is to compare an ancient scroll (sequential; all material prior to the data needed must be unrolled) and the book (direct: can be immediately flipped open to any arbitrary page). A more modern example is a cassette tape (sequential — one must fast forward through earlier songs to get to later ones) and a CD (direct access — one can skip to the track wanted, knowing that it would be the one retrieved).

In data structures, direct access implies the ability to access any entry in a list in constant time (independent of its position in the list and of the list&#x27;s size). Very few data structures can make this guarantee other than arrays (and related structures like dynamic arrays). Direct access is required, or at least valuable, in many algorithms such as binary search, integer sorting, or certain versions of sieve of Eratosthenes.

Other data structures, such as linked lists, sacrifice direct access to permit efficient inserts, deletes, or re-ordering of data. Self-balancing binary search trees may provide an acceptable compromise, where access time is not equal for all members of a collection, but the maximum time to retrieve a given member grows only logarithmically with its size.

==References==
== See also ==
*Data stream
*Random-access machine
*Random-access memory although the cache and virtual memory make this no longer truly random access.
*Locality of reference</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q218825" start="0" end="13" title="Random access" label="Random access"/>
<link wikidata="Q218825" start="27" end="40" title="Random access" label="direct access"/>
<link wikidata="Q367204" start="150" end="161" title="Address space" label="addressable"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="269" end="285" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067705" start="316" end="333" title="sequential access" label="sequential access"/>
<link wikidata="Q908463" start="922" end="935" title="Drum memory" label="magnetic drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067705" start="1367" end="1384" title="sequential access" label="sequential access"/>
<link wikidata="Q720106" start="1507" end="1513" title="scroll (parchment)" label="scroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q571" start="1591" end="1595" title="book" label="book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069725" start="1654" end="1658" title="page (paper)" label="page"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="1788" end="1790" title="CD" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q175263" start="1891" end="1905" title="data structure" label="data structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q27948" start="1967" end="1971" title="List (computing)" label="list"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393193" start="1975" end="1988" title="constant time" label="constant time"/>
<link wikidata="Q186152" start="2120" end="2125" title="array data structure" label="array"/>
<link wikidata="Q128555" start="2156" end="2169" title="dynamic array" label="dynamic array"/>
<link wikidata="Q243754" start="2249" end="2262" title="binary search" label="binary search"/>
<link wikidata="Q13407970" start="2264" end="2279" title="integer sorting" label="integer sorting"/>
<link wikidata="Q177898" start="2304" end="2325" title="sieve of Eratosthenes" label="sieve of Eratosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003418" start="2359" end="2370" title="linked list" label="linked list"/>
<link wikidata="Q245955" start="2459" end="2492" title="Self-balancing binary search tree" label="Self-balancing binary search tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="2655" end="2670" title="logarithmically" label="logarithmically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172540" start="2718" end="2729" title="Data stream" label="Data stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565212" start="2731" end="2752" title="Random-access machine" label="Random-access machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="2754" end="2774" title="Random-access memory" label="Random-access memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q165596" start="2788" end="2793" title="cache (computing)" label="cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q189401" start="2798" end="2812" title="virtual memory" label="virtual memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868547" start="2855" end="2876" title="Locality of reference" label="Locality of reference"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="25613" wikidata="Q8461" url="?curid=25613" title="Racism">
<text>Racism is the belief that groups of humans possess different behavioral traits corresponding to inherited attributes and can be divided based on the superiority of one race or ethnicity over another. It may also mean prejudice, discrimination, or antagonism directed against other people because they are of a different ethnic background. Modern variants of racism are often based in social perceptions of biological differences between peoples. These views can take the form of social actions, practices or beliefs, or political systems in which different races are ranked as inherently superior or inferior to each other, based on presumed shared inheritable traits, abilities, or qualities. There have been attempts to legitimize racist beliefs through scientific means, such as scientific racism, which have been overwhelmingly shown to be unfounded. In terms of political systems (e.g. apartheid) that support the expression of prejudice or aversion in discriminatory practices or laws, racist ideology may include associated social aspects such as nativism, xenophobia, otherness, segregation, hierarchical ranking, and supremacism.

While the concepts of race and ethnicity are considered to be separate in contemporary social science, the two terms have a long history of equivalence in popular usage and older social science literature. &quot;Ethnicity&quot; is often used in a sense close to one traditionally attributed to &quot;race&quot;, the division of human groups based on qualities assumed to be essential or innate to the group (e.g. shared ancestry or shared behavior). &quot;Racism&quot; and &quot;racial discrimination&quot; are often used to describe discrimination on an ethnic or cultural basis, independent of whether these differences are described as racial. According to the United Nations&#x27;s Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, there is no distinction between the terms &quot;racial&quot; and &quot;ethnic&quot; discrimination. It further concludes that superiority based on racial differentiation is scientifically false, morally condemnable, socially unjust, and dangerous. The convention also declared that there is no justification for racial discrimination, anywhere, in theory or in practice.

Racism is frequently described as a relatively modern concept, evolving during the European age of imperialism, transformed by capitalism, and the Atlantic slave trade, of which it was a major driving force. It was also a major force behind racial segregation in the United States in the 19th and early 20th centuries, and of apartheid in South Africa; 19th and 20th-century racism in Western culture is particularly well documented and constitutes a reference point in studies and discourses about racism. Racism has played a role in genocides such as the Holocaust, the Armenian genocide, the Rwandan genocide, and the Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia, as well as colonial projects including the European colonization of the Americas, Africa, Asia, and the population transfer in the Soviet Union including deportations of indigenous minorities. Indigenous peoples have been—and are—often subject to racist attitudes.

== Etymology, definition, and usage ==
In the 19th century, many scientists subscribed to the belief that the human population can be divided into races. The term &quot;racism&quot; is a noun describing the state of being racist, i.e., subscribing to the belief that the human population can or should be classified into races with differential abilities and dispositions, which in turn may motivate a political ideology in which rights and privileges are differentially distributed based on racial categories. The term &quot;racist&quot; may be an adjective or a noun, the latter describing a person who holds those beliefs. The origin of the root word &quot;race&quot; is not clear. Linguists generally agree that it came to the English language from Middle French, but there is no such agreement on how it generally came into Latin-based languages. A recent proposal is that it derives from the Arabic &quot;ra&#x27;s&quot;, which means &quot;head, beginning, origin&quot; or the Hebrew &quot;rosh&quot;, which has a similar meaning. Early race theorists generally held the view that some races were inferior to others and they consequently believed that the differential treatment of races was fully justified. These early theories guided pseudo-scientific research assumptions; the collective endeavors to adequately define and form hypotheses about racial differences are generally termed scientific racism, though this term is a misnomer, due to the lack of any actual science backing the claims.

Most biologists, anthropologists, and sociologists reject a taxonomy of races in favor of more specific and/or empirically verifiable criteria, such as geography, ethnicity, or a history of endogamy. Human genome research indicates that race is not a meaningful genetic classification of humans.

An entry in the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; (2008) defines racialism as &quot;[a]n earlier term than racism, but now largely superseded by it&quot;, and cites the term &quot;racialism&quot; in a 1902 quote. The revised &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; cites the shorter term &quot;racism&quot; in a quote from the year 1903. It was defined by the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; (2nd edition 1989) as &quot;[t]he theory that distinctive human characteristics and abilities are determined by race&quot;; the same dictionary termed &quot;racism&quot; a synonym of &quot;racialism&quot;: &quot;belief in the superiority of a particular race&quot;. By the end of World War II, &quot;racism&quot; had acquired the same supremacist connotations formerly associated with &quot;racialism&quot;: &quot;racism&quot; by then implied racial discrimination, racial supremacism, and a harmful intent. The term &quot;race hatred&quot; had also been used by sociologist Frederick Hertz in the late 1920s.

As its history indicates, the popular use of the word &quot;racism&quot; is relatively recent. The word came into widespread usage in the Western world in the 1930s, when it was used to describe the social and political ideology of Nazism, which treated &quot;race&quot; as a naturally given political unit. It is commonly agreed that racism existed before the coinage of the word, but there is not a wide agreement on a single definition of what racism is and what it is not. Today, some scholars of racism prefer to use the concept in the plural &quot;racisms&quot;, in order to emphasize its many different forms that do not easily fall under a single definition. They also argue that different forms of racism have characterized different historical periods and geographical areas. Garner (2009: p. 11) summarizes different existing definitions of racism and identifies three common elements contained in those definitions of racism. First, a historical, hierarchical power relationship between groups; second, a set of ideas (an ideology) about racial differences; and, third, discriminatory actions (practices).

=== Legal ===
Though many countries around the globe have passed laws related to race and discrimination, the first significant international human rights instrument developed by the United Nations (UN) was the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), which was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 1948. The UDHR recognizes that if people are to be treated with dignity, they require economic rights, social rights including education, and the rights to cultural and political participation and civil liberty. It further states that everyone is entitled to these rights &quot;without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status&quot;.

The UN does not define &quot;racism&quot;; however, it does define &quot;racial discrimination&quot;. According to the 1965 UN International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,

The term &quot;racial discrimination&quot; shall mean any distinction, exclusion, restriction, or preference based on race, colour, descent, or national or ethnic origin that has the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal footing, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural or any other field of public life.
In their 1978 United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Declaration on Race and Racial Prejudice (Article 1), the UN states, &quot;All human beings belong to a single species and are descended from a common stock. They are born equal in dignity and rights and all form an integral part of humanity.&quot;

The UN definition of racial discrimination does not make any distinction between discrimination based on ethnicity and race, in part because the distinction between the two has been a matter of debate among academics, including anthropologists. Similarly, in British law, the phrase &quot;racial group&quot; means &quot;any group of people who are defined by reference to their race, colour, nationality (including citizenship) or ethnic or national origin&quot;.

In Norway, the word &quot;race&quot; has been removed from national laws concerning discrimination because the use of the phrase is considered problematic and unethical. The Norwegian Anti-Discrimination Act bans discrimination based on ethnicity, national origin, descent, and skin color.

=== Social and behavioral sciences ===
Sociologists, in general, recognize &quot;race&quot; as a social construct. This means that, although the concepts of race and racism are based on observable biological characteristics, any conclusions drawn about race on the basis of those observations are heavily influenced by cultural ideologies. Racism, as an ideology, exists in a society at both the individual and institutional level.

While much of the research and work on racism during the last half-century or so has concentrated on &quot;white racism&quot; in the Western world, historical accounts of race-based social practices can be found across the globe. Thus, racism can be broadly defined to encompass individual and group prejudices and acts of discrimination that result in material and cultural advantages conferred on a majority or a dominant social group. So-called &quot;white racism&quot; focuses on societies in which white populations are the majority or the dominant social group. In studies of these majority white societies, the aggregate of material and cultural advantages is usually termed &quot;white privilege&quot;.

Race and race relations are prominent areas of study in sociology and economics. Much of the sociological literature focuses on white racism. Some of the earliest sociological works on racism were written by sociologist W. E. B. Du Bois, the first African American to earn a doctoral degree from Harvard University. Du Bois wrote, &quot;[t]he problem of the twentieth century is the problem of the color line.&quot; Wellman (1993) defines racism as &quot;culturally sanctioned beliefs, which, regardless of intentions involved, defend the advantages whites have because of the subordinated position of racial minorities&quot;. In both sociology and economics, the outcomes of racist actions are often measured by the inequality in income, wealth, net worth, and access to other cultural resources (such as education), between racial groups.

In sociology and social psychology, racial identity and the acquisition of that identity, is often used as a variable in racism studies. Racial ideologies and racial identity affect individuals&#x27; perception of race and discrimination. Cazenave and Maddern (1999) define racism as &quot;a highly organized system of &#x27;race&#x27;-based group privilege that operates at every level of society and is held together by a sophisticated ideology of color/&#x27;race&#x27; supremacy. Racial centrality (the extent to which a culture recognizes individuals&#x27; racial identity) appears to affect the degree of discrimination African-American young adults perceive whereas racial ideology may buffer the detrimental emotional effects of that discrimination.&quot; Sellers and Shelton (2003) found that a relationship between racial discrimination and emotional distress was moderated by racial ideology and social beliefs.

Some sociologists also argue that, particularly in the West, where racism is often negatively sanctioned in society, racism has changed from being a blatant to a more covert expression of racial prejudice. The &quot;newer&quot; (more hidden and less easily detectable) forms of racism—which can be considered embedded in social processes and structures—are more difficult to explore and challenge. It has been suggested that, while in many countries overt or explicit racism has become increasingly taboo, even among those who display egalitarian explicit attitudes, an implicit or aversive racism is still maintained subconsciously.

This process has been studied extensively in social psychology as implicit associations and implicit attitudes, a component of implicit cognition. Implicit attitudes are evaluations that occur without conscious awareness towards an attitude object or the self. These evaluations are generally either favorable or unfavorable. They come about from various influences in the individual experience. Implicit attitudes are not consciously identified (or they are inaccurately identified) traces of past experience that mediate favorable or unfavorable feelings, thoughts, or actions towards social objects. These feelings, thoughts, or actions have an influence on behavior of which the individual may not be aware.

Therefore, subconscious racism can influence our visual processing and how our minds work when we are subliminally exposed to faces of different colors. In thinking about crime, for example, social psychologist Jennifer L. Eberhardt (2004) of Stanford University holds that, &quot;blackness is so associated with crime you&#x27;re ready to pick out these crime objects.&quot; Such exposures influence our minds and they can cause subconscious racism in our behavior towards other people or even towards objects. Thus, racist thoughts and actions can arise from stereotypes and fears of which we are not aware. For example, scientists and activists have warned that the use of the stereotype &quot;Nigerian Prince&quot; for referring to advance-fee scammers is racist, i.e. &quot;reducing Nigeria to a nation of scammers and fraudulent princes, as some people still do online, is a stereotype that needs to be called out&quot;.

=== Humanities ===
Language, linguistics, and discourse are active areas of study in the humanities, along with literature and the arts. Discourse analysis seeks to reveal the meaning of race and the actions of racists through careful study of the ways in which these factors of human society are described and discussed in various written and oral works. For example, Van Dijk (1992) examines the different ways in which descriptions of racism and racist actions are depicted by the perpetrators of such actions as well as by their victims. He notes that when descriptions of actions have negative implications for the majority, and especially for white elites, they are often seen as controversial and such controversial interpretations are typically marked with quotation marks or they are greeted with expressions of distance or doubt. The previously cited book, &quot;The Souls of Black Folk&quot; by W.E.B. Du Bois, represents early African-American literature that describes the author&#x27;s experiences with racism when he was traveling in the South as an African American.

Much American fictional literature has focused on issues of racism and the black &quot;racial experience&quot; in the US, including works written by whites, such as &quot;Uncle Tom&#x27;s Cabin&quot;, &quot;To Kill a Mockingbird&quot;, and &quot;Imitation of Life&quot;, or even the non-fiction work &quot;Black Like Me&quot;. These books, and others like them, feed into what has been called the &quot;white savior narrative in film&quot;, in which the heroes and heroines are white even though the story is about things that happen to black characters. Textual analysis of such writings can contrast sharply with black authors&#x27; descriptions of African Americans and their experiences in US society. African-American writers have sometimes been portrayed in African-American studies as retreating from racial issues when they write about &quot;whiteness&quot;, while others identify this as an African-American literary tradition called &quot;the literature of white estrangement&quot;, part of a multi-pronged effort to challenge and dismantle white supremacy in the US.

=== Popular usage ===
According to dictionary definitions, racism is prejudice and discrimination based on race.

Racism can also be said to describe a condition in society in which a dominant racial group benefits from the oppression of others, whether that group wants such benefits or not. Foucauldian scholar Ladelle McWhorter, in her 2009 book, &quot;Racism and Sexual Oppression in Anglo-America: A Genealogy&quot;, posits modern racism similarly, focusing on the notion of a dominant group, usually whites, vying for racial purity and progress, rather than an overt or obvious ideology focused on the oppression of nonwhites.

In popular usage, as in some academic usage, little distinction is made between &quot;racism&quot; and &quot;ethnocentrism&quot;. Often, the two are listed together as &quot;racial and ethnic&quot; in describing some action or outcome that is associated with prejudice within a majority or dominant group in society. Furthermore, the meaning of the term racism is often conflated with the terms prejudice, bigotry, and discrimination. Racism is a complex concept that can involve each of those; but it cannot be equated with, nor is it synonymous, with these other terms.

The term is often used in relation to what is seen as prejudice within a minority or subjugated group, as in the concept of reverse racism. &quot;Reverse racism&quot; is a concept often used to describe acts of discrimination or hostility against members of a dominant racial or ethnic group while favoring members of minority groups. This concept has been used especially in the United States in debates over color-conscious policies (such as affirmative action) intended to remedy racial inequalities. However, many experts and other commenters view reverse racism as a myth rather than a reality.

Some academics use a new stipulative definition of racism, seeing racism not only in terms of individual prejudice, but also seeing it in terms of a power structure that protects the interests of the dominant culture and actively discriminates against ethnic minorities. From this newly defined perspective, while members of ethnic minorities may be prejudiced against members of the dominant culture, they lack the political and economic power to actively oppress them, and they are therefore not practicing the &quot;Prejudice plus power&quot; definition of racism.

== Aspects ==

The ideology underlying racism can manifest in many aspects of social life. Such aspects are described in this section, although the list is not exhaustive.

=== Aversive racism ===
Aversive racism is a form of implicit racism, in which a person&#x27;s unconscious negative evaluations of racial or ethnic minorities are realized by a persistent avoidance of interaction with other racial and ethnic groups. As opposed to traditional, overt racism, which is characterized by overt hatred for and explicit discrimination against racial/ethnic minorities, aversive racism is characterized by more complex, ambivalent expressions and attitudes. Aversive racism is similar in implications to the concept of symbolic or modern racism (described below), which is also a form of implicit, unconscious, or covert attitude which results in unconscious forms of discrimination.

The term was coined by Joel Kovel to describe the subtle racial behaviors of any ethnic or racial group who rationalize their aversion to a particular group by appeal to rules or stereotypes. People who behave in an aversively racial way may profess egalitarian beliefs, and will often deny their racially motivated behavior; nevertheless they change their behavior when dealing with a member of another race or ethnic group than the one they belong to. The motivation for the change is thought to be implicit or subconscious. Experiments have provided empirical support for the existence of aversive racism. Aversive racism has been shown to have potentially serious implications for decision making in employment, in legal decisions and in helping behavior.

=== Color blindness ===
In relation to racism, color blindness is the disregard of racial characteristics in social interaction, for example in the rejection of affirmative action, as a way to address the results of past patterns of discrimination. Critics of this attitude argue that by refusing to attend to racial disparities, racial color blindness in fact unconsciously perpetuates the patterns that produce racial inequality.

Eduardo Bonilla-Silva argues that color blind racism arises from an &quot;abstract liberalism, biologization of culture, naturalization of racial matters, and minimization of racism&quot;. Color blind practices are &quot;subtle, institutional, and apparently nonracial&quot; because race is explicitly ignored in decision-making. If race is disregarded in predominantly white populations, for example, whiteness becomes the normative standard, whereas people of color are othered, and the racism these individuals experience may be minimized or erased. At an individual level, people with &quot;color blind prejudice&quot; reject racist ideology, but also reject systemic policies intended to fix institutional racism.

=== Cultural ===

Cultural racism manifests as societal beliefs and customs that promote the assumption that the products of a given culture, including the language and traditions of that culture, are superior to those of other cultures. It shares a great deal with xenophobia, which is often characterized by fear of, or aggression toward, members of an outgroup by members of an ingroup.
In that sense it is also similar to communalism as used in South Asia.

Cultural racism exists when there is a widespread acceptance of stereotypes concerning diverse ethnic or population groups. Whereas racism can be characterised by the belief that one race is inherently superior to another, cultural racism can be characterised by the belief that one culture is inherently superior to another.

=== Economic ===

Historical economic or social disparity is alleged to be a form of discrimination caused by past racism and historical reasons, affecting the present generation through deficits in the formal education and kinds of preparation in previous generations, and through primarily unconscious racist attitudes and actions on members of the general population. Some view that capitalism generally transformed racism depending on local circumstances, but racism is not necessary for capitalism. Economic discrimination may lead to choices that perpetuate racism. For example, color photographic film was tuned for white skin as are automatic soap dispensers and facial recognition systems.

=== Institutional ===

Institutional racism (also known as structural racism, state racism or systemic racism) is racial discrimination by governments, corporations, religions, or educational institutions or other large organizations with the power to influence the lives of many individuals. Stokely Carmichael is credited for coining the phrase &quot;institutional racism&quot; in the late 1960s. He defined the term as &quot;the collective failure of an organization to provide an appropriate and professional service to people because of their colour, culture or ethnic origin&quot;.

Maulana Karenga argued that racism constituted the destruction of culture, language, religion, and human possibility and that the effects of racism were &quot;the morally monstrous destruction of human possibility involved redefining African humanity to the world, poisoning past, present and future relations with others who only know us through this stereotyping and thus damaging the truly human relations among peoples&quot;.

=== Othering ===

Othering is the term used by some to describe a system of discrimination whereby the characteristics of a group are used to distinguish them as separate from the norm.

Othering plays a fundamental role in the history and continuation of racism. To objectify a culture as something different, exotic or underdeveloped is to generalize that it is not like &#x27;normal&#x27; society. Europe&#x27;s colonial attitude towards the Orientals exemplifies this as it was thought that the East was the opposite of the West; feminine where the West was masculine, weak where the West was strong and traditional where the West was progressive. By making these generalizations and othering the East, Europe was simultaneously defining herself as the norm, further entrenching the gap.

Much of the process of othering relies on imagined difference, or the expectation of difference. Spatial difference can be enough to conclude that &quot;we&quot; are &quot;here&quot; and the &quot;others&quot; are over &quot;there&quot;. Imagined differences serve to categorize people into groups and assign them characteristics that suit the imaginer&#x27;s expectations.

=== Racial discrimination ===

Racial discrimination refers to discrimination against someone on the basis of their race.

=== Racial segregation ===
Racial segregation is the separation of humans into socially-constructed racial groups in daily life. It may apply to activities such as eating in a restaurant, drinking from a water fountain, using a bathroom, attending school, going to the movies, or in the rental or purchase of a home. Segregation is generally outlawed, but may exist through social norms, even when there is no strong individual preference for it, as suggested by Thomas Schelling&#x27;s models of segregation and subsequent work.

=== Supremacism ===

Centuries of European colonialism in the Americas, Africa and Asia were often justified by white supremacist attitudes. During the early 20th century, the phrase &quot;The White Man&#x27;s Burden&quot; was widely used to justify an imperialist policy as a noble enterprise. A justification for the policy of conquest and subjugation of Native Americans emanated from the stereotyped perceptions of the indigenous people as &quot;merciless Indian savages&quot;, as they are described in the United States Declaration of Independence. Sam Wolfson of &quot;The Guardian&quot; writes that &quot;the declaration&#x27;s passage has often been cited as an encapsulation of the dehumanizing attitude toward indigenous Americans that the US was founded on.&quot; In an 1890 article about colonial expansion onto Native American land, author L. Frank Baum wrote: &quot;The Whites, by law of conquest, by justice of civilization, are masters of the American continent, and the best safety of the frontier settlements will be secured by the total annihilation of the few remaining Indians.&quot; In his &quot;Notes on the State of Virginia&quot;, published in 1785, Thomas Jefferson wrote: &quot;blacks, whether originally a distinct race, or made distinct by time or circumstances, are inferior to the whites in the endowments of both body and mind.&quot; Attitudes of black supremacy, Arab supremacy, and East Asian supremacy also exist.

=== Symbolic/modern ===
Some scholars argue that in the US, earlier violent and aggressive forms of racism have evolved into a more subtle form of prejudice in the late 20th century. This new form of racism is sometimes referred to as &quot;modern racism&quot; and it is characterized by outwardly acting unprejudiced while inwardly maintaining prejudiced attitudes, displaying subtle prejudiced behaviors such as actions informed by attributing qualities to others based on racial stereotypes, and evaluating the same behavior differently based on the race of the person being evaluated. This view is based on studies of prejudice and discriminatory behavior, where some people will act ambivalently towards black people, with positive reactions in certain, more public contexts, but more negative views and expressions in more private contexts. This ambivalence may also be visible for example in hiring decisions where job candidates that are otherwise positively evaluated may be unconsciously disfavored by employers in the final decision because of their race. Some scholars consider modern racism to be characterized by an explicit rejection of stereotypes, combined with resistance to changing structures of discrimination for reasons that are ostensibly non-racial, an ideology that considers opportunity at a purely individual basis denying the relevance of race in determining individual opportunities and the exhibition of indirect forms of micro-aggression toward and/or avoidance of people of other races.

=== Subconscious biases ===

Recent research has shown that individuals who consciously claim to reject racism may still exhibit race-based subconscious biases in their decision-making processes. While such &quot;subconscious racial biases&quot; do not fully fit the definition of racism, their impact can be similar, though typically less pronounced, not being explicit, conscious or deliberate.

== International law and racial discrimination ==
In 1919, a proposal to include a racial equality provision in the Covenant of the League of Nations was supported by a majority, but not adopted in the Paris Peace Conference in 1919. In 1943, Japan and its allies declared work for the abolition of racial discrimination to be their aim at the Greater East Asia Conference. Article 1 of the 1945 UN Charter includes &quot;promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race&quot; as UN purpose.

In 1950, UNESCO suggested in &quot;The Race Question&quot;—a statement signed by 21 scholars such as Ashley Montagu, Claude Lévi-Strauss, Gunnar Myrdal, Julian Huxley, etc.—to &quot;drop the term &quot;race&quot; altogether and instead speak of ethnic groups&quot;. The statement condemned scientific racism theories that had played a role in the Holocaust. It aimed both at debunking scientific racist theories, by popularizing modern knowledge concerning &quot;the race question&quot;, and morally condemned racism as contrary to the philosophy of the Enlightenment and its assumption of equal rights for all. Along with Myrdal&#x27;s &quot;An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy&quot; (1944), &quot;The Race Question&quot; influenced the 1954 U.S. Supreme Court desegregation decision in &quot;Brown v. Board of Education&quot;. Also, in 1950, the European Convention on Human Rights was adopted, which was widely used on racial discrimination issues.

The United Nations use the definition of racial discrimination laid out in the &quot;International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination&quot;, adopted in 1966:

... any distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference based on race, color, descent, or national or ethnic origin that has the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal footing, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural or any other field of public life. (Part 1 of Article 1 of the U.N. International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination)

In 2001, the European Union explicitly banned racism, along with many other forms of social discrimination, in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, the legal effect of which, if any, would necessarily be limited to Institutions of the European Union: &quot;Article 21 of the charter prohibits discrimination on any ground such as race, color, ethnic or social origin, genetic features, language, religion or belief, political or any other opinion, membership of a national minority, property, disability, age or sexual orientation and also discrimination on the grounds of nationality.&quot;

==Ideology==

Racism existed during the 19th century as scientific racism, which attempted to provide a racial classification of humanity. In 1775 Johann Blumenbach divided the world&#x27;s population into five groups according to skin color (Caucasians, Mongols, etc.), positing the view that the non-Caucasians had arisen through a process of degeneration. Another early view in scientific racism was the polygenist view, which held that the different races had been separately created. Polygenist Christoph Meiners (1747 – May 1810) for example, split mankind into two divisions which he labeled the &quot;beautiful White race&quot; and the &quot;ugly Black race&quot;. In Meiners&#x27; book, &quot;The Outline of History of Mankind&quot;, he claimed that a main characteristic of race is either beauty or ugliness. He viewed only the white race as beautiful. He considered ugly races to be inferior, immoral and animal-like.

Anders Retzius (1796–1860) demonstrated that neither Europeans nor others are one &quot;pure race&quot;, but of mixed origins. While discredited, derivations of Blumenbach&#x27;s taxonomy are still widely used for the classification of the population in the United States. Hans Peder Steensby, while strongly emphasizing that all humans today are of mixed origins, in 1907 claimed that the origins of human differences must be traced extraordinarily far back in time, and conjectured that the &quot;purest race&quot; today would be the Australian Aboriginals.
Scientific racism fell strongly out of favor in the early 20th century, but the origins of fundamental human and societal differences are still researched within academia, in fields such as human genetics including paleogenetics, social anthropology, comparative politics, history of religions, history of ideas, prehistory, history, ethics, and psychiatry. There is widespread rejection of any methodology based on anything similar to Blumenbach&#x27;s races. It is more unclear to which extent and when ethnic and national stereotypes are accepted.

Although after World War II and the Holocaust, racist ideologies were discredited on ethical, political and scientific grounds, racism and racial discrimination have remained widespread around the world.

Du Bois observed that it is not so much &quot;race&quot; that we think about, but culture: &quot;... a common history, common laws and religion, similar habits of thought and a conscious striving together for certain ideals of life&quot;. Late 19th century nationalists were the first to embrace contemporary discourses on &quot;race&quot;, ethnicity, and &quot;survival of the fittest&quot; to shape new nationalist doctrines. Ultimately, race came to represent not only the most important traits of the human body, but was also regarded as decisively shaping the character and personality of the nation. According to this view, culture is the physical manifestation created by ethnic groupings, as such fully determined by racial characteristics. Culture and race became considered intertwined and dependent upon each other, sometimes even to the extent of including nationality or language to the set of definition. Pureness of race tended to be related to rather superficial characteristics that were easily addressed and advertised, such as blondness. Racial qualities tended to be related to nationality and language rather than the actual geographic distribution of racial characteristics. In the case of Nordicism, the denomination &quot;Germanic&quot; was equivalent to superiority of race.

Bolstered by some nationalist and ethnocentric values and achievements of choice, this concept of racial superiority evolved to distinguish from other cultures that were considered inferior or impure. This emphasis on culture corresponds to the modern mainstream definition of racism: &quot;[r]acism does not originate from the existence of &#x27;races&#x27;. It &quot;creates&quot; them through a process of social division into categories: anybody can be racialised, independently of their somatic, cultural, religious differences.&quot;

This definition explicitly ignores the biological concept of race, which is still subject to scientific debate. In the words of David C. Rowe, &quot;[a] racial concept, although sometimes in the guise of another name, will remain in use in biology and in other fields because scientists, as well as lay persons, are fascinated by human diversity, some of which is captured by race.&quot;

Racial prejudice became subject to international legislation. For instance, the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 20 November 1963, addresses racial prejudice explicitly next to discrimination for reasons of race, colour or ethnic origin (Article I).

==Ethnicity and ethnic conflicts==
Debates over the origins of racism often suffer from a lack of clarity over the term. Many use the term &quot;racism&quot; to refer to more general phenomena, such as xenophobia and ethnocentrism, although scholars attempt to clearly distinguish those phenomena from racism as an ideology or from scientific racism, which has little to do with ordinary xenophobia. Others conflate recent forms of racism with earlier forms of ethnic and national conflict. In most cases, ethno-national conflict seems to owe itself to conflict over land and strategic resources. In some cases, ethnicity and nationalism were harnessed in order to rally combatants in wars between great religious empires (for example, the Muslim Turks and the Catholic Austro-Hungarians).

Notions of race and racism have often played central roles in ethnic conflicts. Throughout history, when an adversary is identified as &quot;other&quot; based on notions of race or ethnicity (in particular when &quot;other&quot; is interpreted to mean &quot;inferior&quot;), the means employed by the self-presumed &quot;superior&quot; party to appropriate territory, human chattel, or material wealth often have been more ruthless, more brutal, and less constrained by moral or ethical considerations. According to historian Daniel Richter, Pontiac&#x27;s Rebellion saw the emergence on both sides of the conflict of &quot;the novel idea that all Native people were &#x27;Indians,&#x27; that all Euro-Americans were &#x27;Whites,&#x27; and that all on one side must unite to destroy the other&quot;. Basil Davidson states in his documentary, &quot;Africa: Different but Equal&quot;, that racism, in fact, only just recently surfaced as late as the 19th century, due to the need for a justification for slavery in the Americas.

Historically, racism was a major driving force behind the Transatlantic slave trade. It was also a major force behind racial segregation, especially in the United States in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and South Africa under apartheid; 19th and 20th century racism in the Western world is particularly well documented and constitutes a reference point in studies and discourses about racism. Racism has played a role in genocides such as the Armenian genocide, and the Holocaust, and colonial projects like the European colonization of the Americas, Africa, and Asia. Indigenous peoples have been—and are—often subject to racist attitudes. Practices and ideologies of racism are condemned by the United Nations in the Declaration of Human Rights.

===Ethnic and racial nationalism===


After the Napoleonic Wars, Europe was confronted with the new &quot;nationalities question&quot;, leading to reconfigurations of the European map, on which the frontiers between the states had been delineated during the 1648 Peace of Westphalia. Nationalism had made its first appearance with the invention of the &quot;levée en masse&quot; by the French Revolutionaries, thus inventing mass conscription in order to be able to defend the newly founded Republic against the &quot;Ancien Régime&quot; order represented by the European monarchies. This led to the French Revolutionary Wars (1792–1802) and then to the conquests of Napoleon, and to the subsequent European-wide debates on the concepts and realities of nations, and in particular of nation-states. The Westphalia Treaty had divided Europe into various empires and kingdoms (such as the Ottoman Empire, the Holy Roman Empire, the Swedish Empire, the Kingdom of France, etc.), and for centuries wars were waged between princes (&quot;Kabinettskriege&quot; in German).

Modern nation-states appeared in the wake of the French Revolution, with the formation of patriotic sentiments for the first time in Spain during the Peninsula War (1808–1813, known in Spain as the Independence War). Despite the restoration of the previous order with the 1815 Congress of Vienna, the &quot;nationalities question&quot; became the main problem of Europe during the Industrial Era, leading in particular to the 1848 Revolutions, the Italian unification completed during the 1871 Franco-Prussian War, which itself culminated in the proclamation of the German Empire in the Hall of Mirrors in the Palace of Versailles, thus achieving the German unification.

Meanwhile, the Ottoman Empire, the &quot;sick man of Europe&quot;, was confronted with endless nationalist movements, which, along with the dissolving of the Austrian-Hungarian Empire, would lead to the creation, after World War I, of the various nation-states of the Balkans, with &quot;national minorities&quot; in their borders.

Ethnic nationalism, which advocated the belief in a hereditary membership of the nation, made its appearance in the historical context surrounding the creation of the modern nation-states.

One of its main influences was the Romantic nationalist movement at the turn of the 19th century, represented by figures such as Johann Herder (1744–1803), Johan Fichte (1762–1814) in the &quot;Addresses to the German Nation&quot; (1808), Friedrich Hegel (1770–1831), or also, in France, Jules Michelet (1798–1874). It was opposed to liberal nationalism, represented by authors such as Ernest Renan (1823–1892), who conceived of the nation as a community, which, instead of being based on the &quot;Volk&quot; ethnic group and on a specific, common language, was founded on the subjective will to live together (&quot;the nation is a daily plebiscite&quot;, 1882) or also John Stuart Mill (1806–1873).
Ethnic nationalism blended with scientific racist discourses, as well as with &quot;continental imperialist&quot; (Hannah Arendt, 1951) discourses, for example in the pan-Germanism discourses, which postulated the racial superiority of the German &quot;Volk&quot; (people/folk). The Pan-German League (&quot;Alldeutscher Verband&quot;), created in 1891, promoted German imperialism and &quot;racial hygiene&quot;, and was opposed to intermarriage with Jews. Another popular current, the &quot;Völkisch movement&quot;, was also an important proponent of the German ethnic nationalist discourse, and it combined Pan-Germanism with modern racial antisemitism. Members of the Völkisch movement, in particular the Thule Society, would participate in the founding of the German Workers&#x27; Party (DAP) in Munich in 1918, the predecessor of the Nazi Party. Pan-Germanism played a decisive role in the interwar period of the 1920s–1930s.

These currents began to associate the idea of the nation with the biological concept of a &quot;master race&quot; (often the &quot;Aryan race&quot; or the &quot;Nordic race&quot;) issued from the scientific racist discourse. They conflated nationalities with ethnic groups, called &quot;races&quot;, in a radical distinction from previous racial discourses that posited the existence of a &quot;race struggle&quot; inside the nation and the state itself. Furthermore, they believed that political boundaries should mirror these alleged racial and ethnic groups, thus justifying ethnic cleansing, in order to achieve &quot;racial purity&quot; and also to achieve ethnic homogeneity in the nation-state.

Such racist discourses, combined with nationalism, were not, however, limited to pan-Germanism. In France, the transition from Republican liberal nationalism, to ethnic nationalism, which made nationalism a characteristic of far-right movements in France, took place during the Dreyfus Affair at the end of the 19th century. During several years, a nationwide crisis affected French society, concerning the alleged treason of Alfred Dreyfus, a French Jewish military officer. The country polarized itself into two opposite camps, one represented by Émile Zola, who wrote &quot;J&#x27;Accuse…!&quot; in defense of Alfred Dreyfus, and the other represented by the nationalist poet, Maurice Barrès (1862–1923), one of the founders of the ethnic nationalist discourse in France. At the same time, Charles Maurras (1868–1952), founder of the monarchist &quot;Action française&quot; movement, theorized the &quot;anti-France&quot;, composed of the &quot;four confederate states of Protestants, Jews, Freemasons and foreigners&quot; (his actual word for the latter being the pejorative &quot;métèques&quot;). Indeed, to him the first three were all &quot;internal foreigners&quot;, who threatened the ethnic unity of the French people.

==History==
===Ethnocentrism and proto-racism===
====Aristotle====
Bernard Lewis has cited the Greek philosopher Aristotle who, in his discussion of slavery, stated that while Greeks are free by nature, &quot;barbarians&quot; (non-Greeks) are slaves by nature, in that it is in their nature to be more willing to submit to a despotic government. Though Aristotle does not specify any particular races, he argues that people from nations outside Greece are more prone to the burden of slavery than those from Greece. While Aristotle makes remarks about the most natural slaves being those with strong bodies and slave souls (unfit for rule, unintelligent) which would seem to imply a physical basis for discrimination, he also explicitly states that the right kind of souls and bodies do not always go together, implying that the greatest determinate for inferiority and natural slaves versus natural masters is the soul, not the body. The modern version of racism based on the idea of hereditary inferiority had not yet been developed, and Aristotle never explicitly stated whether he believed the supposed natural inferiority of Barbarians was caused by environment and climate (like many of his contemporaries) or by birth.

Historian Dante A. Puzzo, in his discussion of Aristotle, racism, and the ancient world writes that:

Racism rests on two basic assumptions: that a correlation exists between physical characteristics and moral qualities; that mankind is divisible into superior and inferior stocks. Racism, thus defined, is a modern conception, for prior to the XVIth century there was virtually nothing in the life and thought of the West that can be described as racist. To prevent misunderstanding a clear distinction must be made between racism and ethnocentrism ... The Ancient Hebrews, in referring to all who were not Hebrews as Gentiles, were indulging in ethnocentrism, not in racism. ... So it was with the Hellenes who denominated all non-Hellenes—whether the wild Scythians or the Egyptians whom they acknowledged as their mentors in the arts of civilization—Barbarians, the term denoting that which was strange or foreign.

==== Early antisemitism ====
Some scholars suggest that anti-Jewish policies under the Hellenistic empires and the Roman Empire constitute examples of ancient racism. Other scholars have criticized this view as based on an ahistorical conception of race, and argued that such policies were aimed at repressing a religious group resistant to imperialism and conformity rather than a racialized entity.

====Medieval Arab writers====
Bernard Lewis has also cited historians and geographers of the Middle East and North Africa region, including Al-Muqaddasi, Al-Jahiz, Al-Masudi, Abu Rayhan Biruni, Nasir al-Din al-Tusi, and Ibn Qutaybah. Though the Qur&#x27;an expresses no racial prejudice, Lewis argues that ethnocentric prejudice later developed among Arabs, for a variety of reasons: their extensive conquests and slave trade; the influence of Aristotelian ideas regarding slavery, which some Muslim philosophers directed towards Zanj (Bantu) and Turkic peoples; and the influence of Judeo-Christian ideas regarding divisions among humankind. By the eighth century, anti-black prejudice among Arabs resulted in discrimination. A number of medieval Arabic authors argued against this prejudice, urging respect for all black people and especially Ethiopians. By the 14th century, a significant number of slaves came from sub-Saharan Africa; Lewis argues that this led to the likes of Egyptian historian Al-Abshibi (1388–1446) writing that &quot;[i]t is said that when the [black] slave is sated, he fornicates, when he is hungry, he steals.&quot; According to Lewis, the 14th-century Tunisian scholar Ibn Khaldun also wrote:

...beyond [known peoples of black West Africa] to the south there is no civilization in the proper sense. There are only humans who are closer to dumb animals than to rational beings. They live in thickets and caves, and eat herbs and unprepared grain. They frequently eat each other. They cannot be considered human beings. Therefore, the Negro nations are, as a rule, submissive to slavery, because (Negroes) have little that is (essentially) human and possess attributes that are quite similar to those of dumb animals, as we have stated.

According to Wesleyan University professor Abdelmajid Hannoum, French Orientalists projected racist and colonialist views of the 19th century into their translations of medieval Arabic writings, including those of Ibn Khaldun. This resulted in the translated texts racializing Arabs and Berber people, when no such distinction was made in the originals. James E. Lindsay argues that the concept of an Arab identity itself did not exist until modern times, though others like Robert Hoyland have argued that a common sense of Arab identity already existed by the 9th century.

===&quot;Limpieza de sangre&quot;===
With the Umayyad Caliphate&#x27;s conquest of Hispania, Muslim Arabs and Berbers overthrew the previous Visigothic rulers and created Al-Andalus, which contributed to the Golden age of Jewish culture, and lasted for six centuries. It was followed by the centuries-long &quot;Reconquista&quot;, during which Christian Iberian kingdoms contested Al-Andalus and progressively conquered the divided Muslim kingdoms, culminating in the fall of the Nasrid kingdom of Granada in 1492 and the rise of Ferdinand V and Isabella I as Catholic monarchs of Spain. The legacy Catholic Spaniards then formulated the &quot;limpieza de sangre&quot; (&quot;cleanliness of blood&quot;) doctrine. It was during this time in history that the Western concept of aristocratic &quot;blue blood&quot; emerged in a racialized, religious and feudal context, so as to stem the upward social mobility of the converted New Christians. Robert Lacey explains:

It was the Spaniards who gave the world the notion that an aristocrat&#x27;s blood is not red but blue. The Spanish nobility started taking shape around the ninth century in classic military fashion, occupying land as warriors on horseback. They were to continue the process for more than five hundred years, clawing back sections of the peninsula from its Moorish occupiers, and a nobleman demonstrated his pedigree by holding up his sword arm to display the filigree of blue-blooded veins beneath his pale skin—proof that his birth had not been contaminated by the dark-skinned enemy. Sangre azul, blue blood, was thus a euphemism for being a white man—Spain&#x27;s own particular reminder that the refined footsteps of the aristocracy through history carry the rather less refined spoor of racism.

Following the expulsion of the Arabic Moors and most of the Sephardic Jews from the Iberian peninsula, the remaining Jews and Muslims were forced to convert to Roman Catholicism, becoming &quot;New Christians&quot;, who were sometimes discriminated against by the &quot;Old Christians&quot; in some cities (including Toledo), despite condemnations by the Church and the State, which both welcomed the new flock. The Inquisition was carried out by members of the Dominican Order in order to weed out the converts who still practiced Judaism and Islam in secret. The system and ideology of the &quot;limpieza de sangre&quot; ostracized false Christian converts from society in order to protect it against treason. The remnants of such legislation persevered into the 19th century in military contexts.

In Portugal, the legal distinction between New and Old Christian was only ended through a legal decree issued by the Marquis of Pombal in 1772, almost three centuries after the implementation of the racist discrimination. The &quot;limpieza de sangre&quot; legislation was common also during the colonization of the Americas, where it led to the racial and feudal separation of peoples and social strata in the colonies. It was however often ignored in practice, as the new colonies needed skilled people.

At the end of the Renaissance, the Valladolid debate (1550–1551), concerning the treatment of the natives of the &quot;New World&quot; pitted the Dominican friar and Bishop of Chiapas, Bartolomé de Las Casas, to another Dominican and Humanist philosopher, Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda. The latter argued that the Indians practiced human sacrifice of innocents, cannibalism, and other such &quot;crimes against nature&quot;; they were unacceptable and should be suppressed by any means possible including war, thus reducing them to slavery or serfdom was in accordance with Catholic theology and natural law. To the contrary, Bartolomé de Las Casas argued that the Amerindians were free men in the natural order and deserved the same treatment as others, according to Catholic theology. It was one of the many controversies concerning racism, slavery, religion, and European morality that would arise in the following centuries and which resulted in the legislation protecting the natives. The marriage between Luisa de Abrego, a free black domestic servant from Seville and Miguel Rodríguez, a white segovian conquistador in 1565 in St. Augustine (Spanish Florida), is the first known and recorded Christian marriage anywhere in the continental United States.

In the Spanish colonies, Spaniards developed a complex caste system based on race, which was used for social control, and which also determined a person&#x27;s importance in society. While many Latin American countries have long since rendered the system officially illegal through legislation, usually at the time of their independence, prejudice based on degrees of perceived racial distance from European ancestry combined with one&#x27;s socioeconomic status remain, an echo of the colonial caste system.

===Racism as a modern phenomenon===
Racism is frequently described as a &quot;modern&quot; phenomenon. In the view of the French philosopher and historian Michel Foucault, the first formulation of racism emerged in the Early Modern period as the &quot;discourse of race struggle&quot;, and a historical and political discourse, which Foucault opposed to the philosophical and juridical discourse of sovereignty.

This European discourse, which first appeared in Great Britain, was then carried on in France by such people as Boulainvilliers (1658–1722), Nicolas Fréret (1688–1749), and then, during the 1789 French Revolution, Sieyès, and afterwards, Augustin Thierry and Cournot. Boulainvilliers, who created the matrix of such racist discourse in France, conceived of the &quot;race&quot; as being something closer to the sense of a &quot;nation&quot;, that is, in his time, the &quot;race&quot; meant the &quot;people&quot;.

He conceived of France as being divided between various nations—the unified nation-state is an anachronism here—which themselves formed different &quot;races&quot;. Boulainvilliers opposed the absolute monarchy, which tried to bypass the aristocracy by establishing a direct relationship to the Third Estate. Thus, he developed the theory that the French aristocrats were the descendants of foreign invaders, whom he called the &quot;Franks&quot;, while according to him, the Third Estate constituted the autochthonous, vanquished Gallo-Romans, who were dominated by the Frankish aristocracy as a consequence of the right of conquest. Early modern racism was opposed to nationalism and the nation-state: the Comte de Montlosier, in exile during the French Revolution, who borrowed Boulainvilliers&#x27; discourse on the &quot;Nordic race&quot; as being the French aristocracy that invaded the plebeian &quot;Gauls&quot;, thus showed his contempt for the Third Estate, calling it &quot;this new people born of slaves ... mixture of all races and of all times&quot;.

===19th century===
While 19th-century racism became closely intertwined with nationalism, leading to the ethnic nationalist discourse that identified the &quot;race&quot; with the &quot;folk&quot;, leading to such movements as pan-Germanism, pan-Turkism, pan-Arabism, and pan-Slavism, medieval racism precisely divided the nation into various non-biological &quot;races&quot;, which were thought to be the consequence of historical conquests and social conflicts. Michel Foucault traced the genealogy of modern racism to this medieval &quot;historical and political discourse of race struggle&quot;. According to him, it divided itself in the 19th century according to two rival lines: on one hand, it was incorporated by racists, biologists and eugenicists, who gave it the modern sense of &quot;race&quot;, and they also transformed this popular discourse into a &quot;state racism&quot; (e.g., Nazism). On the other hand, Marxism also seized this discourse founded on the assumption of a political struggle that provided the real engine of history and continued to act underneath the apparent peace. Thus, Marxists transformed the essentialist notion of &quot;race&quot; into the historical notion of &quot;class struggle&quot;, defined by socially structured positions: capitalist or proletarian. In &quot;The Will to Knowledge&quot; (1976), Foucault analyzed another opponent of the &quot;race struggle&quot; discourse: Sigmund Freud&#x27;s psychoanalysis, which opposed the concept of &quot;blood heredity&quot;, prevalent in the 19th century racist discourse.

Authors such as Hannah Arendt, in her 1951 book &quot;The Origins of Totalitarianism&quot;, have said that the racist ideology (&quot;popular racism&quot;) which developed at the end of the 19th century helped legitimize the imperialist conquests of foreign territories and the atrocities that sometimes accompanied them (such as the Herero and Namaqua Genocide of 1904–1907 or the Armenian genocide of 1915–1917). Rudyard Kipling&#x27;s poem, &quot;The White Man&#x27;s Burden&quot; (1899), is one of the more famous illustrations of the belief in the inherent superiority of the European culture over the rest of the world, though it is also thought to be a satirical appraisal of such imperialism. Racist ideology thus helped legitimize the conquest and incorporation of foreign territories into an empire, which were regarded as a humanitarian obligation partially as a result of these racist beliefs.
However, during the 19th century, Western European colonial powers were involved in the suppression of the Arab slave trade in Africa, as well as in the suppression of the slave trade in West Africa. Some Europeans during the time period objected to injustices that occurred in some colonies and lobbied on behalf of aboriginal peoples. Thus, when the Hottentot Venus was displayed in England in the beginning of the 19th century, the African Association publicly opposed itself to the exhibition. The same year that Kipling published his poem, Joseph Conrad published &quot;Heart of Darkness&quot; (1899), a clear criticism of the Congo Free State, which was owned by Leopold II of Belgium.

Examples of racial theories used include the creation of the Hamitic theory during the European exploration of Africa. The term &quot;Hamite&quot; was applied to different populations within North Africa, mainly comprising Ethiopians, Eritreans, Somalis, Berbers, and the ancient Egyptians. Hamites were regarded as Caucasoid peoples who probably originated in either Arabia or Asia on the basis of their cultural, physical and linguistic similarities with the peoples of those areas. Europeans considered Hamites to be more civilized than Sub-Saharan Africans, and more akin to themselves and Semitic peoples. In the first two-thirds of the 20th century, the Hamitic race was, in fact, considered one of the branches of the Caucasian race, along with the Indo-Europeans, Semites, and the Mediterraneans.

However, the Hamitic peoples themselves were often deemed to have failed as rulers, which was usually ascribed to interbreeding with Negroes. In the mid-20th century, the German scholar Carl Meinhof (1857–1944) claimed that the Bantu race was formed by a merger of Hamitic and Negro races. The Hottentots (Nama or Khoi) were formed by the merger of Hamitic and Bushmen (San) races—both being termed nowadays as Khoisan peoples.
In the United States in the early 19th century, the American Colonization Society was established as the primary vehicle for proposals to return black Americans to greater freedom and equality in Africa. The colonization effort resulted from a mixture of motives with its founder Henry Clay stating that &quot;unconquerable prejudice resulting from their color, they never could amalgamate with the free whites of this country. It was desirable, therefore, as it respected them, and the residue of the population of the country, to drain them off&quot;. Racism spread throughout the New World in the late 19th century and early 20th century. Whitecapping, which started in Indiana in the late 19th century, soon spread throughout all of North America, causing many African laborers to flee from the land they worked on. In the US, during the 1860s, racist posters were used during election campaigns. In one of these racist posters (see above), a black man is depicted lounging idly in the foreground as one white man ploughs his field and another chops wood. Accompanying labels are: &quot;In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat thy bread&quot;, and &quot;The white man must work to keep his children and pay his taxes.&quot; The black man wonders, &quot;Whar is de use for me to work as long as dey make dese appropriations.&quot; Above in a cloud is an image of the &quot;Freedman&#x27;s Bureau! Negro Estimate of Freedom!&quot; The bureau is pictured as a large domed building resembling the U.S. Capitol and is inscribed &quot;Freedom and No Work&quot;. Its columns and walls are labeled, &quot;Candy&quot;, &quot;Rum, Gin, Whiskey&quot;, &quot;Sugar Plums&quot;, &quot;Indolence&quot;, &quot;White Women&quot;, &quot;Apathy&quot;, &quot;White Sugar&quot;, &quot;Idleness&quot;, and so on.

On 5 June 1873, Sir Francis Galton, distinguished English explorer and cousin of Charles Darwin, wrote in a letter to &quot;The Times&quot;:

===20th century===


The Nazi party, which seized power in the 1933 German elections and maintained a dictatorship over much of Europe until the End of World War II on the European continent, deemed the Germans to be part of an Aryan &quot;master race&quot; (&quot;Herrenvolk&quot;), who therefore had the right to expand their territory and enslave or kill members of other races deemed inferior.

The racial ideology conceived by the Nazis graded humans on a scale of pure Aryan to non-Aryan, with the latter viewed as subhuman. At the top of the scale of pure Aryans were Germans and other Germanic peoples including the Dutch, Scandinavians, and the English as well as other peoples such as some northern Italians and the French, who were said to have a suitable admixture of Germanic blood. Nazi policies labeled Romani people, people of color, and Slavs (mainly Poles, Serbs, Russians, Belarusians, Ukrainians and Czechs) as inferior non-Aryan subhumans. Jews were at the bottom of the hierarchy, considered inhuman and thus unworthy of life. In accordance with Nazi racial ideology, approximately six million Jews were killed in the Holocaust. 2.5 million ethnic Poles, 0.5 million ethnic Serbs and 0.2–0.5 million Romani were killed by the regime and its collaborators.

The Nazis considered most Slavs to be non-Aryan &quot;Untermenschen&quot;. The Nazi Party&#x27;s chief racial theorist, Alfred Rosenberg, adopted the term from Klansman Lothrop Stoddard&#x27;s 1922 book &quot;The Revolt Against Civilization: The Menace of the Under-man&quot;. In the secret plan (&quot;Master Plan East&quot;) the Nazis resolved to expel, enslave, or exterminate most Slavic people to provide &quot;living space&quot; for Germans, but Nazi policy towards Slavs changed during World War II due to manpower shortages which necessitated limited Slavic participation in the Waffen-SS. Significant war crimes were committed against Slavs, particularly Poles, and Soviet POWs had a far higher mortality rate than their American and British counterparts due to deliberate neglect and mistreatment. Between June 1941 and January 1942, the Nazis killed an estimated 2.8 million Red Army POWs, whom they viewed as &quot;subhuman&quot;.

In the years 1943–1945, around 120,000 Polish people, mostly women and children, became the victims of ethnicity-based massacres by the Ukrainian Insurgent Army, which was then operating in the territory of occupied Poland. In addition to Poles who represented the vast majority of the murdered people, the victims also included Jews, Armenians, Russians, and Ukrainians who were married to Poles or attempted to help them.

During the intensification of ties with Nazi Germany in the 1930s, Ante Pavelić and the Ustaše and their idea of the Croatian nation became increasingly race-oriented. The Ustaše view of national and racial identity, as well as the theory of Serbs as an inferior race, was influenced by Croatian nationalists and intellectuals from the end of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th century. Serbs were primary targets of racial laws and murders in the puppet Independent State of Croatia (NDH); Jews and Roma were also targeted. The Ustaše introduced laws to strip Serbs of their citizenship, livelihoods, and possessions. During the genocide in the NDH, Serbs suffered among the highest casualty rates in Europe during the World War II, and the NDH was one of the most lethal regimes in the 20th century.

German praise for America&#x27;s institutional racism was continuous throughout the early 1930s, and Nazi lawyers were advocates of the use of American models. Race based U.S. citizenship laws and anti-miscegenation laws (no race mixing) directly inspired the Nazi&#x27;s two principal Nuremberg racial laws—the Citizenship Law and the Blood Law. Hitler&#x27;s 1925 memoir &quot;Mein Kampf&quot; was full of admiration for America&#x27;s treatment of &quot;coloreds&quot;. Nazi expansion eastward was accompanied with invocation of America&#x27;s colonial expansion westward, with the accompanying actions toward the Native Americans. In 1928, Hitler praised Americans for having &quot;gunned down the millions of Redskins to a few hundred thousand, and now keeps the modest remnant under observation in a cage.&quot; On Nazi Germany&#x27;s expansion eastward, in 1941 Hitler stated, &quot;Our Mississippi [the line beyond which Thomas Jefferson wanted all Indians expelled] must be the Volga.&quot;
White supremacy was dominant in the U.S. from its founding up to the civil rights movement. On the U.S. immigration laws prior to 1965, sociologist Stephen Klineberg cited the law as clearly declaring &quot;that Northern Europeans are a superior subspecies of the white race.&quot; While anti-Asian racism was embedded in U.S. politics and culture in the early 20th century, Indians were also racialized for their anticolonialism, with U.S. officials, casting them as a &quot;Hindu&quot; menace, pushing for Western imperial expansion abroad. The Naturalization Act of 1790 limited U.S. citizenship to whites only, and in the 1923 case, &quot;United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind&quot;, the Supreme Court ruled that high caste Hindus were not &quot;white persons&quot; and were therefore racially ineligible for naturalized citizenship. It was after the Luce–Celler Act of 1946 that a quota of 100 Indians per year could immigrate to the U.S. and become citizens. The Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 dramatically opened entry to the U.S. to immigrants other than traditional Northern European and Germanic groups, and as a result would significantly alter the demographic mix in the U.S.

Serious race riots in Durban between Indians and Zulus erupted in 1949. Ne Win&#x27;s rise to power in Burma in 1962 and his relentless persecution of &quot;resident aliens&quot; led to an exodus of some 300,000 Burmese Indians. They migrated to escape racial discrimination and wholesale nationalisation of private enterprises a few years later, in 1964. The Zanzibar Revolution of 12 January 1964, put an end to the local Arab dynasty. Thousands of Arabs and Indians in Zanzibar were massacred in riots, and thousands more were detained or fled the island. In August 1972, Ugandan President Idi Amin started the expropriation of properties owned by Asians and Europeans. In the same year, Amin ethnically cleansed Uganda&#x27;s Asians, giving them 90 days to leave the country. Shortly after World War II, the South African National Party took control of the government in South Africa. Between 1948 and 1994, the apartheid regime took place. This regime based its ideology on the racial separation of whites and non-whites, including the unequal rights of non-whites. Several protests and violence occurred during the struggle against apartheid, the most famous of these include the Sharpeville Massacre in 1960, the Soweto uprising in 1976, the Church Street bombing of 1983, and the Cape Town peace march of 1989.

===Contemporary===
During the Congo Civil War (1998–2003), Pygmy people were hunted down like game animals and eaten. Both sides in the war regarded them as &quot;subhuman&quot; and some say their flesh can confer magical powers. UN human rights activists reported in 2003 that rebels had carried out acts of cannibalism. Sinafasi Makelo, a representative of the Mbuti pygmies, has asked the UN Security Council to recognise cannibalism as both a crime against humanity and an act of genocide. A report released by the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination condemns Botswana&#x27;s treatment of the &#x27;Bushmen&#x27; as racist. In 2008, the tribunal of the 15-nation Southern African Development Community (SADC) accused Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe of having a racist attitude towards white people.

The mass demonstrations and riots against African students in Nanjing, China, lasted from December 1988 to January 1989. In November 2009, British newspaper &quot;The Guardian&quot; reported that Lou Jing, of mixed Chinese and African parentage, had emerged as the most famous talent show contestant in China and has become the subject of intense debate because of her skin color. Her attention in the media opened serious debates about racism in China and racial prejudice.

Some 70,000 black African Mauritanians were expelled from Mauritania in the late 1980s. In the Sudan, black African captives in the civil war were often enslaved, and female prisoners were often sexually abused. The Darfur conflict has been described by some as a racial matter. In October 2006, Niger announced that it would deport the approximately 150,000 Arabs living in the Diffa region of eastern Niger to Chad. While the government collected Arabs in preparation for the deportation, two girls died, reportedly after fleeing Government forces, and three women suffered miscarriages.

The Jakarta riots of May 1998 targeted many Chinese Indonesians. The anti-Chinese legislation was in the Indonesian constitution until 1998. Resentment against Chinese workers has led to violent confrontations in Africa and Oceania. Anti-Chinese rioting, involving tens of thousands of people, broke out in Papua New Guinea in May 2009. Indo-Fijians suffered violent attacks after the Fiji coup in 2000. Non-indigenous citizens of Fiji are subject to discrimination. Racial divisions also exist in Guyana, Malaysia, Trinidad and Tobago, Madagascar, and South Africa. In Malaysia such racist state policies are codified on many levels, see Bumiputera.

Peter Bouckaert, the Human Rights Watch&#x27;s emergencies director, said in an interview that &quot;racist hatred&quot; is the chief motivation behind the violence against Rohingya Muslims in Myanmar.

One form of racism in the United States was enforced racial segregation, which existed until the 1960s, when it was outlawed in the Civil Rights Act of 1964. It has been argued that this separation of races continues to exist &quot;de facto&quot; today in different forms, such as lack of access to loans and resources or discrimination by police and other government officials.

The 2016 Pew Research poll found that Italians, in particular, hold strong anti-Romani views, with 82% of Italians expressing negative opinions about Romani. In Greece, there are 67%, in Hungary, 64%, in France, 61%, in Spain, 49%, in Poland, 47%, in the UK, 45%, in Sweden, 42%, in Germany, 40%, and in the Netherlands, 37%, that have an unfavourable view of Roma. A survey conducted by Harvard University found the Czech Republic, Lithuania, Belarus and Ukraine had the strongest racial bias against black people in Europe, while Serbia, Slovenia and Bosnia and Herzegovina had the weakest racial bias, followed by Croatia and Ireland.

A 2023 University of Cambridge survey which featured the largest sample of Black people in Britain found that 88% had reported racial discrimination at work, 79% believed the police unfairly targeted black people with stop and search powers and 80% definitely or somewhat agreed that the biggest barrier to academic attainment for young Black students was racial discrimination in education.

==Scientific racism==

The modern biological definition of race developed in the 19th century with scientific racist theories. The term &quot;scientific racism&quot; refers to the use of science to justify and support racist beliefs, which goes back to the early 18th century, though it gained most of its influence in the mid-19th century, during the New Imperialism period. Also known as academic racism, such theories first needed to overcome the Church&#x27;s resistance to positivist accounts of history and its support of monogenism, the concept that all human beings were originated from the same ancestors, in accordance with creationist accounts of history.

These racist theories put forth on scientific hypothesis were combined with unilineal theories of social progress, which postulated the superiority of the European civilization over the rest of the world. Furthermore, they frequently made use of the idea of &quot;survival of the fittest&quot;, a term coined by Herbert Spencer in 1864, associated with ideas of competition, which were named social Darwinism in the 1940s. Charles Darwin himself opposed the idea of rigid racial differences in &quot;The Descent of Man&quot; (1871), in which he argued that humans were all of one species, sharing common descent. He recognised racial differences as varieties of humanity, and emphasised the close similarities between people of all races in mental faculties, tastes, dispositions and habits, while still contrasting the culture of the &quot;lowest savages&quot; with European civilization.

At the end of the 19th century, proponents of scientific racism intertwined themselves with eugenics discourses of &quot;degeneration of the race&quot; and &quot;blood heredity&quot;. Henceforth, scientific racist discourses could be defined as the combination of polygenism, unilinealism, social Darwinism, and eugenism. They found their scientific legitimacy on physical anthropology, anthropometry, craniometry, phrenology, physiognomy, and others now discredited disciplines in order to formulate racist prejudices.

Before being disqualified in the 20th century by the American school of cultural anthropology (Franz Boas, etc.), the British school of social anthropology (Bronisław Malinowski, Alfred Radcliffe-Brown, etc.), the French school of ethnology (Claude Lévi-Strauss, etc.), as well as the discovery of the neo-Darwinian synthesis, such sciences, in particular anthropometry, were used to deduce behaviours and psychological characteristics from outward, physical appearances.

The neo-Darwinian synthesis, first developed in the 1930s, eventually led to a gene-centered view of evolution in the 1960s. According to the Human Genome Project, the most complete mapping of human DNA to date indicates that there is no clear genetic basis to racial groups. While some genes are more common in certain populations, there are no genes that exist in all members of one population and no members of any other.

===Heredity and eugenics===
The first theory of eugenics was developed in 1869 by Francis Galton (1822–1911), who used the then-popular concept of &quot;degeneration&quot;. He applied statistics to study human differences and the alleged &quot;inheritance of intelligence&quot;, foreshadowing future uses of &quot;intelligence testing&quot; by the anthropometry school. Such theories were vividly described by the writer Émile Zola (1840–1902), who started publishing in 1871, a twenty-novel cycle, &quot;Les Rougon-Macquart&quot;, where he linked heredity to behavior. Thus, Zola described the high-born Rougons as those involved in politics (&quot;Son Excellence Eugène Rougon&quot;) and medicine (&quot;Le Docteur Pascal&quot;) and the low-born Macquarts as those fatally falling into alcoholism (&quot;L&#x27;Assommoir&quot;), prostitution (&quot;Nana&quot;), and homicide (&quot;La Bête humaine&quot;).

During the rise of Nazism in Germany, some scientists in Western nations worked to debunk the regime&#x27;s racial theories. A few argued against racist ideologies and discrimination, even if they believed in the alleged existence of biological races. However, in the fields of anthropology and biology, these were minority positions until the mid-20th century. According to the 1950 UNESCO statement, &quot;The Race Question&quot;, an international project to debunk racist theories had been attempted in the mid-1930s. However, this project had been abandoned. Thus, in 1950, UNESCO declared that it had resumed:

...up again, after a lapse of fifteen years, a project that the International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation has wished to carry through but that it had to abandon in deference to the appeasement policy of the pre-war period. The race question had become one of the pivots of Nazi ideology and policy. Masaryk and Beneš took the initiative of calling for a conference to re-establish in the minds and consciences of men everywhere the truth about race ... Nazi propaganda was able to continue its baleful work unopposed by the authority of an international organisation.

The Third Reich&#x27;s racial policies, its eugenics programs and the extermination of Jews in the Holocaust, as well as the Romani people in the Porrajmos (the Romani Holocaust) and others minorities led to a change in opinions about scientific research into race after the war. Changes within scientific disciplines, such as the rise of the Boasian school of anthropology in the United States contributed to this shift. These theories were strongly denounced in the 1950 UNESCO statement, signed by internationally renowned scholars, and titled &quot;The Race Question&quot;.

===Polygenism and racial typologies===

Works such as Arthur de Gobineau&#x27;s &quot;An Essay on the Inequality of the Human Races&quot; (1853–1855) may be considered one of the first theorizations of this new racism, founded on an essentialist notion of race, which opposed the former racial discourse, of Boulainvilliers for example, which saw in races a fundamentally historical reality, which changed over time. Gobineau, thus, attempted to frame racism within the terms of biological differences among humans, giving it the legitimacy of biology.

Gobineau&#x27;s theories would be expanded in France by Georges Vacher de Lapouge (1854–1936)&#x27;s typology of races, who published in 1899 &quot;The Aryan and his Social Role&quot;, in which he claimed that the white &quot;Aryan race&quot; &quot;dolichocephalic&quot;, was opposed to the &quot;brachycephalic&quot; race, of whom the &quot;Jew&quot; was the archetype. Vacher de Lapouge thus created a hierarchical classification of races, in which he identified the &quot;&quot;Homo europaeus&quot; (Teutonic, Protestant, etc.), the &quot;&quot;Homo alpinus&quot; (Auvergnat, Turkish, etc.), and finally the &quot;Homo mediterraneus&quot;&quot; (Neapolitan, Andalus, etc.) He assimilated races and social classes, considering that the French upper class was a representation of the &quot;Homo europaeus&quot;, while the lower class represented the &quot;Homo alpinus&quot;. Applying Galton&#x27;s eugenics to his theory of races, Vacher de Lapouge&#x27;s &quot;selectionism&quot; aimed first at achieving the annihilation of trade unionists, considered to be a &quot;degenerate&quot;; second, creating types of man each destined to one end, in order to prevent any contestation of labour conditions. His &quot;anthroposociology&quot; thus aimed at blocking social conflict by establishing a fixed, hierarchical social order.

The same year, William Z. Ripley used identical racial classification in &quot;The Races of Europe&quot; (1899), which would have a great influence in the United States. Other scientific authors include H.S. Chamberlain at the end of the 19th century (a British citizen who naturalized himself as German because of his admiration for the &quot;Aryan race&quot;) and Madison Grant, a eugenicist and author of &quot;The Passing of the Great Race&quot; (1916). Madison Grant provided statistics for the Immigration Act of 1924, which severely restricted immigration of Jews, Slavs, and Southern Europeans, who were subsequently hindered in seeking to escape Nazi Germany.

=== Human zoos ===
Human zoos (called &quot;People Shows&quot;), were an important means of bolstering &quot;popular racism&quot; by connecting it to scientific racism: they were both objects of public curiosity and of anthropology and anthropometry. Joice Heth, an African-American slave, was displayed by P.T. Barnum in 1836, a few years after the exhibition of Saartjie Baartman, the &quot;Hottentot Venus&quot;, in England. Such exhibitions became common in the New Imperialism period, and remained so until World War II. Carl Hagenbeck, inventor of the modern zoos, exhibited animals beside humans who were considered &quot;savages&quot;.

Congolese pygmy Ota Benga was displayed in 1906 by eugenicist Madison Grant, head of the Bronx Zoo, as an attempt to illustrate the &quot;missing link&quot; between humans and orangutans: thus, racism was tied to Darwinism, creating a social Darwinist ideology that tried to ground itself in Darwin&#x27;s scientific discoveries. The 1931 Paris Colonial Exhibition displayed Kanaks from New Caledonia. A &quot;Congolese village&quot; was on display as late as 1958 at the Brussels&#x27; World Fair.

== Theories about the origins of racism ==

Evolutionary psychologists John Tooby and Leda Cosmides were puzzled by the fact that in the US, race is one of the three characteristics most often used in brief descriptions of individuals (the others are age and sex). They reasoned that natural selection would not have favoured the evolution of an instinct for using race as a classification, because for most of human history, humans almost never encountered members of other races. Tooby and Cosmides hypothesized that modern people use race as a proxy (rough-and-ready indicator) for coalition membership, since a better-than-random guess about &quot;which side&quot; another person is on will be helpful if one does not actually know in advance.

Their colleague Robert Kurzban designed an experiment whose results appeared to support this hypothesis. Using the memory confusion protocol, they presented subjects with pictures of individuals and sentences, allegedly spoken by these individuals, which presented two sides of a debate. The errors that the subjects made in recalling who said what indicated that they sometimes mis-attributed a statement to a speaker of the same race as the &quot;correct&quot; speaker, although they also sometimes mis-attributed a statement to a speaker &quot;on the same side&quot; as the &quot;correct&quot; speaker. In a second run of the experiment, the team also distinguished the &quot;sides&quot; in the debate by clothing of similar colors; and in this case the effect of racial similarity in causing mistakes almost vanished, being replaced by the color of their clothing. In other words, the first group of subjects, with no clues from clothing, used race as a visual guide to guessing who was on which side of the debate; the second group of subjects used the clothing color as their main visual clue, and the effect of race became very small.

Some research suggests that ethnocentric thinking may have actually contributed to the development of cooperation. Political scientists Ross Hammond and Robert Axelrod created a computer simulation wherein virtual individuals were randomly assigned one of a variety of skin colors, and then one of a variety of trading strategies: be color-blind, favor those of your own color, or favor those of other colors. They found that the ethnocentric individuals clustered together, then grew, until all the non-ethnocentric individuals were wiped out.

In &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot;, evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins writes that &quot;Blood-feuds and inter-clan warfare are easily interpretable in terms of Hamilton&#x27;s genetic theory.&quot; Dawkins writes that racial prejudice, while not evolutionarily adaptive, &quot;could be interpreted as an irrational generalization of a kin-selected tendency to identify with individuals physically resembling oneself, and to be nasty to individuals different in appearance.&quot; Simulation-based experiments in evolutionary game theory have attempted to provide an explanation for the selection of ethnocentric-strategy phenotypes.

Despite support for evolutionary theories relating to an innate origin of racism, various studies have suggested racism is associated with lower intelligence and less diverse peer groups during childhood. A neuroimaging study on amygdala activity during racial matching activities found increased activity to be associated with adolescent age as well as less racially diverse peer groups, which the author conclude suggest a learned aspect of racism. A meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies found amygdala activity correlated to increased scores on implicit measures of racial bias. It was also argued amygdala activity in response to racial stimuli represents increased threat perception rather than the traditional theory of the amygdala activity represented ingroup-outgroup processing. Racism has also been associated with lower childhood IQ in an analysis of 15,000 people in the UK.

== Psychological causes ==
A 2017 study in the &quot;American Political Science Review&quot; found that prejudice towards marginalized groups, such as refugees, could be explained by a failure to take the perspective of the marginalized group. The study found that young Hungarian adults who played a perspective-taking game (a game intended to reduce prejudice towards marginalized groups by having players assume the role of a member of a marginalized group) showed reduced prejudice towards Romani people and refugees, as well as reduced their vote intentions for Hungary&#x27;s overtly racist, far right party by 10%.

== State-sponsored racism ==
State racism—the institutions and practices of a nation-state that are grounded in racist ideology—has played a major role in all instances of settler colonialism, from the United States to Australia. It also played a prominent role in the Nazi German regime, in fascist regimes throughout Europe, and during the early years of Japan&#x27;s Shōwa period. These governments advocated and implemented ideologies and policies that were racist, xenophobic, and, in the case of Nazism, genocidal.

The Nuremberg Race Laws of 1935 prohibited sexual relations between any Aryan and Jew, considering it &quot;Rassenschande&quot;, &quot;racial pollution&quot;. The Nuremberg Laws stripped all Jews, even quarter- and half-Jews (second and first degree &quot;Mischlings&quot;), of their German citizenship. This meant that they had no basic citizens&#x27; rights, e.g., the right to vote. In 1936, Jews were banned from all professional jobs, effectively preventing them from having any influence in education, politics, higher education, and industry. On 15 November 1938, Jewish children were banned from going to normal schools. By April 1939, nearly all Jewish companies had either collapsed under financial pressure and declining profits, or had been persuaded to sell out to the Nazi government. This further reduced their rights as human beings; they were in many ways officially separated from the German populace. Similar laws existed in Bulgaria (The Law for protection of the nation), Hungary, Romania, and Austria.

Legislative state racism is known to have been enforced by the National Party of South Africa during its Apartheid regime between 1948 and 1994. Here, a series of Apartheid legislation was passed through the legal systems to make it legal for white South Africans to have rights which were superior to those of non-white South Africans. Non-white South Africans were not allowed involvement in any governing matters, including voting; access to quality healthcare; the provision of basic services, including clean water; electricity; as well as access to adequate schooling. Non-white South Africans were also prevented from accessing certain public areas, from using certain public transportation, and were required to live only in certain designated areas. Non-white South Africans were taxed differently than white South Africans and they were also required to carry on them at all times additional documentation, which later became known as &quot;dom passes&quot;, to certify their non-white South African citizenship. All of these legislative racial laws were abolished through a series of equal human rights laws which were passed at the end of the Apartheid era in the early 1990s.

==Anti-racism==

Anti-racism includes beliefs, actions, scholarship, movements, and policies which are adopted or developed in order to oppose racism. In general, it promotes an egalitarian society in which people are not discriminated against on the basis of race. Examples of anti-racist movements include the civil rights movement, the Anti-Apartheid Movement and Black Lives Matter. Socialist groups have also been closely aligned with a number of anti-racist organizations such as Anti-Nazi League and Unite Against Fascism. Nonviolent resistance is sometimes embraced as an element of anti-racist movements, although this was not always the case. Hate crime laws, affirmative action, and bans on racist speech are also examples of government policy which is intended to suppress racism.

==See also==

* Afrophobia
* Allport&#x27;s Scale
* Aporophobia
* Christian Identity
* Covert racism
* Creativity (religion)
* Curse and mark of Cain
* Curse of Ham 
* Discrimination based on skin color
* Environmental racism
* Environmental racism in Europe
* Ethnic hatred
* Hate crime
* Hate speech
* Hipster racism
* Historical trauma
* Identitarianism
* Index of racism-related articles
* In-group favoritism
* Labeling theory
* Minority stress
* Nigger
* Racial bias in criminal news
* Racial bias on Wikipedia
* Racial fetishism
* Racial literacy
* Racialization
* Raciolinguistics
* Racist pre-Adamism
* Racism in horror films
* Racism in the LGBT community
* Redlining
* Reverse discrimination
* Romantic racism
* Social interpretations of race
* Speciesism
* Stereotype threat
* Tatarophobia
* Tragic mulatto
* Yellow Peril
==References==
==Further reading==
* Allen, Theodore. (1994). &quot;The Invention of the White Race: Volume 1&quot; London: Verso Books.
* Allen, Theodore. (1997). &quot;The Invention of the White Race: Volume 2&quot; London: Verso Books.
* Barkan, Elazar (1992), &quot;The Retreat of Scientific Racism : Changing Concepts of Race in Britain and the United States between the World Wars&quot;, Cambridge University Press, New York.
* Barth, Boris: nbn:de:0159-2010092173 &quot;Racism &quot;, European History Online, Mainz: Institute of European History, 2011, retrieved: 16 November 2011.
* Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo. 2018. &quot;Racism without Racists: Color-Blind Racism and the Persistence of Racial Inequality in the United States&quot;. Rowman &amp; Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
* Dain, Bruce (2002), &quot;A Hideous Monster of the Mind : American Race Theory in the Early Republic&quot;, Harvard University Press, Cambridge. (18th century US racial theory)
* Daniels, Jessie (1997), &quot;White Lies: Race, Class, Gender and Sexuality in White Supremacist Discourse&quot;, Routledge, New York.
* Daniels, Jessie (2009), &quot;Cyber Racism: White Supremacy Online and the New Attack on Civil Rights&quot;, Rowman &amp; Littlefield, Lanham, MD.
* 
* 
* Gibson, Rich (2005) Against Racism and Irrationalism
* Graves, Joseph. (2004) &quot;The Race Myth&quot; NY: Dutton.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Smedley, Audrey. 2007. &quot;Race in North America: Origins and Evolution of a World View&quot;. Boulder, CO: Westview.
* (historiography of race and racism)
* Taguieff, Pierre-André (1987), &quot;La Force du préjugé : Essai sur le racisme et ses doubles&quot;, Tel Gallimard, La Découverte.
* Poliakov, Leon. The Aryan Myth: A History of Racist and Nationalistic Ideas In Europe (Barnes &amp; Noble Books (1996)) .
* Trepagnier, Barbara. 2006. &quot;Silent Racism: How Well-Meaning White People Perpetuate the Racial Divide&quot;. Paradigm Publishers.
* Twine, France Winddance (1997), &quot;Racism in a Racial Democracy: The Maintenance of White Supremacy in Brazil&quot;, Rutgers University Press.
* UNESCO, &quot;The Race Question&quot;, 1950
* Tali Farkash, &quot;Racists among us&quot; in Y-Net (Yediot Aharonot), &quot;Jewish Scene&quot; section, April 20, 2007
* Winant, Howard &quot;The New Politics of Race&quot; (2004)
* Winant, Howard and Omi, Michael &quot;Racial Formation in the United States&quot; Routeledge (1986); Second Edition (1994).
* Wright W.D. (1998) &quot;Racism Matters&quot;, Westport, CT: Praeger.
==External links==

* Being a Black Male in Cuba – By Lucia Lopez, &quot;Havana Times&quot; 5 May 2009.
* Race, history and culture – Ethics – March 1996 – Extract of two articles by Claude Lévi-Strauss.
* Race, Racism and the Law – Information about race, racism and racial distinctions in the law.
* RacismReview – Created and maintained by American sociologists Joe Feagin, PhD and Jessie Daniels, PhD, provides a research-based analysis of racism.
* The Impact of Racism on Child and Adolescent Health</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="0" end="6" title="Racism" label="Racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254959" start="168" end="172" title="Race (human categorization)" label="race"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="176" end="185" title="ethnicity" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q179742" start="217" end="226" title="prejudice" label="prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="228" end="242" title="discrimination" label="discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q769620" start="479" end="493" title="social actions" label="social actions"/>
<link wikidata="Q28108" start="520" end="537" title="political systems" label="political systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="782" end="799" title="scientific racism" label="scientific racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="891" end="900" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969722" start="1054" end="1062" title="Nativism (politics)" label="nativism"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="1064" end="1074" title="xenophobia" label="xenophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433373" start="1076" end="1085" title="Other (philosophy)" label="otherness"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="1087" end="1098" title="Racial segregation" label="segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="1100" end="1120" title="Hierarchy" label="hierarchical ranking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031455" start="1126" end="1137" title="supremacism" label="supremacism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="1227" end="1241" title="social science" label="social science"/>
<link wikidata="Q402152" start="1560" end="1568" title="ancestry" label="ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12332701" start="1619" end="1640" title="racial discrimination" label="racial discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1804" end="1818" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q743306" start="1826" end="1893" title="Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination" label="Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373356" start="2068" end="2088" title="scientifically false" label="scientifically false"/>
<link wikidata="Q770480" start="2120" end="2126" title="unjust" label="unjust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="2359" end="2377" title="age of imperialism" label="age of imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="2394" end="2404" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="2414" end="2434" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="2508" end="2547" title="racial segregation in the United States" label="racial segregation in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="2593" end="2618" title="apartheid in South Africa" label="apartheid in South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="2652" end="2667" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="2802" end="2810" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="2820" end="2833" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q80034" start="2839" end="2856" title="Armenian genocide" label="Armenian genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q131297" start="2862" end="2878" title="Rwandan genocide" label="Rwandan genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278544" start="2888" end="2941" title="Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia" label="Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245246" start="2986" end="3007" title="European colonization" label="European colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="3011" end="3023" title="Colonization of the Americas" label="the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353647" start="3025" end="3031" title="Colonisation of Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234208" start="3033" end="3037" title="Western imperialism in Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q85125" start="3047" end="3086" title="population transfer in the Soviet Union" label="population transfer in the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="3136" end="3154" title="Indigenous peoples" label="Indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473289" start="3962" end="3975" title="Middle French" label="Middle French"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="4192" end="4198" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="4452" end="4469" title="Pseudoscience" label="pseudo-scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="4604" end="4621" title="scientific racism" label="scientific racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q864503" start="4719" end="4728" title="biologist" label="biologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="4731" end="4746" title="Anthropology" label="anthropologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="4752" end="4764" title="Sociology" label="sociologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7211" start="4774" end="4782" title="Taxonomy (general)" label="taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071" start="4866" end="4875" title="geography" label="geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q212926" start="4904" end="4912" title="endogamy" label="endogamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q720988" start="4914" end="4926" title="Human genome" label="Human genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="5033" end="5058" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="5080" end="5089" title="racialism" label="racialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42106" start="5583" end="5590" title="synonym" label="synonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5691" end="5703" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="5861" end="5875" title="discrimination" label="discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031455" start="5884" end="5895" title="supremacism" label="supremacism"/>
<link wikidata="Q89512" start="5986" end="6001" title="Frederick Hertz" label="Frederick Hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="6160" end="6173" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="6254" end="6260" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="6994" end="6999" title="Power (social and political)" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="7206" end="7209" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="7283" end="7295" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="7352" end="7389" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="7423" end="7454" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242046" start="7544" end="7559" title="economic rights" label="economic rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="7561" end="7574" title="civil rights" label="social rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="7614" end="7622" title="culture" label="cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="7655" end="7668" title="Civil liberties" label="civil liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q853516" start="7783" end="7789" title="Human skin color" label="colour"/>
<link wikidata="Q231002" start="7844" end="7852" title="Nationality" label="national"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425" start="7856" end="7862" title="society" label="social"/>
<link wikidata="Q743306" start="8038" end="8119" title="International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination" label="International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q210272" start="8254" end="8261" title="Cultural heritage" label="descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="8278" end="8284" title="ethnicity" label="ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="8546" end="8620" title="UNESCO" label="United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282081" start="8952" end="8994" title="Discrimination based on skin color" label="discrimination based on ethnicity and race"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="9078" end="9087" title="academia" label="academics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="9099" end="9114" title="Anthropology" label="anthropologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721171" start="9130" end="9141" title="Law of the United Kingdom" label="British law"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="9666" end="9678" title="Sociology" label="Sociologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135710" start="9724" end="9740" title="Social constructivism" label="social construct"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016489" start="10748" end="10763" title="white privilege" label="white privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="10828" end="10837" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="10842" end="10851" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q158060" start="10992" end="11008" title="W. E. B. Du Bois" label="W. E. B. Du Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="11068" end="11086" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148614" start="11170" end="11180" title="color line (civil rights issue)" label="color line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431887" start="11489" end="11499" title="Social inequality" label="inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527264" start="11503" end="11509" title="income" label="income"/>
<link wikidata="Q200535" start="11511" end="11517" title="wealth" label="wealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933764" start="11519" end="11528" title="net worth" label="net worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q161272" start="11631" end="11648" title="social psychology" label="social psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q844569" start="11650" end="11665" title="Identity (social science)" label="racial identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q623971" start="12621" end="12642" title="Social control" label="negatively sanctioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q171180" start="13037" end="13042" title="taboo" label="taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q774081" start="13108" end="13116" title="Implicit-association test" label="implicit"/>
<link wikidata="Q429194" start="13120" end="13135" title="aversive racism" label="aversive racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007271" start="13265" end="13282" title="implicit attitude" label="implicit attitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q17046399" start="13300" end="13318" title="implicit cognition" label="implicit cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q161272" start="14077" end="14096" title="Social psychology" label="social psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q18098124" start="14097" end="14118" title="Jennifer Eberhardt" label="Jennifer L. Eberhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="14129" end="14148" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q830193" start="14622" end="14638" title="advance-fee scam" label="advance-fee scam"/>
<link wikidata="Q167172" start="14767" end="14777" title="stereotype" label="stereotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="14833" end="14841" title="Language" label="Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="14843" end="14854" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q190539" start="14860" end="14869" title="discourse" label="discourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="14903" end="14913" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129466" start="14951" end="14969" title="Discourse analysis" label="Discourse analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253660" start="15687" end="15710" title="The Souls of Black Folk" label="The Souls of Black Folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q388170" start="15753" end="15780" title="African-American literature" label="African-American literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="15867" end="15872" title="Southern United States" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222" start="16069" end="16091" title="Uncle Tom&amp;#x27;s Cabin" label="Uncle Tom&amp;#x27;s Cabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q212340" start="16105" end="16126" title="To Kill a Mockingbird" label="To Kill a Mockingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004170" start="16144" end="16161" title="Imitation of Life (novel)" label="Imitation of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740773" start="16204" end="16217" title="Black Like Me" label="Black Like Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104076" start="16301" end="16331" title="white savior narrative in film" label="white savior narrative in film"/>
<link wikidata="Q653137" start="16453" end="16469" title="Content analysis" label="Textual analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q383968" start="16662" end="16686" title="African-American studies" label="African-American studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q64711016" start="16748" end="16757" title="Whiteness studies" label="whiteness"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="16949" end="16964" title="white supremacy" label="white supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q252000" start="17201" end="17211" title="oppression" label="oppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q189049" start="17720" end="17733" title="ethnocentrism" label="ethnocentrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179742" start="18017" end="18024" title="bigotry" label="bigotry"/>
<link wikidata="Q951894" start="18308" end="18322" title="reverse racism" label="reverse racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003733" start="18594" end="18609" title="color-conscious" label="color-conscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q214244" start="18628" end="18646" title="affirmative action" label="affirmative action"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617524" start="18810" end="18832" title="Stipulative definition" label="stipulative definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136199" start="19304" end="19324" title="Prejudice plus power" label="Prejudice plus power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928045" start="19973" end="19983" title="ambivalence" label="ambivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q853725" start="21108" end="21126" title="social interaction" label="social interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148591" start="21329" end="21351" title="racial color blindness" label="racial color blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q26251562" start="21432" end="21453" title="Eduardo Bonilla-Silva" label="Eduardo Bonilla-Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="21515" end="21525" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178706" start="21661" end="21672" title="institution" label="institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q205665" start="21856" end="21865" title="norm (social)" label="normative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072081" start="21884" end="21899" title="people of color" label="people of color"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433373" start="21904" end="21911" title="Othering" label="othered"/>
<link wikidata="Q848745" start="22129" end="22149" title="institutional racism" label="institutional racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="22418" end="22428" title="xenophobia" label="xenophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q375181" start="22507" end="22515" title="Ingroups and outgroups" label="outgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q375181" start="22533" end="22540" title="Ingroups and outgroups" label="ingroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153967" start="22578" end="22589" title="Communalism (South Asia)" label="communalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="23026" end="23040" title="discrimination" label="discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333457" start="23445" end="23468" title="Economic discrimination" label="Economic discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192553" start="23612" end="23637" title="facial recognition system" label="facial recognition system"/>
<link wikidata="Q848745" start="23664" end="23684" title="Institutional racism" label="Institutional racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143139" start="23700" end="23717" title="structural racism" label="structural racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q848745" start="23719" end="23731" title="state racism" label="state racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q509860" start="23934" end="23952" title="Stokely Carmichael" label="Stokely Carmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056728" start="24230" end="24245" title="Maulana Karenga" label="Maulana Karenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075072" start="24928" end="24937" title="Objectification" label="objectify"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="25892" end="25906" title="discrimination" label="discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254959" start="26031" end="26065" title="Race (human categorization)" label="socially-constructed racial groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q206460" start="26415" end="26431" title="Thomas Schelling" label="Thomas Schelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245246" start="26517" end="26537" title="European colonialism" label="European colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="26595" end="26612" title="White supremacy" label="white supremacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q908734" start="26672" end="26699" title="The White Man&amp;#x27;s Burden" label="The White Man&amp;#x27;s Burden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="26736" end="26747" title="Imperialism" label="imperialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="26840" end="26856" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="26994" end="27035" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="United States Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="27058" end="27070" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495037" start="27174" end="27186" title="dehumanizing" label="dehumanizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q207544" start="27336" end="27349" title="L. Frank Baum" label="L. Frank Baum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261404" start="27601" end="27631" title="Notes on the State of Virginia" label="Notes on the State of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="27658" end="27674" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q795000" start="27862" end="27877" title="black supremacy" label="black supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279752" start="27879" end="27893" title="Arab supremacy" label="Arab supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370788" start="27899" end="27919" title="Sinocentrism" label="East Asian supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007042" start="29386" end="29402" title="micro-aggression" label="micro-aggression"/>
<link wikidata="Q900714" start="29913" end="29921" title="Racial Equality Proposal, 1919" label="proposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769635" start="29968" end="30001" title="Covenant of the League of Nations" label="Covenant of the League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="30054" end="30076" title="Paris Peace Conference, 1919" label="Paris Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q702431" start="30196" end="30224" title="Greater East Asia Conference" label="Greater East Asia Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="30248" end="30258" title="UN Charter" label="UN Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="30424" end="30430" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279096" start="30450" end="30467" title="The Race Question" label="The Race Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q725974" start="30516" end="30530" title="Ashley Montagu" label="Ashley Montagu"/>
<link wikidata="Q128126" start="30532" end="30551" title="Claude Lévi-Strauss" label="Claude Lévi-Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q152452" start="30553" end="30566" title="Gunnar Myrdal" label="Gunnar Myrdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q243419" start="30568" end="30581" title="Julian Huxley" label="Julian Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="30660" end="30673" title="ethnic groups" label="ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="30705" end="30722" title="scientific racism" label="scientific racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="30758" end="30771" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="30969" end="30982" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416790" start="31005" end="31017" title="Social equality" label="equal rights"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31058" end="31117" title="An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy" label="An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="31201" end="31214" title="racial segregation in the United States" label="desegregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="31233" end="31260" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q183191" start="31287" end="31322" title="European Convention on Human Rights" label="European Convention on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q743306" start="31477" end="31558" title="International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination" label="International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="32072" end="32086" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q265236" start="32174" end="32225" title="Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union" label="Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q748720" start="32294" end="32328" title="Institutions of the European Union" label="Institutions of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="32728" end="32745" title="scientific racism" label="scientific racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q25416184" start="32776" end="32797" title="typology (anthropology)" label="racial classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q58588" start="32819" end="32836" title="Johann Blumenbach" label="Johann Blumenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q323800" start="33079" end="33094" title="Polygenism" label="polygenist view"/>
<link wikidata="Q71587" start="33172" end="33189" title="Christoph Meiners" label="Christoph Meiners"/>
<link wikidata="Q490699" start="33602" end="33616" title="Anders Retzius" label="Anders Retzius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33735" end="33746" title="Typology (anthropology)#Typology" label="discredited"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251622" start="33794" end="33811" title="Definitions of whiteness in the United States" label="still widely used"/>
<link wikidata="Q12315497" start="33875" end="33894" title="Hans Peder Steensby" label="Hans Peder Steensby"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="34138" end="34160" title="Australian Aboriginals" label="Australian Aboriginals"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="34324" end="34332" title="academia" label="academia"/>
<link wikidata="Q265799" start="34352" end="34366" title="human genetics" label="human genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q543491" start="34377" end="34390" title="paleogenetics" label="paleogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q29051" start="34392" end="34411" title="social anthropology" label="social anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q32492" start="34413" end="34433" title="comparative politics" label="comparative politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q846742" start="34435" end="34455" title="history of religions" label="history of religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195695" start="34457" end="34473" title="history of ideas" label="history of ideas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="34475" end="34485" title="prehistory" label="prehistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="34487" end="34494" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="34496" end="34502" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="34508" end="34518" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698964" start="34667" end="34673" title="ethnic stereotype" label="ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131714" start="34687" end="34698" title="archetype" label="stereotypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="34729" end="34741" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="34746" end="34759" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q12332701" start="34853" end="34874" title="racial discrimination" label="racial discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q158060" start="34919" end="34926" title="W.E.B. Du Bois" label="Du Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q721322" start="35281" end="35304" title="survival of the fittest" label="survival of the fittest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4327314" start="36131" end="36140" title="Nordicism" label="Nordicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="36165" end="36173" title="Germanic people" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="36238" end="36249" title="Nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q189049" start="36254" end="36266" title="Ethnocentrism" label="ethnocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232054" start="36889" end="36902" title="David C. Rowe" label="David C. Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249477" start="37230" end="37298" title="Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination" label="Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="37690" end="37700" title="xenophobia" label="xenophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189049" start="37705" end="37718" title="ethnocentrism" label="ethnocentrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="37803" end="37811" title="ideology" label="ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="38100" end="38109" title="ethnicity" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="38114" end="38125" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414937" start="38159" end="38168" title="combatant" label="combatant"/>
<link wikidata="Q766875" start="38341" end="38356" title="ethnic conflict" label="ethnic conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="38749" end="38754" title="morality" label="moral"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="38758" end="38765" title="ethics" label="ethical"/>
<link wikidata="Q179077" start="38821" end="38845" title="Pontiac&amp;#x27;s Rebellion" label="Pontiac&amp;#x27;s Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q810024" start="39080" end="39094" title="Basil Davidson" label="Basil Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="39366" end="39391" title="Transatlantic slave trade" label="Transatlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="39426" end="39444" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="39464" end="39477" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="39550" end="39559" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="39597" end="39610" title="Western culture" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="39745" end="39753" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q80034" start="39767" end="39784" title="Armenian genocide" label="Armenian genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="39794" end="39803" title="The Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="39845" end="39873" title="colonization of the Americas" label="colonization of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353647" start="39875" end="39881" title="Colonisation of Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234208" start="39887" end="39891" title="Western imperialism in Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="39893" end="39911" title="Indigenous peoples" label="Indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="40043" end="40070" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="40121" end="40136" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q231002" start="40179" end="40192" title="nationalities" label="nationalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q150995" start="40336" end="40355" title="Peace of Westphalia" label="Peace of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="40357" end="40368" title="Nationalism" label="Nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821974" start="40431" end="40445" title="levée en masse" label="levée en masse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="40459" end="40476" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="40503" end="40515" title="conscription" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="40564" end="40572" title="French First Republic" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q234081" start="40591" end="40604" title="Ancien Régime" label="Ancien Régime"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="40673" end="40698" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="40740" end="40748" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266" start="40827" end="40833" title="nation" label="nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="40857" end="40869" title="nation-state" label="nation-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q150995" start="40876" end="40893" title="Westphalia Treaty" label="Westphalia Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="40960" end="40974" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="40980" end="40997" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="41003" end="41017" title="Swedish Empire" label="Swedish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="41023" end="41040" title="France" label="Kingdom of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380101" start="41106" end="41121" title="Kabinettskriege" label="Kabinettskriege"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="41148" end="41160" title="nation-state" label="nation-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241" start="41231" end="41240" title="patriotism" label="patriotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322229" start="41274" end="41279" title="Enlightenment Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="41291" end="41304" title="Peninsula War" label="Peninsula War"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="41418" end="41436" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="41522" end="41536" title="Industrial Era" label="Industrial Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="41567" end="41583" title="1848 Revolutions" label="1848 Revolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="41589" end="41608" title="Italian unification" label="Italian unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="41635" end="41654" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="41707" end="41720" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="41751" end="41771" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Palace of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q154705" start="41792" end="41810" title="German unification" label="German unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="41828" end="41842" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472463" start="41854" end="41872" title="sick man of Europe" label="sick man of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="41971" end="41996" title="Austrian-Hungarian Empire" label="Austrian-Hungarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="42032" end="42043" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="42081" end="42087" title="Balkan" label="Balkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="42110" end="42120" title="minorities" label="minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q637251" start="42146" end="42164" title="Ethnic nationalism" label="Ethnic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q263985" start="42371" end="42391" title="Romantic nationalist" label="Romantic nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q155547" start="42465" end="42478" title="Johann Gottfried Herder" label="Johann Herder"/>
<link wikidata="Q102585" start="42492" end="42504" title="Johann Gottlieb Fichte" label="Johan Fichte"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="42575" end="42590" title="Friedrich Hegel" label="Friedrich Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q310791" start="42624" end="42638" title="Jules Michelet" label="Jules Michelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q59599" start="42670" end="42689" title="liberal nationalism" label="liberal nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q157155" start="42722" end="42734" title="Ernest Renan" label="Ernest Renan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149587" start="42835" end="42839" title="Volk" label="Volk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="42976" end="42986" title="plebiscite" label="plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="43008" end="43024" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="43134" end="43145" title="imperialist" label="imperialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q60025" start="43153" end="43166" title="Hannah Arendt" label="Hannah Arendt"/>
<link wikidata="Q155812" start="43205" end="43218" title="pan-Germanism" label="pan-Germanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149587" start="43291" end="43295" title="Volk" label="Volk"/>
<link wikidata="Q559398" start="43321" end="43338" title="Alldeutscher Verband" label="Pan-German League"/>
<link wikidata="Q329618" start="43401" end="43419" title="German colonial empire" label="German imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q717939" start="43430" end="43444" title="racial hygiene" label="racial hygiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="43490" end="43494" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q589614" start="43531" end="43548" title="Völkisch movement" label="Völkisch movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q20825742" start="43595" end="43620" title="German ethnic nationalist" label="German ethnic nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390212" start="43674" end="43693" title="racial antisemitism" label="racial antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q156652" start="43747" end="43760" title="Thule Society" label="Thule Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q631205" start="43803" end="43829" title="German Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="German Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="43878" end="43888" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="43934" end="43949" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q836329" start="44067" end="44078" title="master race" label="master race"/>
<link wikidata="Q718909" start="44102" end="44112" title="Aryan race" label="Aryan race"/>
<link wikidata="Q714773" start="44132" end="44143" title="Nordic race" label="Nordic race"/>
<link wikidata="Q154278" start="44549" end="44565" title="ethnic cleansing" label="ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062653" start="44899" end="44928" title="History of far-right movements in France" label="far-right movements in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q173457" start="44952" end="44966" title="Dreyfus Affair" label="Dreyfus Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q171826" start="45100" end="45114" title="Alfred Dreyfus" label="Alfred Dreyfus"/>
<link wikidata="Q504" start="45223" end="45233" title="Émile Zola" label="Émile Zola"/>
<link wikidata="Q741304" start="45251" end="45266" title="J&amp;#x27;Accuse…!" label="J&amp;#x27;Accuse…!"/>
<link wikidata="Q314957" start="45354" end="45368" title="Maurice Barrès" label="Maurice Barrès"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048" start="45467" end="45482" title="Charles Maurras" label="Charles Maurras"/>
<link wikidata="Q49629" start="45528" end="45544" title="Action française" label="Action française"/>
<link wikidata="Q385625" start="45759" end="45767" title="Metic" label="métèques"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="45888" end="45901" title="French people" label="French people"/>
<link wikidata="Q501880" start="45971" end="45984" title="Bernard Lewis" label="Bernard Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q999259" start="45999" end="46016" title="Greek philosophy" label="Greek philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="46017" end="46026" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q134313" start="46113" end="46122" title="barbarian" label="barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q179352" start="46229" end="46237" title="Despotism" label="despotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="46412" end="46418" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="46889" end="46899" title="Heredity" label="hereditary"/>
<link wikidata="Q189049" start="47667" end="47680" title="ethnocentrism" label="ethnocentrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q570868" start="47697" end="47704" title="Hebrews" label="Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q252837" start="47750" end="47757" title="Gentile" label="Gentile"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="47831" end="47839" title="Greeks" label="Hellenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="47890" end="47899" title="Scythians" label="Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="47907" end="47916" title="Egyptians" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="47972" end="47984" title="civilization" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="48138" end="48157" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic empires"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="48166" end="48178" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q984212" start="48546" end="48574" title="MENA" label="Middle East and North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q294116" start="48593" end="48605" title="Al-Muqaddasi" label="Al-Muqaddasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q293497" start="48607" end="48615" title="Al-Jahiz" label="Al-Jahiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q168705" start="48617" end="48626" title="Al-Masudi" label="Al-Masudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11826" start="48628" end="48645" title="Abu Rayhan Biruni" label="Abu Rayhan Biruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q302835" start="48647" end="48667" title="Nasir al-Din al-Tusi" label="Nasir al-Din al-Tusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q984663" start="48673" end="48685" title="Ibn Qutaybah" label="Ibn Qutaybah"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="48698" end="48709" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="48804" end="48808" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="48843" end="48862" title="Early Muslim conquests" label="extensive conquests"/>
<link wikidata="Q965947" start="48867" end="48878" title="Arab slave trade" label="slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q263307" start="48897" end="48909" title="Aristotelianism" label="Aristotelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274353" start="48946" end="48965" title="Early Islamic philosophy" label="Muslim philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q146666" start="48983" end="48987" title="Zanj" label="Zanj"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="48989" end="48994" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="49000" end="49014" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359782" start="49037" end="49052" title="Judeo-Christian" label="Judeo-Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918061" start="49298" end="49308" title="Ethiopians" label="Ethiopians"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="49372" end="49390" title="sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="49652" end="49663" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q49167" start="50233" end="50252" title="Wesleyan University" label="Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q42865" start="50290" end="50302" title="Orientalists" label="Orientalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="50324" end="50335" title="colonialist" label="colonialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10649809" start="50485" end="50496" title="racializing" label="racializing"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="50507" end="50513" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="50621" end="50634" title="Arab nationalism" label="Arab identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157206" start="50695" end="50709" title="Robert Hoyland" label="Robert Hoyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28169577" start="50745" end="50758" title="Arab identity" label="Arab identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455917" start="50842" end="50887" title="Umayyad conquest of Hispania" label="Umayyad Caliphate&amp;#x27;s conquest of Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="50906" end="50913" title="Berbers" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="50937" end="50947" title="Visigoths" label="Visigothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="50967" end="50977" title="Al-Andalus" label="Al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508898" start="51004" end="51032" title="Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain" label="Golden age of Jewish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="51108" end="51119" title="Reconquista" label="Reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51264" end="51301" title="Granada War#Last stand at Granada" label="fall of the Nasrid kingdom of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="51326" end="51337" title="Ferdinand V of Spain" label="Ferdinand V"/>
<link wikidata="Q45859" start="51342" end="51352" title="Isabella I of Spain" label="Isabella I"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="51356" end="51373" title="Reyes Catolicos" label="Catholic monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="51404" end="51413" title="Spanish people" label="Spaniards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745483" start="51440" end="51458" title="limpieza de sangre" label="limpieza de sangre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51592" end="51602" title="Nobility#&amp;quot;Blue&amp;quot; blood" label="blue blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129467" start="51722" end="51736" title="Converso" label="New Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="52407" end="52412" title="white people" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="52602" end="52607" title="Moors" label="Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="52624" end="52638" title="Sephardic Jews" label="Sephardic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="52648" end="52665" title="Iberian peninsula" label="Iberian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="52681" end="52685" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="52690" end="52696" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129467" start="52713" end="52720" title="Converso" label="convert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094510" start="52758" end="52771" title="New Christian" label="New Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494829" start="52834" end="52847" title="Old Christian" label="Old Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="52881" end="52887" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="52980" end="52991" title="Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="53026" end="53041" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="53096" end="53103" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="53108" end="53113" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="53267" end="53274" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="53368" end="53376" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776440" start="53482" end="53499" title="Marquis of Pombal" label="Marquis of Pombal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047607" start="53661" end="53689" title="Spanish colonization of the Americas" label="colonization of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q430167" start="53890" end="53901" title="Spanish Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229264" start="53907" end="53924" title="Valladolid debate" label="Valladolid debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="53970" end="53977" title="Indigenous people of the Americas" label="natives"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="53991" end="54000" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q207416" start="54057" end="54079" title="Bartolomé de Las Casas" label="Bartolomé de Las Casas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="54115" end="54126" title="philosophy" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q940132" start="54128" end="54151" title="Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda" label="Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="54180" end="54187" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q119094" start="54198" end="54213" title="human sacrifice" label="human sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853058" start="54228" end="54239" title="Human cannibalism" label="cannibalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="54462" end="54473" title="natural law" label="natural law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367940" start="54634" end="54651" title="Catholic theology" label="Catholic theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379243" start="55183" end="55195" title="Castas" label="caste system"/>
<link wikidata="Q179742" start="55466" end="55475" title="prejudice" label="prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="55793" end="55808" title="Michel Foucault" label="Michel Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483107" start="55857" end="55876" title="Early modern Europe" label="Early Modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q190539" start="55890" end="55899" title="discourse" label="discourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="56037" end="56048" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="56100" end="56113" title="United Kingdom" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="56138" end="56144" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035338" start="56163" end="56178" title="Henri de Boulainvilliers" label="Boulainvilliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q320870" start="56192" end="56206" title="Nicolas Fréret" label="Nicolas Fréret"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="56246" end="56263" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q294344" start="56265" end="56271" title="Emmanuel-Joseph Sieyès" label="Sieyès"/>
<link wikidata="Q381092" start="56289" end="56305" title="Augustin Thierry" label="Augustin Thierry"/>
<link wikidata="Q323245" start="56310" end="56317" title="Antoine Augustin Cournot" label="Cournot"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="56643" end="56655" title="nation-state" label="nation-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q189203" start="56662" end="56673" title="anachronism" label="anachronism"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="56760" end="56777" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="56805" end="56816" title="aristocracy" label="aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207304" start="56862" end="56874" title="Estates General (France)" label="Third Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="57001" end="57007" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364601" start="57098" end="57110" title="Gallo-Romans" label="Gallo-Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895359" start="57183" end="57200" title="right of conquest" label="right of conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084476" start="57275" end="57294" title="François Dominique de Reynaud de Montlosier" label="Comte de Montlosier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="57316" end="57333" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090033" start="57587" end="57624" title="miscegenation" label="mixture of all races and of all times"/>
<link wikidata="Q637251" start="57738" end="57756" title="ethnic nationalist" label="ethnic nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149587" start="57819" end="57823" title="Volk (German word)" label="folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q155812" start="57860" end="57873" title="pan-Germanism" label="pan-Germanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83280" start="57875" end="57886" title="pan-Turkism" label="pan-Turkism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193476" start="57888" end="57899" title="pan-Arabism" label="pan-Arabism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182267" start="57905" end="57916" title="pan-Slavism" label="pan-Slavism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672648" start="58079" end="58094" title="social conflict" label="social conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="58379" end="58390" title="eugenicists" label="eugenicists"/>
<link wikidata="Q848745" start="58504" end="58516" title="state racism" label="state racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="58558" end="58565" title="Marxists" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q190721" start="58666" end="58683" title="philosophy of history" label="engine of history"/>
<link wikidata="Q391156" start="58767" end="58779" title="essentialist" label="essentialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744607" start="58843" end="58857" title="class struggle" label="class struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704365" start="58943" end="58964" title="The Will to Knowledge" label="The Will to Knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="59058" end="59071" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="59079" end="59093" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="59136" end="59144" title="heredity" label="heredity"/>
<link wikidata="Q60025" start="59217" end="59230" title="Hannah Arendt" label="Hannah Arendt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327843" start="59255" end="59285" title="The Origins of Totalitarianism" label="The Origins of Totalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q304121" start="59426" end="59447" title="New Imperialism" label="imperialist conquests"/>
<link wikidata="Q312492" start="59535" end="59562" title="Herero and Namaqua Genocide" label="Herero and Namaqua Genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q80034" start="59583" end="59600" title="Armenian genocide" label="Armenian genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="59616" end="59631" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q908734" start="59651" end="59678" title="The White Man&amp;#x27;s Burden" label="The White Man&amp;#x27;s Burden"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="59782" end="59798" title="Western culture" label="European culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q965947" start="60214" end="60230" title="Arab slave trade" label="Arab slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q12981973" start="60279" end="60290" title="History of slavery" label="slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="60424" end="60442" title="aboriginal peoples" label="aboriginal peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q232041" start="60459" end="60474" title="Saartjie Baartman" label="Hottentot Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82925" start="60652" end="60665" title="Joseph Conrad" label="Joseph Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q129778" start="60682" end="60699" title="Heart of Darkness" label="Heart of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q76048" start="60739" end="60755" title="Congo Free State" label="Congo Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q12967" start="60776" end="60797" title="Leopold II of Belgium" label="Leopold II of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191194" start="60861" end="60875" title="Hamites" label="Hamitic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344487" start="60887" end="60917" title="European exploration of Africa" label="European exploration of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185952" start="61035" end="61044" title="Demographics of Eritrea" label="Eritreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q241696" start="61046" end="61053" title="Somali people" label="Somalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="61055" end="61062" title="Berber people" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="61340" end="61360" title="Black people" label="Sub-Saharan Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q62928" start="61394" end="61409" title="Semitic peoples" label="Semitic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129609" start="61525" end="61539" title="Caucasian race" label="Caucasian race"/>
<link wikidata="Q718909" start="61556" end="61570" title="Aryan race" label="Indo-Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q62928" start="61572" end="61579" title="Semitic people" label="Semites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330715" start="61589" end="61603" title="Mediterranean race" label="Mediterraneans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090033" start="61720" end="61733" title="miscegenation" label="interbreeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130557" start="61739" end="61745" title="Negroe" label="Negroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q66484" start="61792" end="61804" title="Carl Meinhof" label="Carl Meinhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="61834" end="61839" title="Bantu peoples" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191194" start="61871" end="61878" title="Hamitic" label="Hamitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q338460" start="61883" end="61888" title="Negroid" label="Negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q694525" start="61912" end="61916" title="Nama people" label="Nama"/>
<link wikidata="Q219252" start="61920" end="61924" title="Khoi" label="Khoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="61967" end="61974" title="Bushmen" label="Bushmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q459387" start="62017" end="62024" title="Khoisan" label="Khoisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q210911" start="62086" end="62115" title="American Colonization Society" label="American Colonization Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="62314" end="62324" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995761" start="62676" end="62688" title="Whitecapping" label="Whitecapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q191026" start="63851" end="63865" title="Francis Galton" label="Francis Galton"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="63955" end="63964" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q689220" start="64036" end="64057" title="German federal election, March 1933" label="1933 German elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q700924" start="64118" end="64163" title="End of World War II in Europe" label="End of World War II on the European continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q836329" start="64213" end="64224" title="master race" label="master race"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="64627" end="64634" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="64791" end="64804" title="Romani people" label="Romani people"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="64806" end="64821" title="Black people" label="people of color"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="64827" end="64832" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="64841" end="64846" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="64848" end="64853" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="64855" end="64863" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q483569" start="64865" end="64876" title="Belarusians" label="Belarusians"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="64878" end="64888" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="64893" end="64899" title="Czechs" label="Czechs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142150" start="65004" end="65020" title="life unworthy of life" label="unworthy of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="65113" end="65122" title="The Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983410" start="65136" end="65148" title="Nazi crimes against the Polish nation" label="ethnic Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278544" start="65162" end="65174" title="Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia" label="ethnic Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q117571" start="65195" end="65201" title="Porajmos" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="65278" end="65283" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q326822" start="65306" end="65319" title="Untermenschen" label="Untermenschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q75849" start="65372" end="65388" title="Alfred Rosenberg" label="Alfred Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="65412" end="65420" title="Klansman" label="Klansman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871107" start="65421" end="65437" title="Lothrop Stoddard" label="Lothrop Stoddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q157136" start="65668" end="65680" title="Lebensraum" label="living space"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="65839" end="65848" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983410" start="65916" end="65921" title="Nazi crimes against the Polish nation" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715064" start="65927" end="65938" title="German mistreatment of Soviet prisoners of war" label="Soviet POWs"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="66138" end="66146" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q695020" start="66299" end="66324" title="massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia" label="ethnicity-based massacres"/>
<link wikidata="Q737212" start="66332" end="66356" title="Ukrainian Insurgent Army" label="Ukrainian Insurgent Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="66403" end="66418" title="Occupation of Poland (1939–45)" label="occupied Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36965" start="66688" end="66700" title="Ante Pavelić" label="Ante Pavelić"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="66709" end="66715" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="66738" end="66753" title="Croats" label="Croatian nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="66863" end="66868" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265120" start="66908" end="66929" title="Croatian nationalism" label="Croatian nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="67080" end="67108" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278544" start="67255" end="67263" title="Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q181589" start="67625" end="67648" title="anti-miscegenation laws" label="anti-miscegenation laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q27906" start="67714" end="67735" title="Nuremberg Laws" label="Nuremberg racial laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q48244" start="67807" end="67817" title="Mein Kampf" label="Mein Kampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="68497" end="68518" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="68640" end="68657" title="Northern European" label="Northern European"/>
<link wikidata="Q862086" start="68803" end="68810" title="Indian people" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612823" start="68975" end="69001" title="Naturalization Act of 1790" label="Naturalization Act of 1790"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062270" start="69071" end="69106" title="United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind" label="United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind"/>
<link wikidata="Q6696532" start="69281" end="69304" title="Luce–Celler Act of 1946" label="Luce–Celler Act of 1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q505311" start="69395" end="69434" title="Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965" label="Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="69532" end="69547" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316294" start="69632" end="69652" title="Durban Riot" label="race riots in Durban"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120990" start="69661" end="69668" title="Indian South Africans" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q129962" start="69673" end="69678" title="Zulus" label="Zulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q315522" start="69696" end="69702" title="Ne Win" label="Ne Win"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535147" start="69836" end="69851" title="Burmese Indians" label="Burmese Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535147" start="69877" end="69898" title="Racial Discrimination against Burmese Indians" label="racial discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q75844" start="69984" end="70003" title="Zanzibar Revolution" label="Zanzibar Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="70048" end="70052" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q48231" start="70217" end="70225" title="Idi Amin" label="Idi Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207409" start="70340" end="70360" title="Expulsion of Asians in Uganda in 1972" label="Uganda&amp;#x27;s Asians"/>
<link wikidata="Q740718" start="70450" end="70464" title="National Party (South Africa)" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="70540" end="70549" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354415" start="70745" end="70771" title="Internal resistance to South African apartheid" label="struggle against apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q518753" start="70810" end="70830" title="Sharpeville Massacre" label="Sharpeville Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q153081" start="70844" end="70859" title="Soweto uprising" label="Soweto uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869958" start="70873" end="70894" title="Church Street bombing" label="Church Street bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035103" start="70912" end="70933" title="Cape Town peace march" label="Cape Town peace march"/>
<link wikidata="Q75756" start="70974" end="70989" title="Second Congo War" label="Congo Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q171927" start="71003" end="71015" title="Pygmy people" label="Pygmy people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853058" start="71253" end="71264" title="Human cannibalism" label="cannibalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039820" start="71307" end="71312" title="Mbuti" label="Mbuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="71336" end="71355" title="UN Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="71391" end="71413" title="Crimes against humanity" label="crime against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="71428" end="71436" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="71541" end="71549" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="71580" end="71587" title="Bushmen" label="Bushmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10707" start="71719" end="71732" title="Robert Mugabe" label="Robert Mugabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q837424" start="71788" end="71817" title="Nanjing Anti-African protests" label="mass demonstrations and riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="71846" end="71853" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="71947" end="71959" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8981432" start="71980" end="71988" title="Lou Jing" label="Lou Jing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404284" start="72221" end="72236" title="racism in China" label="racism in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004847" start="72413" end="72421" title="Slavery in contemporary Africa" label="enslaved"/>
<link wikidata="Q190758" start="72476" end="72491" title="Darfur conflict" label="Darfur conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q990527" start="72639" end="72644" title="Diffa" label="Diffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q379693" start="72738" end="72749" title="deportation" label="deportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749287" start="72855" end="72880" title="Jakarta riots of May 1998" label="Jakarta riots of May 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q44596" start="72881" end="72889" title="Discrimination against Chinese Indonesians" label="targeted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945786" start="72895" end="72913" title="Chinese Indonesian" label="Chinese Indonesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518191" start="72920" end="72944" title="Anti-Chinese legislation in Indonesia" label="anti-Chinese legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q779191" start="73011" end="73018" title="Overseas Chinese" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="73158" end="73174" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009633" start="73188" end="73200" title="Indians in Fiji" label="Indo-Fijians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597438" start="73236" end="73253" title="2000 Fijian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="Fiji coup in 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004875" start="73490" end="73500" title="Bumiputera (Malaysia)" label="Bumiputera"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="73524" end="73542" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217132" start="73659" end="73692" title="persecution of Muslims in Myanmar" label="violence against Rohingya Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="73696" end="73703" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="73759" end="73777" title="racial segregation in the United States" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="73838" end="73862" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="74095" end="74107" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q584475" start="74161" end="74178" title="Anti-Romanyism" label="anti-Romani views"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="74236" end="74242" title="Romani people" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="74474" end="74492" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="74732" end="74755" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q106810407" start="74943" end="74958" title="stop and search" label="stop and search"/>
<link wikidata="Q20090024" start="75081" end="75115" title="discrimination in education" label="racial discrimination in education"/>
<link wikidata="Q304121" start="75470" end="75485" title="New Imperialism" label="New Imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="75568" end="75574" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q131015" start="75596" end="75606" title="positivism" label="positivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901593" start="75646" end="75656" title="monogenism" label="monogenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q130352" start="75752" end="75763" title="creationist" label="creationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382550" start="75862" end="75899" title="unilineal evolution" label="unilineal theories of social progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q721322" start="76050" end="76073" title="survival of the fittest" label="survival of the fittest"/>
<link wikidata="Q144535" start="76098" end="76113" title="Herbert Spencer" label="Herbert Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q202261" start="76178" end="76194" title="social Darwinism" label="social Darwinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="76209" end="76223" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165434" start="76286" end="76304" title="The Descent of Man" label="The Descent of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="76769" end="76777" title="eugenics" label="eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q559003" start="76798" end="76810" title="Social degeneration" label="degeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="76845" end="76853" title="heredity" label="heredity"/>
<link wikidata="Q27172" start="77041" end="77062" title="physical anthropology" label="physical anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6656244" start="77064" end="77077" title="anthropometry" label="anthropometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q240389" start="77079" end="77090" title="craniometry" label="craniometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q188584" start="77092" end="77102" title="phrenology" label="phrenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q841933" start="77104" end="77115" title="physiognomy" label="physiognomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28598" start="77270" end="77291" title="cultural anthropology" label="cultural anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q76857" start="77293" end="77303" title="Franz Boas" label="Franz Boas"/>
<link wikidata="Q29051" start="77334" end="77353" title="social anthropology" label="social anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q184992" start="77355" end="77375" title="Bronisław Malinowski" label="Bronisław Malinowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q135576" start="77377" end="77399" title="Alfred Radcliffe-Brown" label="Alfred Radcliffe-Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q43455" start="77429" end="77438" title="ethnology" label="ethnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q128126" start="77440" end="77459" title="Claude Lévi-Strauss" label="Claude Lévi-Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q337897" start="77500" end="77523" title="Modern synthesis (20th century)" label="neo-Darwinian synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080021" start="77750" end="77781" title="gene-centered view of evolution" label="gene-centered view of evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q192446" start="77813" end="77833" title="Human Genome Project" label="Human Genome Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278940" start="77915" end="77945" title="Race and genetics" label="genetic basis to racial groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="78145" end="78153" title="eugenics" label="eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q191026" start="78179" end="78193" title="Francis Galton" label="Francis Galton"/>
<link wikidata="Q559003" start="78250" end="78262" title="Social degeneration" label="degeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="78281" end="78291" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022593" start="78341" end="78368" title="inheritance of intelligence" label="inheritance of intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q170277" start="78411" end="78431" title="intelligence testing" label="intelligence testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q504" start="78518" end="78528" title="Émile Zola" label="Émile Zola"/>
<link wikidata="Q6027" start="78602" end="78621" title="Les Rougon-Macquart" label="Les Rougon-Macquart"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="78645" end="78653" title="heredity" label="heredity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754235" start="78747" end="78775" title="Son Excellence Eugène Rougon" label="Son Excellence Eugène Rougon"/>
<link wikidata="Q663632" start="78803" end="78820" title="Le Docteur Pascal" label="Le Docteur Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="78885" end="78895" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197590" start="78903" end="78919" title="L&amp;#x27;Assommoir" label="L&amp;#x27;Assommoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="78928" end="78940" title="prostitution" label="prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138346" start="78948" end="78952" title="Nana (novel)" label="Nana"/>
<link wikidata="Q149086" start="78965" end="78973" title="homicide" label="homicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q942810" start="78981" end="78996" title="La Bête humaine" label="La Bête humaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="79025" end="79042" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazism in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279096" start="79414" end="79431" title="The Race Question" label="The Race Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q2761462" start="79686" end="79737" title="International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation" label="International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q620737" start="79813" end="79831" title="Appeasement of Hitler" label="appeasement policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="79905" end="79918" title="Nazi ideology" label="Nazi ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q78492" start="79931" end="79938" title="Tomáš Masaryk" label="Masaryk"/>
<link wikidata="Q152274" start="79943" end="79948" title="Edvard Beneš" label="Beneš"/>
<link wikidata="Q15912661" start="80205" end="80239" title="Third Reich&amp;#x27;s racial policies" label="Third Reich&amp;#x27;s racial policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q701673" start="80245" end="80262" title="Nazi eugenics" label="eugenics programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="80296" end="80309" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="80326" end="80339" title="Romani people" label="Romani people"/>
<link wikidata="Q117571" start="80347" end="80356" title="Porrajmos" label="Porrajmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q117571" start="80362" end="80378" title="Porajmos" label="Romani Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q76857" start="80544" end="80551" title="Franz Boas" label="Boasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279096" start="80754" end="80771" title="The Race Question" label="The Race Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q264918" start="80834" end="80852" title="Arthur de Gobineau" label="Arthur de Gobineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058688" start="80866" end="80911" title="An Essay on the Inequality of the Human Races" label="An Essay on the Inequality of the Human Races"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035338" start="81088" end="81103" title="Henri de Boulainvilliers" label="Boulainvilliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="81324" end="81331" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589859" start="81390" end="81415" title="Georges Vacher de Lapouge" label="Georges Vacher de Lapouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q25416184" start="81435" end="81452" title="typology (anthropology)" label="typology of races"/>
<link wikidata="Q179733" start="81560" end="81565" title="Aryan" label="Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998874" start="81583" end="81598" title="Cephalic index" label="dolichocephalic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="81676" end="81679" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q17625380" start="81738" end="81765" title="hierarchical classification" label="hierarchical classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q714773" start="81815" end="81829" title="Nordic race" label="Homo europaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q958572" start="81882" end="81894" title="Homo alpinus" label="Homo alpinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136880" start="81902" end="81911" title="Auvergne (province)" label="Auvergnat"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="81913" end="81920" title="Turkish people" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330715" start="81951" end="81969" title="Homo mediterraneus" label="Homo mediterraneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="81983" end="81993" title="Naples" label="Neapolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="81995" end="82002" title="Andalusia" label="Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="82035" end="82047" title="social class" label="social class"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="82362" end="82373" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q208701" start="82518" end="82534" title="labour condition" label="labour condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672648" start="82594" end="82609" title="social conflict" label="social conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q15126623" start="82678" end="82695" title="William Z. Ripley" label="William Z. Ripley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759187" start="82742" end="82761" title="The Races of Europe (Ripley)" label="The Races of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q57737" start="82866" end="82882" title="Houston Stewart Chamberlain" label="H.S. Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="82937" end="82948" title="naturalization" label="naturalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337762" start="83029" end="83042" title="Madison Grant" label="Madison Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756256" start="83077" end="83106" title="The Passing of the Great Race" label="The Passing of the Great Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434492" start="83163" end="83186" title="Immigration Act of 1924" label="Immigration Act of 1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="83235" end="83240" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569977" start="83352" end="83361" title="Human zoo" label="Human zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="83552" end="83564" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6656244" start="83569" end="83582" title="anthropometry" label="anthropometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413239" start="83584" end="83594" title="Joice Heth" label="Joice Heth"/>
<link wikidata="Q223766" start="83640" end="83651" title="Phineas Taylor Barnum" label="P.T. Barnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q232041" start="83697" end="83714" title="Saartjie Baartman" label="Saartjie Baartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q65264" start="83859" end="83873" title="Carl Hagenbeck" label="Carl Hagenbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q171927" start="83988" end="83993" title="Pygmies" label="pygmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q557565" start="83994" end="84003" title="Ota Benga" label="Ota Benga"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="84029" end="84039" title="eugenicist" label="eugenicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337762" start="84040" end="84053" title="Madison Grant" label="Madison Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q739792" start="84067" end="84076" title="Bronx Zoo" label="Bronx Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41050" start="84154" end="84163" title="orangutan" label="orangutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183493" start="84191" end="84200" title="Darwinism" label="Darwinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q202261" start="84213" end="84229" title="social Darwinism" label="social Darwinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="84270" end="84276" title="Charles Darwin" label="Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062234" start="84323" end="84342" title="Colonial Exhibition" label="Colonial Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q178631" start="84353" end="84359" title="Kanaks" label="Kanaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="84365" end="84378" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q74035" start="84450" end="84475" title="Expo &amp;#x27;58" label="Brussels&amp;#x27; World Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701956" start="84549" end="84559" title="John Tooby" label="John Tooby"/>
<link wikidata="Q451962" start="84564" end="84577" title="Leda Cosmides" label="Leda Cosmides"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="84762" end="84779" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157939" start="85243" end="85257" title="Robert Kurzban" label="Robert Kurzban"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815716" start="85342" end="85367" title="memory confusion protocol" label="memory confusion protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q212789" start="86925" end="86941" title="The Selfish Gene" label="The Selfish Gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q44461" start="86972" end="86987" title="Richard Dawkins" label="Richard Dawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q15451" start="87078" end="87086" title="W. D. Hamilton" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q741598" start="87094" end="87108" title="kin selection" label="genetic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298789" start="87429" end="87453" title="evolutionary game theory" label="evolutionary game theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q848745" start="89093" end="89105" title="State racism" label="State racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q716815" start="89236" end="89255" title="settler colonialism" label="settler colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="89333" end="89344" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi German"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="89356" end="89363" title="Fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q327567" start="89434" end="89446" title="Shōwa period" label="Shōwa period"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="89566" end="89572" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q27906" start="89590" end="89609" title="Nuremberg Laws" label="Nuremberg Race Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q565284" start="89694" end="89707" title="Rassenschande" label="Rassenschande"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="89957" end="89970" title="the right to vote" label="right to vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901069" start="90540" end="90576" title="Law for protection of the nation" label="The Law for protection of the nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q740718" start="90674" end="90688" title="National Party (South Africa)" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="90716" end="90725" title="Apartheid" label="Apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430295" start="90774" end="90795" title="Apartheid legislation in South Africa" label="Apartheid legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="91712" end="91724" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738074" start="91870" end="91879" title="Political movement" label="movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q546113" start="91885" end="91893" title="Public policy" label="policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="92113" end="92134" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583158" start="92140" end="92163" title="Anti-Apartheid Movement" label="Anti-Apartheid Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600530" start="92168" end="92186" title="Black Lives Matter" label="Black Lives Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="92188" end="92197" title="Socialist" label="Socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098407" start="92287" end="92303" title="Anti-Nazi League" label="Anti-Nazi League"/>
<link wikidata="Q13625190" start="92308" end="92329" title="Unite Against Fascism" label="Unite Against Fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q754479" start="92331" end="92352" title="Nonviolent resistance" label="Nonviolent resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q459409" start="92454" end="92464" title="Hate crime" label="Hate crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q214244" start="92471" end="92489" title="affirmative action" label="affirmative action"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906231" start="92611" end="92621" title="Afrophobia" label="Afrophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854407" start="92624" end="92644" title="Allport&amp;#x27;s Scale" label="Allport&amp;#x27;s Scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5701611" start="92647" end="92658" title="Aporophobia" label="Aporophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q477317" start="92661" end="92679" title="Christian Identity" label="Christian Identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179304" start="92682" end="92695" title="Covert racism" label="Covert racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q679584" start="92698" end="92719" title="Creativity (religion)" label="Creativity (religion)"/>
<link wikidata="Q492728" start="92722" end="92744" title="Curse and mark of Cain" label="Curse and mark of Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270037" start="92747" end="92759" title="Curse of Ham" label="Curse of Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282081" start="92763" end="92797" title="Discrimination based on skin color" label="Discrimination based on skin color"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491965" start="92800" end="92820" title="Environmental racism" label="Environmental racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10684669" start="92823" end="92853" title="Environmental racism in Europe" label="Environmental racism in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308225" start="92856" end="92869" title="Ethnic hatred" label="Ethnic hatred"/>
<link wikidata="Q459409" start="92872" end="92882" title="Hate crime" label="Hate crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q653347" start="92885" end="92896" title="Hate speech" label="Hate speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q5768685" start="92899" end="92913" title="Hipster racism" label="Hipster racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030017" start="92916" end="92933" title="Historical trauma" label="Historical trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q654863" start="92936" end="92951" title="Identitarianism" label="Identitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101566" start="92954" end="92986" title="Index of racism-related articles" label="Index of racism-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6008637" start="92989" end="93008" title="In-group favoritism" label="In-group favoritism"/>
<link wikidata="Q40613" start="93011" end="93026" title="Labeling theory" label="Labeling theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103967" start="93029" end="93044" title="Minority stress" label="Minority stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455718" start="93047" end="93053" title="Nigger" label="Nigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q21261556" start="93056" end="93084" title="Racial bias in criminal news" label="Racial bias in criminal news"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894322" start="93087" end="93111" title="Racial bias on Wikipedia" label="Racial bias on Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24965327" start="93114" end="93130" title="Racial fetishism" label="Racial fetishism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279587" start="93133" end="93148" title="Racial literacy" label="Racial literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10649809" start="93151" end="93164" title="Racialization" label="Racialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136934" start="93167" end="93183" title="Raciolinguistics" label="Raciolinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="93186" end="93204" title="Pre-Adamite#Racist pre-Adamism" label="Racist pre-Adamism"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905252" start="93207" end="93229" title="Racism in horror films" label="Racism in horror films"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279753" start="93232" end="93260" title="Racism in the LGBT community" label="Racism in the LGBT community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453838" start="93263" end="93272" title="Redlining" label="Redlining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752294" start="93275" end="93297" title="Reverse discrimination" label="Reverse discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362827" start="93300" end="93315" title="Romantic racism" label="Romantic racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254959" start="93318" end="93348" title="Social interpretations of race" label="Social interpretations of race"/>
<link wikidata="Q203986" start="93351" end="93361" title="Speciesism" label="Speciesism"/>
<link wikidata="Q813952" start="93364" end="93381" title="Stereotype threat" label="Stereotype threat"/>
<link wikidata="Q85805264" start="93384" end="93396" title="Tatarophobia" label="Tatarophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832650" start="93399" end="93413" title="Tragic mulatto" label="Tragic mulatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499276" start="93416" end="93428" title="Yellow Peril" label="Yellow Peril"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782081" start="93466" end="93481" title="Theodore W. Allen" label="Allen, Theodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010248" start="93553" end="93564" title="Verso Books" label="Verso Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782081" start="93568" end="93583" title="Theodore W. Allen" label="Allen, Theodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010248" start="93655" end="93666" title="Verso Books" label="Verso Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165207" start="93921" end="93944" title="European History Online" label="European History Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q327772" start="93953" end="93982" title="Institute of European History" label="Institute of European History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="94321" end="94345" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="94506" end="94515" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372254" start="94638" end="94662" title="Rowman &amp;amp; Littlefield" label="Rowman &amp;amp; Littlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q50675" start="94937" end="94951" title="historiography" label="historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376734" start="94974" end="94996" title="Pierre-André Taguieff" label="Taguieff, Pierre-André"/>
<link wikidata="Q701745" start="95108" end="95122" title="Leon Poliakov" label="Poliakov, Leon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478321" start="95369" end="95392" title="France Winddance Twine" label="Twine, France Winddance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048631" start="95489" end="95513" title="Rutgers University Press" label="Rutgers University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="95517" end="95523" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279096" start="95531" end="95548" title="The Race Question" label="The Race Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921272" start="95685" end="95699" title="Howard Winant" label="Winant, Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833247" start="95765" end="95777" title="Michael Omi" label="Omi, Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q128126" start="96125" end="96144" title="Claude Lévi-Strauss" label="Claude Lévi-Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q6209787" start="96307" end="96317" title="Joe Feagin" label="Joe Feagin"/>
</links>
</doc>
