<doc id="24864" wikidata="Q131359" url="?curid=24864" title="Professional wrestling">
<text>Professional wrestling (often referred to as pro wrestling, or simply, wrestling) is a form of athletic theater centered around mock combat and based on the premise that its performers are competitive wrestlers. Professional wrestling is distinguished from amateur wrestling by its scripted outcomes and emphasis on entertainment and storytelling over genuine competition. The staged nature of matches is an open secret: through a practice known as kayfabe, both wrestlers and spectators—as well as commentators—maintain the pretense that the performances are &quot;bona fide&quot; competitions, which is likened to the suspension of disbelief employed when engaging with fiction. 

Professional wrestlers perform as characters and usually maintain what is known in the industry as a &quot;gimmick&quot; — the persona, style and traits conveyed by distinctive attire, stage name, entrance theme music, and other distinguished characteristics and creative flourishes. Matches are the primary vehicle for advancing storylines, which typically center on interpersonal conflicts, or feuds, between heroic &quot;faces&quot; and villainous &quot;heels&quot;. A wrestling ring, akin to the platform used in boxing, serves as the main stage. Additional scenes may be recorded for television in backstage areas of the venue, in a format similar to reality television. Performers generally integrate authentic wrestling techniques and fighting styles with choreography, stunts, improvisation, and dramatic conventions designed to maximize entertainment value and audience engagement.

Professional wrestling as a performing art evolved from the common practice of match-fixing among American wrestlers in the 19th century, who later sought to make matches shorter, more entertaining, and less physically taxing. As the public gradually realized and accepted that matches were predetermined, wrestlers responded by increasingly adding melodrama, gimmickry, and outlandish stunt work to their performances to further enhance the spectacle. By at least the early 20th century, professional wrestling had diverged from the competitive sport to become an artform and genre of sports entertainment.

Professional wrestling is performed around the world through various &quot;promotions&quot;, which are roughly analogous to production companies or sports leagues. Promotions vary considerably in size, scope, and creative approach, ranging from local shows on the independent circuit, to internationally broadcast events at major arenas. The largest and most influential promotions are in the United States, Mexico, Japan, and Europe (particularly the United Kingdom, Germany/Austria and France), which have each developed distinct styles, traditions, and subgenres within professional wrestling. Many professional wrestlers also perform as freelancers and make appearances for different promotions.

Professional wrestling has developed its own culture and community, including a distinct vernacular. It has achieved mainstream success and influence within popular culture, with many terms and jargon, tropes, and concepts being referenced in everyday language and in film, music, television, and video games. Numerous professional wrestlers have become national or international sports icons with recognition by the broader public, with some finding further fame and success through other performing arts, such as acting.

==Context==
In the United States, authentic wrestling is generally practiced in an amateur context. There is no professional league for competitive wrestling due to a lack of popularity. As a case in point, Real Pro Wrestling, an American professional freestyle wrestling league, dissolved in 2007 after just two seasons. In other countries, such as Iran and India, wrestling enjoys widespread popularity as a genuine sport, and the phrase &quot;professional wrestling&quot; therefore has a more literal meaning in those places. A notable example is India&#x27;s Pro Wrestling League.

In numerous American states, professional wrestling is legally defined as a non-sport. For instance, New York defines professional wrestling as:

In the industry&#x27;s slang, a fixed match is referred to as a &quot;worked&quot; match, derived from the slang word for manipulation, as in &quot;working the crowd&quot;. A &quot;shoot&quot; match is a genuine contest where both wrestlers fight to win and are therefore &quot;straight shooters&quot;, which comes from a carny term for a shooting gallery gun whose sights were not deliberately misaligned.

==History in the United States==
===From sport to performance art===
Wrestling in the United States blossomed in popularity after the Civil War, with catch wrestling eventually becoming the most popular style. At first, professional wrestlers were genuine competitive fighters, but they struggled to draw audiences because Americans did not find real wrestling to be very entertaining, so the wrestlers quietly began faking their matches so that they could give their audiences a satisfying spectacle. Fixing matches was also convenient for scheduling. A real (&quot;shoot&quot;) match could sometimes last hours, whereas a fixed (&quot;worked&quot;) match can be made short, which was convenient for wrestlers on tour who needed to keep appointments or share venues. It also suited wrestlers who were aging and therefore lacked the stamina for an hours-long fight. Audiences also preferred short matches. Worked matches also carried less risk of injury, which meant shorter recovery. Altogether, worked matches proved more profitable than shoots. By the end of the 19th century, nearly all professional wrestling matches were worked.

A major influence on professional wrestling was carnival culture. Wrestlers in the late 19th century worked in carnival shows. For a fee, a visitor could challenge the wrestler to a quick match. If the challenger defeated the champion in a short time frame, usually 15 minutes, he won a prize. To encourage challenges, the carnival operators staged rigged matches in which an accomplice posing as a visitor challenged the champion and won, giving the audience the impression that the champion was easy to beat. This practice taught wrestlers the art of staging rigged matches and fostered a mentality that spectators were marks to be duped. The term &quot;kayfabe&quot; comes from carny slang.

By the turn of the 20th century, most professional wrestling matches were &quot;worked&quot; and some journalists exposed the practice:

Wrestler Lou Thesz recalled that between 1915 and 1920, a series of exposés in the newspapers about the integrity of professional wrestling alienated many fans, sending the industry &quot;into a tailspin&quot;. But rather than perform more shoot matches, professional wrestlers instead committed themselves wholesale to fakery.

Several reasons explain why professional wrestling became fake, whereas boxing endured as a legitimate sport despite similar issues with fraud and match-fixing. Firstly, wrestling was more entertaining when it was faked, whereas fakery did not make boxing any more entertaining. Secondly, in a rigged boxing match, the designated loser must take a real beating for his &quot;defeat&quot; to be convincing, but wrestling holds can be faked convincingly without inflicting injury. This meant that boxers were less willing to &quot;take dives&quot;; they wanted to have a victory for all the pain to which they subjected themselves.

=== Cartelization ===
In the 1910s, promotional cartels for professional wrestling emerged in the East Coast, outside its traditional heartland in the Midwest. These promoters sought to make long-term plans with their wrestlers, and to ensure their more charismatic and crowd-pleasing wrestlers received championships, further entrenching the desire for worked matches.

The primary rationale for shoot matches at this point was challenges from independent wrestlers. But a cartelized wrestler, if challenged, could credibly use his contractual obligations to his promoter as an excuse to refuse the challenge. Promotions would sometimes respond to challenges with &quot;policemen&quot;: powerful wrestlers who lacked the charisma to become stars, but could defeat and often seriously injure any challenger in a shoot match. As the industry trend continued, there were fewer independent wrestlers to make such challenges in the first place.

&quot;Double-crosses&quot;, where a wrestler agreed to lose a match but then fought to win, remained a problem in the early cartel days. At times a promoter would even award a victorious double-crosser the title of champion to preserve the facade of sport. But promoters punished such wrestlers by blacklisting them, making it quite challenging to find work. Double-crossers could also be sued for breach of contract, such as Dick Shikat in 1936. In the trial, witnesses testified that most of the &quot;big matches&quot; and all of the championship bouts were fixed.

=== Transition towards pure entertainment ===
By the 1930s, with the exception of the occasional double-cross or business dispute, shoot matches were essentially nonexistent. In April 1930, the New York State Athletic Commission decreed that all professional wrestling matches held in the state had to be advertised as exhibitions unless certified as contests by the commission. This requirement did not apply to amateur wrestling, which the commission had no authority over. The Commission did, on very rare occasions, hand out such authorizations, such as for a championship match between Jim Londos and Jim Browning in June 1934.

Wrestling fans widely suspected that professional wrestling was fake, but generally did not care as long as it entertained.

In 1933, wrestling promoter Jack Pfefer divulged the inner workings of the industry with &quot;New York Daily Mirror&quot;, maintaining no pretense that wrestling was real and sharing planned results just before the matches took place. While fans were neither surprised nor alienated, traditionalists like Jack Curley were furious, and most promoters tried to maintain the facade of &quot;kayfabe&quot; as best they could.

Newspapers tended to eschew coverage of professional wrestling, as journalists refused to support its pretense to being a true sport. In 1935, &quot;Toronto Star&quot; sports editor Lou Marsh was among the first to use the term &quot;sportive entertainment&quot; to describe professional wrestling. Eventually promoters resorted to publishing their own magazines in order to get press coverage and communicate with fans. The first professional wrestling magazine, &quot;Wrestling As You Like It&quot;, printed its first issue in 1946. These magazines were faithful to &quot;kayfabe&quot; and helped sustain the pretense of professional wrestling as a sport.

By the late 1950s, professional wrestling had largely completed its shift from sport to theater. In 1989, Vince McMahon—who sought to exempt his promotion, the World Wrestling Federation, from sports licensing fees—testified before the New Jersey State Athletic Control Board that professional wrestling is not a real sport because its matches have predetermined outcomes. New Jersey subsequently deregulated professional wrestling, and the WWF rebranded itself as a &quot;sports entertainment&quot; company.

=== Evolution in television age ===
Professional wrestling&#x27;s fanbase had traditionally largely consisted of children, the elderly, blue-collar workers, and minorities. The rise of television in the 1940s brought unprecedented national exposure to a broader audience, as networks were short on content. Professional wrestling enjoyed a period of mainstream popularity that was buoyed by the visual spectacles and showmanship of performers such as Gorgeous George and Buddy Rogers.

Beginning in the 1960s, however, networks increasingly shifted to more mainstream interests such as baseball, and professional wrestling was dropped from primetime slots, if not altogether; the core audience then shrunk back to a profile similar to that of the 1930s. Nevertheless, this period saw some a brief boost in ratings and signs of strength; the American Wrestling Association&#x27;s (AWA), which had emerged as an independent promotion in 1960, was setting new standards in how professional wrestling was presented on television, while the National Wrestling Alliance (NWA) maintained a strong following in the South.

However, by the 1970s, professional wrestling entered a more pronounced and sustained decline that persisted into the 1980s. 

=== Development of stylistic conventions ===
In the early 20th century, the style of wrestling used in professional wrestling matches was catch wrestling. Promoters wanted their matches to look realistic and so preferred to recruit wrestlers with real grappling skills.

In the 1920s, a group of wrestlers and promoters known as the Gold Dust Trio introduced moves that have since become staples of the mock combat of professional wrestling, such as body slams, suplexes, punches, finishing moves, and out-of-ring count-outs.

By the early 1930s, most wrestlers had adopted personas to generate public interest. These personas could broadly be characterized as either &quot;faces&quot; (likeable) or &quot;heels&quot; (villainous). Native Americans, cowboys, and English aristocrats were staple characters in the 1930s and 1940s. Some wrestlers played different personas depending on the region they were performing in; with the rise of television and thus national exposure, most wrestlers maintained a single persona and narrative.

Wrestlers also often used some sort of gimmick, such as a finishing move, eccentric mannerisms, or out-of-control behavior (in the case of heels). The matches could also be gimmicky sometimes, with wrestlers fighting in mud and piles of tomatoes and so forth. The most successful and enduring gimmick to emerge from the 1930s were tag-team matches. Promoters noticed that matches slowed down as the wrestlers in the ring tired, so they gave them partners to relieve them. It also gave heels another way to misbehave by double-teaming.

Towards the end of the 1930s, faced with declining revenues, promoters chose to focus on grooming charismatic wrestlers with no regard for their skill because it was charisma that drew the crowds, and wrestlers who were both skilled at grappling and charismatic were hard to come by. Since most of the public by this time knew and accepted that professional wrestling was fake, realism was no longer paramount and a background in authentic wrestling no longer mattered. After this time, matches became more outlandish and gimmickier and any semblance professional wrestling had to catch wrestling faded. The personas of the wrestlers likewise grew more outlandish.

Gorgeous George, who performed throughout the 1940s and 1950s, was the first wrestler whose entrance into the arena was accompanied by a theme song played over the arena&#x27;s loudspeakers, his being &quot;Pomp and Circumstance&quot;. He also wore a costume—a robe and hairnet, which he removed after getting in the ring—and had a pre-match ritual where his &quot;butler&quot; would spray the ring with perfume. In the 1980s, Vince McMahon made entrance songs, costumes, and rituals standard for his star wrestlers; for instance, McMahon&#x27;s top star, Hulk Hogan, would delight the audience by tearing his shirt off before each match.

===Rise and fall of promoter cartels===

The first major promoter cartel emerged on the East Coast, although up to that point, wrestling&#x27;s heartland had been in the Midwest. Notable members of this cartel included Jack Curley, Lou Daro, Paul Bowser and Tom and Tony Packs. The promoters colluded to solve a number of problems that hurt their profits. Firstly, they could force their wrestlers to perform for less money. As the cartel grew, there were fewer independent promoters where independent wrestlers could find work, and many were forced to sign a contract with the cartel to receive steady work. The contracts forbade them from performing at independent venues. A wrestler who refused to play by the cartel&#x27;s rules was barred from performing at its venues. A second goal of the wrestling cartels was to establish an authority to decide who was the &quot;world champion&quot;. Before the cartels, there were multiple wrestlers in the U.S. simultaneously calling themselves the &quot;world champion&quot;, and this sapped public enthusiasm for professional wrestling. Likewise, the cartel could agree on a common set of match rules that the fans could keep track of. The issue over who got to be the champion and who controlled said champion was a major point of contention among the members of wrestling cartels as the champion drew big crowds wherever he performed, and this would occasionally lead to schisms.

By 1925, this cartel had divided the country up into territories which were the exclusive domains of specific promoters. This system of territories endured until Vince McMahon drove the fragmented cartels out of the market in the 1980s. This cartel fractured in 1929 after one of its members, Paul Bowser, bribed Ed &quot;Strangler&quot; Lewis to lose his championship in a match against Gus Sonnenberg in January 1929. Bowser then broke away to form his own cartel, the Boston-based American Wrestling Association, in September 1930, declaring Sonnenberg as AWA champion. Curley reacted to this move by convincing the National Boxing Association to form the National Wrestling Association, which in turn crowned a champion that Curley put forth: Dick Shikat. 

In 1948, several promoters from across the country came together to form the National Wrestling Alliance (NWA); Bowser&#x27;s AWA would join the following.The NWA recognized one &quot;world champion&quot;, voted on by its members, but allowed member promoters to crown their own local champions in their territories. If a member poached wrestlers from another member, or held matches in another member&#x27;s territory, they risked being ejected from the NWA, at which point his territory became fair game for everyone. The NWA would blacklist wrestlers who worked for independent promoters or who publicly criticized an NWA promoter or who did not throw a match on command. If an independent promoter tried to establish himself in a certain area, the NWA would send their star performers to perform for the local NWA promoter to draw the customers away from the independent. 

By 1956, the NWA controlled 38 promotions in the United States and several more in Canada, Mexico, Australia and New Zealand. The NWA&#x27;s monopolistic practices became so stifling that independent promotions appealed to the government for help. In October 1956 the U.S. Attorney General&#x27;s office filed an antitrust lawsuit against the NWA in an Iowa federal district court. The NWA settled with the government: It pledged to stop allocating exclusive territories to its promoters, to stop blacklisting wrestlers who worked for outsider promoters, and to admit any promoter into the Alliance. 

The NWA would flout many of these promises, but its power was nonetheless weakened by the lawsuit. In 1957, just one year after settlement, the AWA withdrew from the Alliance and renamed itself the Atlantic Athletic Corporation (AAC); the AAC shut down in 1960. 

In 1958, Omaha promoter and NWA member Joe Dusek recognized Verne Gagne as the world champion without the approval of the NWA. Gagne asked for a match against the recognized NWA champion Pat O&#x27;Connor. The NWA refused to honor the request, so Gagne and Minneapolis promoter Wally Karbo established the American Wrestling Association in 1960. This AWA should not be confused with Paul Bowser&#x27;s AWA, which ceased operations just two months prior. Gagne&#x27;s AWA operated out of Minnesota. Unlike the NWA, which only allowed faces to be champions, Gagne occasionally allowed heels to win the AWA championship so that they could serve as foils for him.

=== Consolidation and renewed growth ===
In August 1983, the World Wrestling Federation (WWF), a promotion in the northeast, withdrew from the NWA; Vince McMahon then took over as its boss. No longer bound by the territorial pact of the NWA, McMahon began expanding his promotion into the territories of his former NWA peers, now his rivals. By the end of the 1980s, the WWF would become the sole national wrestling promotion in the U.S. This was in part made possible by the rapid spread of cable television in the 1980s. The national broadcast networks generally regarded professional wrestling as too niche an interest, and had not broadcast any national wrestling shows since the 1950s. 

Before cable TV, a typical American household only received four national channels by antenna, and ten to twelve local channels via UHF broadcasting. Cable television could carry a much larger selection of channels and therefore had room for niche interests. The WWF started with a show called &quot;All-American Wrestling&quot; on the USA Network in September 1983. McMahon&#x27;s TV shows made his wrestlers national celebrities, so when he held matches in a new city, attendance was high because there was a waiting fanbase cultivated in advance by the cable TV shows. The NWA&#x27;s traditional anti-competitive tricks were no match for this. The NWA attempted to centralize and create their own national cable television shows to counter McMahon&#x27;s rogue promotion, but it failed in part because the members of the NWA, ever protective of their territories, could not stomach submitting themselves to a central authority. Nor could any of them stomach the idea of leaving the NWA themselves to compete directly with McMahon, for that would mean their territories would become fair game for the other NWA members. McMahon also had a creative flair for TV that his rivals lacked. For instance, the AWA&#x27;s TV productions during the 1980s were amateurish, low-budget, and out-of-touch with contemporary culture, which lead to the promotion&#x27;s closing in 1991.

In the spring of 1984, the WWF purchased Georgia Championship Wrestling (GCW), which had been ailing for some time due to financial mismanagement and internal squabbles. In the deal, the WWF acquired the GCW&#x27;s timeslot on TBS. McMahon agreed to keep showing Georgia wrestling matches in that timeslot, but he was unable to get his staff to Atlanta every Saturday to fulfill this obligation, so he sold GCW and its TBS timeslot to Jim Crockett Promotions (JCP). JCP started informally calling itself World Championship Wrestling (WCW). In 1988, Ted Turner bought JCP and formally renamed it World Championship Wrestling. 

During the 1990s, WCW became a credible rival to the WWF, but by end it suffered from a series of creative missteps that led to its failure and purchase by the WWF. One of its mistakes was that it diminished the glamor of its World Heavyweight Championship. Between January 2000 and March 2001, the title changed hands eighteen times, which sapped fan enthusiasm, particularly for the climactic pay-per-view matches.

== Industry conventions ==

Professional wrestling performances are governed primarily by a script and overarching storyline devised by producers, who often are professional wrestlers themselves. Real-life events, such as a performer&#x27;s contract status and legitimate injuries, may be incorporated into storylines, and some wrestlers integrate elements of their genuine personalities or background into their performances or personas; for example, Kurt Angle, who performed his fictional persona eponymously, often utilized his genuine Olympic gold medal in wrestling as a defining aspect of his character. The actions of the character in shows are considered fictional and wholly separate from the life of the performer, although some performers will remain in character outside the ring, such as in promotional videos, interviews, and even social media; consequently, the line between real-life and scripted events and personas are often blurred. For example, Maxwell Jacob Friedman is well known for staying in character at all times while in public, going so far as to insult his fans, often to their delight as they are aware of his persona.

=== Kayfabe ===
&quot;Kayfabe&quot; is the practice of pretending that professional wrestling is a true sport. Wrestlers would at all times flatly deny allegations that they fixed their matches, and they often remained in-character in public even when not performing. When in public, wrestlers would sometimes say &quot;kayfabe&quot; to each other as a coded signal that there were fans present for whom they needed to be in character. Professional wrestlers in the past strongly believed that if they admitted the truth, their audiences would desert them; accordingly, promotions have often disciplined or punished performers for breaking kayfabe.

The first wrestling promoter to publicly admit to routinely fixing matches was Jack Pfefer. In 1933, he started talking about the industry&#x27;s inner workings to the &quot;New York Daily Mirror&quot;, resulting in a huge exposé. The exposé neither surprised nor alienated most wrestling fans, although some promoters like Jack Curley were furious and tried to restore the facade of kayfabe as best as they could. In 1989, Vince McMahon testified before the New Jersey government that professional wrestling was not a true sport and therefore should be exempted from sports-related taxes. Many wrestlers and fans resented McMahon for this, but Lou Thesz accepted it as the smart move as it gave the industry more freedom to do as it pleased, and because by that point professional wrestling no longer attempted to appear real.

The demise of WCW in 2001 provided some evidence that &quot;kayfabe&quot; still mattered to a degree. Vince Russo, the boss of WCW in 2000, completely disregarded &quot;kayfabe&quot; by routinely discussing business matters and office politics in public, which alienated fans.

=== Sports entertainment ===
The wrestling industry convention of &quot;kayfabe&quot; has increasingly been challenged by the modern concept of sports entertainment, which openly acknowledges professional wrestling&#x27;s predetermined nature and celebrates its roots in both competitive sport and dramatic theater. The term &quot;sports entertainment&quot; was coined by World Wrestling Federation (WWF, now WWE) chairman Vince McMahon during the 1980s as a marketing term to describe the professional wrestling industry, primarily to potential advertisers; however, precursors date back to at least February 1935, when &quot;Toronto Star&quot; sports editor Lou Marsh described professional wrestling as &quot;sportive entertainment&quot;. In 1989, the WWF used the phrase in a case before the New Jersey Senate to classify professional wrestling as &quot;sports entertainment&quot; and thus not subject to regulation like a directly competitive sport.

In subsequent years, WWE insisted that its talent use &quot;sports entertainment&quot; rather than &quot;pro wrestling&quot; to describe its business, to the point that the term was sometimes used in other promotions to generate &quot;heat&quot; (fan reaction and engagement). The line between sports entertainment and competitive sports was further blurred in 2023, when WWE merged with the parent company of Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC), a genuinely competitive mixed martial arts promotion, in what was officially announced as an effort to &quot;bring together two leading pureplay sports and entertainment companies&quot; and provide &quot;significant operating synergies&quot; between them. The following year, WWE moved away from its insistence on being a sports entertainment company after Vince McMahon&#x27;s departure from the company, but still uses &quot;sports entertainment&quot; in some contexts.

Whether professional wrestling is a genuine sport often reflects a broader debate as to the nature and qualities of a sport categorically. Some commentators and analysts identify baseline commonalities between professional wrestling and other sports, such as performance entailing &quot;physical activity governed by a set of rules of customs&quot; and there still being competition among pro wrestlers with respect to their performances. Just because there&#x27;s a script involved it doesn&#x27;t take away from the competitive environment of professional wrestling. Ask any former wrestler, read an autobiography on a wrestler or use common sense. There is tremendous competition within the WWE. Not performing to the high standards in the ring? &quot;You&#x27;re Fired&quot;. Not getting over with the fans? &quot;You&#x27;re Fired.&quot; Being a nuisance and refusing to be a team player? &quot;You&#x27;re fired.&quot; Don&#x27;t want to continually train, live the grueling road schedule and establish connections...see where I&#x27;m going with all this? While NFL, NBA, NHL, MLB and overseas soccer players (football, I know, I apologize) are getting paid ridiculous contracts (with a lump sum up front, and a lot of the contract guaranteed), professional wrestlers do much more work for a lot less. We can safely take the competition argument out of the discussion. So ultimately, if you can look past the script, then professional wrestling is a sport. 

— William Gullo, &quot;Bleacher Report&quot; (Sep. 6, 2011)Others retort that while professional wrestling is comparable in its physical and athletic requirements—including &quot;shared values of resilience and excellence&quot; and similar risks of bodily injury—its scripted nature preempts one of the purported defining characteristics of a sport: genuine competition over the outcome.

The ambiguity of professional wrestling as a form of sports entertainment is further heightened by news media, which often cover professional wrestling matches and events as if they were genuine sports; for example, in 2024, &quot;Forbes&quot; ranked professional wrestling promotions WWE and All Elite Wrestling (AEW) among the world&#x27;s &quot;most valuable combat sports promotions&quot; alongside bona fide competitive sport organizations UFC, ONE Championship, and Matchroom Boxing.

=== Performance aspects ===

Professional wrestling shows can be considered a form of theater in the round, with the ring, ringside area, and entryway comprising a stage. There is less of a fourth wall than in most theatric performances; like pantomime, audience involvement is expected and encouraged. Attendees are recognized and acknowledged by performers as spectators to the sporting event being portrayed and are encouraged to interact as such; their reactions can dictate how the performance unfolds, leading to a high level of audience participation. Often, individual matches will be part of a longer storyline conflict between &quot;babyfaces&quot; (often shortened to just &quot;faces&quot;) and &quot;heels&quot;. &quot;Faces&quot; (the &quot;good guys&quot;) are those whose actions are intended to encourage the audience to cheer, while &quot;heels&quot; (the &quot;bad guys&quot;) act to draw the spectators&#x27; ire.

In pro wrestling matches, performers often execute a series of pre-planned moves and attacks, ranging from grappling and throws found in some traditional forms of wrestling, to more spectacular stunts, sometimes involving props and special effects. Although match outcomes and narratives are predetermined, wrestlers are expected to improvise and weave elements of their character. Attacks are designed to appear dramatic while reducing the risk of serious injury as much as possible; the overall aim is to minimize the actual injurious impact of their moves while maximizing their entertainment value. Shows produced by the largest professional wrestling promotions like WWE are traditionally performed in indoor venues, while flagship events like WrestleMania are sometimes taking place at outdoor venues; these shows are generally video recorded for live or delayed broadcasting. Additionally filmed footage known as &quot;segments&quot; or &quot;promos&quot; are usually used to accompany the drama in these shows.

Prior experience in legitimate wrestling is not a requirement for aspiring professional wrestlers but is seen as an advantageous background. Despite its scripted format, several notable performers have had prior experience in legitimate wrestling before transitioning to its theatrical form. A popular performer, Kurt Angle, is the first Olympic gold medalist in professional wrestling history, having won his gold medal at the 1996 Summer Olympic Games in freestyle wrestling. Another prominent performer is Brock Lesnar, a former NCAA Wrestler who won the NCAA Division I National Championship in 2000.

== Rules and other dramatic elements ==

Professional wrestlers nominally compete under rules promulgated by wrestling promotions. However, the rules are not legitimate standards for sporting activity, instead serving as a basis to advance plotlines, similar to the artificial constraints imposed in other fictional universes. Sociologist Thomas S. Henricks has argued the rules serve as a basis for a structuralist moral order, serving to advance plot lines involving charismatic heroes applying an instrumentally rationalist approach to social conflicts.

Professional wrestlers do not follow an industry-standard set of rules, unlike most sporting events, which generally have a governing body to regulate competitions. While each promoter can set his own standards, promoters have long understood that fans enjoy professional wrestling more when all matches appear to follow a consistent set of rules. The rules described in this section represent common standards but may not precisely align with the ruleset of any specific promotion.

=== Structure of performances ===

Matches are staged between two or more sides (&quot;corners&quot;). Each corner may consist of one wrestler, or a team of two or more. Most team matches are nominally governed by tag team rules. Other matches present under the premise of a free-for-alls, with multiple combatants but no teams. In all variants, there can be only one winning team or wrestler.

Matches generally take place within a wrestling ring, an elevated square canvas mat with posts on each corner. A cloth apron hangs over the edges of the ring. Three horizontal ropes or cables surround the ring, suspended with turnbuckles which are connected to the posts. For safety, the ropes are padded at the turnbuckles and cushioned mats surround the floor outside the ring. Guardrails or a similar barrier enclose this area from the audience. Wrestlers are generally expected to stay within the confines of the ring, though matches sometimes end up moving outside the ring, and even into the audience.

The standard method of scoring is the &quot;fall&quot;, which, is premised as being accomplished by:
* Pinning the opponent&#x27;s shoulders to the mat, typically for three seconds (though other times have been used)
* Forcing the opponent to submit
* Disqualification of the opponent
* The opponent remaining outside the ring for too long (countout)
* Knocking out or otherwise incapacitating the opponent
These are each explained in greater detail below. Pinfalls and submissions must occur within the ring unless stipulated otherwise.

Most wrestling matches last for a set number of falls, with the first side to achieve the majority number of pinfalls, submissions, or countouts being the kayfabe winner. Historically, the matches went to 3 falls (&quot;best 2 out of 3&quot;) or 5 falls (&quot;best 3 out of 5&quot;). For modern wrestling, the genre convention is 1 fall. These matches have a time limit; if not enough falls are scored by the end of the time limit, the match is presented as draw. Modern matches are generally given a 10- to 30-minute time limit for standard matches; title matches can go for up to one hour. British wrestling matches held under Admiral-Lord Mountevans rules (and similar systems across Europe) consist of a series of rounds – typically six rounds each lasting three minutes or until a fall or submission is scored, with a thirty-second break between each round and can either be two-out-of-three falls, one fall to a finish (mostly for low-priority warmup matches) or the wrestler with the most falls wins at the end of the final round.

An alternative subgenre involves is a match set for a prescribed length of time, with a running tally of falls. The entrant with the most falls at the end of the time limit is declared the winner. This is usually for 20, 30 or 60 minutes, and is commonly called an Iron Man match. This type of match can be modified so that fewer types of falls are allowed.

In performances staged with multiple competitors, an elimination system may be used. Any wrestler who has a fall scored against them is forced out of the match, and the match continues until only one remains. It is much more common when more than two wrestlers are involved to simply go one fall, with the one scoring the fall, regardless of who they scored it against, being the winner. In championship matches, this means that, unlike one-on-one matches (where the champion can simply disqualify himself or get himself counted out to retain the title via the Champion&#x27;s Advantage), the champion does &quot;not&quot; have to be pinned or involved in the decision to lose the championship. Heel champions often find advantages, not in Champion&#x27;s Advantage, but in the use of weapons and outside interference, as these poly-sided matches tend to involve no holds barred rules.
Some wrestling performances are staged with unique winning conditions, often to allow a thing theoristic plot construction. An example is the ladder match.

In the basic ladder match, the premise is wrestlers or teams of wrestlers must climb a ladder to obtain a prize that is hoist above the ring. The key to winning this match is that the wrestler or team of wrestlers must try to incapacitate each other long enough for one wrestler to climb the ladder and secure that prize for their team. As a result, the ladder can be used as a weapon. The prizes include, but are not limited to, any given championship belt (the traditional prize), a document granting the winner the right to a future title shot, or any document that matters to the wrestlers involved in the match (such as one granting the winner a cash prize). Something that is also common in pro wrestling is the cage match which comes with the added rule that victory can be achieved by escaping the cage. Another common specialty match is known as the battle royal. In a battle royal, all the wrestlers enter the ring to the point that there are 20–30 wrestlers in the ring at one time. When the match begins, the simple objective is to throw the opponent over the top rope and out of the ring with both feet on the floor to eliminate that opponent. The last wrestler standing is declared the winner. A variant on this type of match is the WWE&#x27;s Royal Rumble where two wrestlers enter the ring to start the match and other wrestlers follow in 90 second intervals (previously 2 minutes) until 30–40 wrestlers have entered the ring. All other rules stay the same.
Almost every professional wrestling match features referee, who is the final arbitrator of the fictional rules, which may vary from promotion to promotion. In multi-man lucha libre matches, two referees are used, one inside the ring and one outside.

Due to the legitimate role that referees play in wrestling of serving as liaison between the bookers backstage and the wrestlers in the ring (the role of being a final arbitrator is merely kayfabe), the referee is present, even in matches that do not at first glance appear to require a referee (such as a ladder match, as it is no holds barred, and the criteria for victory could theoretically be assessed from afar). Although their actions are also frequently scripted for dramatic effect, referees are subject to certain general rules and requirements to maintain the theatrical appearance of unbiased authority. The most basic rule is that an action must be seen by a referee to be declared for a fall or disqualification. This allows for heel characters to gain a scripted advantage by distracting or disabling the referee to perform some ostensibly illegal maneuver on their opponent. Most referees are unnamed and essentially anonymous, though some wrestling promotions, most notably in the present All Elite Wrestling, have made officials known by their names (and there are some cases where fans have called their names during matches).

Special guest referees may be used from time to time; by virtue of their celebrity status, they are often scripted to dispense with the appearance of neutrality and use their influence to unfairly influence the outcome of the match for added dramatic impact. Face special referees will often fight back against hostile heel wrestlers, particularly if the special referee is either a wrestler himself or a famous martial artist (such as Tito Ortiz at the main event at Hard Justice 2005).

For dramatic effect, heel referees may assist a heel wrestler. Several common plot devices involve the heel referee assisting the heel wrestler.
* Counting fast whenever the face wrestler is being pinned, while counting slow, faking a wrist or eye injury, or even refusing to count at all, when the heel wrestler is being pinned.
* Allowing heel wrestlers to use blatantly illegal tactics that most normal referees would instantly disqualify for, while not extending these relaxed rules to face wrestlers.
* Disqualifying the face wrestler for unfair reasons, such as an accidental attack on the referee or a maneuver that appears to be an illegal attack.
* Feigning unconsciousness far longer than they would normally otherwise be out, or using convenient distractions to look away from the wrestlers for a prolonged period of time. This allows for greater opportunities for run-ins or use of illegal weapons and tactics, or can be used as an excuse to avoid counting a pinfall or calling a submission in the face&#x27;s favor. The referee often instantly up the moment the heel wrestler seems to have an advantage, usually the moment the heel goes for the pinfall or applies a submission finisher.
* Actually assisting in attacking the face wrestler.

=== Tag rules ===

In some team matches, there is a fictional premise that only one entrant from each team may be designated as the &quot;legal&quot; or &quot;active&quot; wrestler at any given moment. Two wrestlers must make physical contact in the corner (typically palm-to-palm) to transfer this legal status. This is known as a &quot;tag&quot;, with the participants &quot;tagging out&quot; and &quot;tagging in&quot;. Typically, the wrestler who is tagging out has a five count to leave the ring, whereas the one tagging in can enter the ring at any time, resulting in heels legally double-teaming a face.

The non-legal wrestlers must remain outside the ring or other legal area at all times (and avoid purposeful contact with the opposing wrestlers) or face reprimand from the referee. In most promotions, the wrestler to be tagged in must be touching the turnbuckle on his corner, or a cloth strap attached to the turnbuckle.

Some multi-wrestler matches allow for a set number of legal wrestlers; this rule is commonplace in four-way tag team matches, where only two wrestlers are legal in the match, meaning two teams will have both members on the outside at any given time. In these matches, tags can be made between any two teams regardless if they are on the same team or not. As a result of this stipulation, tags between different teams are not usually mutual effort; a non-legal wrestler will usually tag themselves in against the legal wrestler&#x27;s will. A legal wrestler will only voluntarily tag themselves out to another team if their own partner is incapacitated, or are being held in a submission hold and are closer to another tag team than their own.
Sometimes, poly-sided matches that pit every man for himself will incorporate tagging rules. Outside of kayfabe, this is done to give wrestlers a break from the action (as these matches tend to go on for long periods of time), and to make the action in the ring easier to choreograph. One of the most mainstream examples of this is the Four-Corner match, the most common type of match in the WWE before it was replaced with its equivalent Fatal Four-Way; four wrestlers, each for himself, fight in a match, but only two wrestlers can be in the match at any given time. The other two are positioned in the corner, and tags can be made between any two wrestlers.

In a Texas Tornado Tag Team match, all the competitors are legal in the match, and tagging in and out is not necessary. All matches fought under hardcore rules (such as no disqualification, no holds barred, ladder match, etc.) are all contested under &quot;de facto&quot; Texas Tornado rules, since the lack of ability of a referee to issue a disqualification renders any tagging requirements moot.

Regardless of rules of tagging, a wrestler cannot pin his or her own tag team partner, even if it is technically possible from the rules of the match (e.g. Texas Tornado rules, or a three-way tag team match). This is called the &quot;Outlaw Rule&quot; because the first team to attempt to use that (in an attempt to unfairly retain their tag team titles) was the New Age Outlaws.

=== Victory ===

Although scripted and choreographed, wrestling matches are presented as being legitimate athletic competitions decided on one of several possible outcomes.

==== Pinfall ====
A match&#x27;s fictional premise may allow a score by pinfall, in which a wrestling performer must pin both his opponent&#x27;s shoulders against the mat while the referee slaps the mat three times (referred to as a &quot;three count&quot;). This is the most common form presented a defeat. The pinned wrestler must also be on his back and, if they&#x27;re lying on his stomach, it usually does not count. A count may be started at any time that a wrestler&#x27;s shoulders are down (both shoulders touching the mat), back-first and any part of the opponent&#x27;s body is lying over the wrestler. This often results in pins that can easily be kicked out of, if the defensive wrestler is even slightly conscious. For example, an attacking wrestler who is half-conscious may simply drape an arm over an opponent, or a cocky wrestler may place his foot gently on the opponent&#x27;s body, prompting a three-count from the referee.

In some promotions, there is a premise that certain pinning methods are disallowed, including using the ropes for leverage and hooking the opponent&#x27;s clothing. As a plot device, disallowed pinning methods can be depicted as a cheating method for heels. Pins such as these are rarely seen by the referee and are often used by heels and on occasion by cheating faces to win matches. Even if it is noticed, storylines rarely result in a disqualification and instead it simply results in nullification of the pin attempt, so the wrestler rarely has anything to lose.

Occasionally, there are instances where a pinfall is presented as being made where both wrestlers&#x27; shoulders were on the mat for the three-count. This situation will most likely lead to a draw, and in some cases a continuation of the match or a future match to determine the winner.

==== Submission ====
To score by submission, the performer must make their opponent give up, usually by putting them in a submission hold (e.g. figure four leg-lock, arm-lock, sleeper-hold).
A performer may appear to voluntarily submit by verbally informing the referee (usually used in moves such as the Mexican Surfboard, where all four limbs are incapacitated, making tapping impossible). Since Ken Shamrock popularized it in 1997, a wrestler can indicate a voluntary submission by &quot;tapping out&quot;, that is, tapping a free hand against the mat or against an opponent. Submission was initially a large factor in professional wrestling, but following the decline of the submission-oriented catch-as-catch-can style from mainstream professional wrestling, the submission largely faded. Despite this, some wrestlers, such as Chris Jericho, Ric Flair, Bret Hart, Kurt Angle, Ken Shamrock, Dean Malenko, Chris Benoit, Bryan Danielson, and Tazz, became famous for their fictional depictions of winning matches via submission. A wrestler with a signature submission technique is portrayed as better at applying the hold, making it more painful or more difficult to get out of than others, or can be falsely credited as inventing the hold (such as when Tazz popularized the kata ha jime judo choke in pro wrestling as the &quot;Tazzmission&quot;).

Under wrestling nominal rules, all contact between the wrestlers must cease if any part of the body is touching or underneath the ropes. As such, many performances will attempt to break submission holds by deliberately grabbing the bottom ropes. This is called a &quot;rope break&quot;, and it is one of the most common ways to break a submission hold. Most holds leave an arm or leg free, so that the person can tap out if they want. Instead, they use these free limbs to either grab one of the ring ropes or drape their foot across or underneath one. Once this has been accomplished and witnessed by the referee, the referee will demand that the offending wrestler break the hold and start counting to five if the wrestler does not. If the referee reaches the count of five and the wrestler still does not break the hold, they are disqualified.

If a manager decides that their wrestler presented as their client should tap out, but cannot convince the wrestler to do so, they may &quot;throw in the towel&quot; (by literally taking a gym towel and hurling it into the ring where the referee can see it). This is the same as a submission, as in kayfabe the manager is considered the wrestler&#x27;s agent and therefore authorized to make formal decisions (such as forfeiting a match) on the client&#x27;s behalf.

==== Knockout ====
Some wrestling performances are presented as resulting in a knockout, mirroring legitimate martial arts and concluding with a technical knockout or technical submission. To determine if a wrestler has passed out in WWE, the referee usually picks up and drops his hand. If it drops to the mat or floor one or three consecutive times without the wrestler having the strength to hold it up, the wrestler is considered to have passed out.

A performer can also be presented as winning by technical knockout even if he does not resort to submission holds, but still beats the opponent to the point of unconsciousness or to the impossibility to defend himself. To check for a technical knockout in this manner a referee would wave his hand in front of the wrestler&#x27;s face and, if this produces no reaction of any kind, the referee would award the victory to the other wrestler.

A wrestler can also request a ten-count from the referee when, under the event&#x27;s fictional premise, they think an opponent is sufficiently incapacitated to not be able to stand before the count of ten. Except in traditional European promotions where following down on a fallen opponent was prohibited, these knockouts are rarely used or mentioned as logically it makes more sense for a wrestler to actively pin an opponent for three seconds rather than leaving an opponent the chance to stand up before ten. In such European promotions, countouts as described below are treated as a variant of a knockout.

==== Countout ====
A performance can be depicted as ending in a countout (alternatively &quot;count-out&quot; or &quot;count out&quot;), where wrestler is out of the ring long enough for the referee to count to ten (twenty in some promotions) and thus, under the event&#x27;s fictional premise, is disqualified. The count is broken and restarted when a wrestler in the ring exits the ring. Playing into this, some wrestlers are depicted as &quot;milking&quot; the count by sliding in the ring and immediately sliding back out. As he was technically inside the ring for a split second before exiting again, it is sufficient to restart the count. This is often referred to by commentators as &quot;breaking the count&quot;. Heels often use this tactic in order to buy themselves more time to catch their breath, or to attempt to frustrate their babyface opponents.

If all the active wrestlers in a match are down inside the ring at the same time, the referee begins a count (usually ten seconds, twenty in Japan). If nobody rises to their feet by the end of the count, the match is ruled a draw. Any participant who stands up in time ends the count for everyone else, while in a Last Man Standing match this form of a countout is the only way that the match can end, so the referee counts when one or more wrestlers are down and one wrestler standing up before the 10-count does not stop the count for another wrestler who is still down.

In most major modern promotions, championships are not permitted to change hands via a countout, unless the on-screen authority figure declares otherwise; this rule varies in some promotions, however. In some storylines, heels are presented take advantage of this and will intentionally get counted out when facing difficult opponents while defending championships.

==== Disqualification ====
Disqualification (sometimes abbreviated as &quot;DQ&quot;) occurs when a wrestler violates the rules established as part of the performance&#x27;s fictional premise, thus losing automatically. Although a countout can technically be considered a disqualification (as it is, for all intents and purposes, an automatic loss suffered as a result of violating a match rule), the two concepts are often distinct in wrestling. A no disqualification match can still end by countout (although this is rare). Typically, a match must be declared a &quot;no holds barred&quot; match, a &quot;street fight&quot; or some other term, in order for both disqualifications and countouts to be waived.

Disqualification from a match is called when the fictional storyline involves:
* Performing any illegal holds or maneuvers, such as refusing to break a hold when an opponent is in the ropes, hair-pulling, choking or biting an opponent, or repeatedly punching with a closed fist. These violations are usually subject to a referee-administered five count and will result in disqualification if the wrestler does not cease the offending behavior in time. Note that the ban on closed fists does not apply if the attacker is in midair when the punch connects, like with Jerry Lawler&#x27;s diving fist drop or Roman Reigns&#x27;s Superman Punch.
* Deliberate injury of an opponent, such as attacking an opponent&#x27;s eye, such as raking it, poking it, gouging it, punching it or other severe attacks to the eye. This was imposed when Sexy Star was disqualified for a legitimate injury on Rosemary at AAA Triplemanía XXV by popping her arm out of the socket. This type of disqualification can also be grounds for stripping a wrestler of a championship, as AAA overturned the result of that AAA Women&#x27;s Championship match, stripping her of the title.
* Any outside interference involving a person not involved in the match striking or holding a wrestler. Sometimes (depending on the promotion and uniqueness of the situation), if a heel attempts to interfere but is ejected from the ring by a wrestler or referee before this occurs, there may not be a disqualification (All Elite Wrestling is known to use ejections, as AEW referees Earl Hebner and Aubrey Edwards have ejected numerous wrestlers during events, all for outside interference). In this disqualification method, the wrestler being attacked by the foreign member is awarded the win. Sometimes this can work in heels&#x27; favor. In February 2009, Shawn Michaels, who was under the kayfabe employment of John &quot;Bradshaw&quot; Layfield, interfered in a match and super kicked JBL in front of the referee to get his employer the win via &quot;outside interference&quot;.
* Striking an opponent with a foreign object (an object not permitted by the rules of the match; see hardcore wrestling). Sometimes the win decision can be reversed if the referee spots the weapon before pin attempt or after the match because a wrestler tried to strike when the referee was either distracted or knocked out.
* Using any kind of &quot;banned&quot; move (see below for details).
* A direct low blow to the groin (unless the rules of the match specifically allow this).
* Intentionally laying hands on the referee.
* Pulling an opponent&#x27;s mask off during a match (this is illegal in Mexico, and sometimes in Japan).
* Throwing an opponent over the top rope during a match (illegal in the National Wrestling Alliance).
* In a mixed tag team match, a male wrestler hitting a female wrestler (intergender), or a normal sized wrestler attacking an opposing midget wrestler (tag team matches involving teams with one normal-sized and one midget wrestler).

In the fictional universe of some promotions, not all rule violations result in a disqualification as the referee may be depicted as using his own judgement and is not obligated to stop the match. Usually, the only offenses that the referee will see and immediately disqualify a wrestler for (as opposed to having multiple offenses) are low blows, weapon usage, interference, or assaulting the referee. In WWE, the plot convention is that a referee must see the violation with his own eyes to rule that the match end in a disqualification (simply watching the video tape is usually not enough) and the referee&#x27;s ruling is almost always final, although &quot;Dusty finishes&quot; (named after, and made famous by, Dusty Rhodes) will often result in the referee&#x27;s decision being overturned. It is not uncommon for the referees themselves to get knocked out during a match, which is commonly referred to by the term &quot;ref bump&quot;. While the referee remains &quot;unconscious&quot;, wrestlers are free to violate rules until he is revived or replaced. In some cases, a referee might disqualify a person under the presumption that it was that wrestler who knocked him out; most referee knockouts are arranged to allow a wrestler, usually a heel, to gain an advantage. For example, a wrestler may get whipped into a referee at a slower speed, knocking the ref down for short amount of time; during that interim period, one wrestler may pin his opponent for a three-count and would have won the match but for the referee being down (sometimes, another referee will sprint to the ring from backstage to attempt to make the count, but by then, the other wrestler has had enough time to kick out on his own accord). In most promotions, a championship title cannot normally change hands via disqualification; this rule is explicitly enforced in a title match under special circumstances.

In traditional European promotions, severe or persistent infractions of the rules result in a formal caution, called a &quot;public warning&quot; in the U.K., &quot;avertissement&quot; (warning) in France and a soccer-style yellow card in Germany. Three of these will result in disqualification (a red card in Germany). One major North American promotion – Stampede Wrestling of Calgary – also used the German card system from the late 1970s onward.

If all participants in a match continue to breach the referee&#x27;s instructions, the staged performance may presented as ending in a double disqualification, where both wrestlers and/or teams (in a tag team match) have been disqualified. The match is essentially nullified and called a draw or in some cases a restart or the same match being held at a pay-per-view or next night&#x27;s show. Sometimes, in a match to determine the challenger for a heel champion&#x27;s title, the champion is forced to face both opponents simultaneously for the title. Usually, the double disqualification is caused by the heel wrestler&#x27;s associates in a match between two face wrestlers to determine his opponent.

==== Forfeit ====
Although extremely rare, some fictional storylines involve a match ending in a forfeit if the opponent is depicted as either does not show up for the match, or shows up but refuses to compete. Although the plot premise is that championship usually cannot change hands except by pinfall or submission, a forfeit victory is enough to crown a new champion. A famous example of this happened on the December 8, 1997, episode of &quot;Raw is War&quot;, when Stone Cold Steve Austin handed the WWE Intercontinental Championship to The Rock after refusing to defend the title.

When a pay-per-view match is booked and one wrestler is unable to make it for one reason or another, the genre convention is to insert a last-minute replacement rather than award a wrestler a victory by forfeit. Forfeit victories are almost always reserved for when the story the promotion is telling specifically requires such an ending.

Despite being, statistically, an extremely rare occurrence, Charles Wright is one wrestler who is famous performances in which forfeit victories were turned into his own gimmick. During the late 1990s, Wright called himself &quot;The Godfather&quot; and portrayed the gimmick of a pimp. He often brought multiple women, whom he referred to as &quot;hos&quot;, to the ring with him, and offered them to his opponents in exchange for their forfeit.

==== Draw ====
A professional wrestling match can be depicted as ending in a draw. A draw occurs if both opponents are simultaneously disqualified (e.g. Brock Lesnar vs. The Undertaker at Unforgiven in 2002), neither opponent is able to answer a ten-count (e.g. Shawn Michaels vs. Triple H at the Royal Rumble in 2004), or both opponents simultaneously win the match. The latter can occur if, for example, both wrestlers pin each other (e.g. MJF vs. Adam Cole at All In in 2023, before the match was restarted), or one competitor scores a submission victory while the other scores a pinfall victory (e.g. Kurt Angle being pinned while successfully applying the triangle choke to The Undertaker on a 2002 episode of &quot;SmackDown&quot;). Traditionally, a championship may not change hands in the event of a draw.

A variant of the draw is the time-limit draw, where the match does not have a winner by a specified time period; a one-hour draw, which was once common, is known in wrestling circles as a &quot;Broadway&quot;. In European promotions where wrestling is traditionally timed in rounds, a best of three falls match is stopped and declared a one-fall-each draw if an equalizing pinfall or submission is scored in the final round.

==== No contest ====
A wrestling match may be declared a no contest if, under the fictional storyline, the winning conditions are unable to occur. The storyline may attribute such an outcome to factors such as excessive interference, the loss of referee&#x27;s control over the match, an injury unrelated to the fictitious storyline, or other fictional circumstances presenting the scheduled match to even begin. A no contest is a state separate and distinct from a draw — a draw indicates winning conditions were met. Although the terms are sometimes used interchangeably in practice, this usage is technically incorrect.

=== Other dramatic elements ===

While each wrestling match is ostensibly a competition of athletics and strategy, the goal from a business standpoint is to excite and entertain the audience. Although the competition is staged, dramatic emphasis draws out the most intense reaction. Heightened interest results in higher attendance, increased ticket sales, higher ratings on television broadcasts (greater ad revenue), higher pay-per-view buyrates, and sales of branded merchandise and recorded video footage. All of these contribute to the profit of the promotion company.

==== Character gimmicks ====
In Latin America and English-speaking countries, most wrestlers (and other on-stage performers) portray character roles, sometimes with personalities wildly different from their own. These personalities are a gimmick intended to heighten interest in a wrestler without regard to athletic ability. Some can be unrealistic and cartoon-like (such as Doink the Clown), while others carry more verisimilitude (such as Chris Jericho, The Rock, John Cena, Steve Austin, and CM Punk). In lucha libre, many characters wear masks, adopting a secret identity akin to a superhero or a supervillain, a near-sacred tradition.

An individual wrestler may use their real name, or a minor variation of it, for much of their career, such as Bret Hart, John Cena and Randy Orton. Others can keep one ring name for their entire career (Shawn Michaels, CM Punk and Ricky Steamboat), or may change from time to time to better suit the demands of the audience or company. Sometimes a character is owned and trademarked by the company, forcing the wrestler to find a new one when he leaves (although a simple typeset change, such as changing Rhyno to Rhino, can get around this), and sometimes a character is owned by the wrestler. Sometimes, a wrestler may change their legal name to obtain ownership of their ring name (Andrew Martin and Warrior). Many wrestlers (such as The Rock and The Undertaker) are strongly identified with their character, even responding to the name in public or between friends. Proper decorum is for wrestlers to refer to each other by their stage names/characters rather than their birth/legal names, unless otherwise introduced. A character can become so popular that it appears in other media (Hulk Hogan and El Santo) or even gives the performer enough visibility to enter politics (Antonio Inoki and Jesse Ventura).
Typically, matches are staged between a protagonist (historically an audience favorite, known as a babyface, or &quot;the good guy&quot;) and an antagonist (historically a villain with arrogance, a tendency to break rules, or other unlikable qualities, called a heel, or &quot;the bad guy&quot;). In recent years, antiheroes have also become prominent in professional wrestling. There is also a less common role of a &quot;tweener&quot;, who is neither fully face nor fully heel yet able to play either role effectively (case in point, Samoa Joe during his first run in Impact Wrestling from June 2005 to November 2006).

At times, a character may &quot;turn&quot;, altering their face/heel alignment. This may be an abrupt, surprising event, or it may slowly build over time. It is almost always accomplished with a markable change in behavior. Some turns become defining points in a career, as when Hulk Hogan turned heel after being a top face for over a decade. Others may have no noticeable effect on the character&#x27;s status. If a character repeatedly switches between face and heel, this lessens the effect of such turns, and may result in apathy from the audience. Big Show is a good example of having more heel and face turns than anyone in WWE history. Sometimes a character&#x27;s heel turn will become so popular that eventually the audience response will alter the character&#x27;s heel-face cycle to the point where the heel persona will, in practice, become a face persona, and what was previously the face persona, will turn into the heel persona, such as when Dwayne Johnson first began using &quot;The Rock&quot; persona as a heel character, as opposed to his original &quot;Rocky Maivia&quot; babyface persona. Another legendary example is Stone Cold Steve Austin, who was originally booked as a heel, with such mannerisms as drinking on the job, using profanity, breaking company property, and even breaking into people&#x27;s private homes. The fans&#x27; response to Austin was so positive that he effectively became one of the most popular antiheroes in professional wrestling. Austin, along with the stable of D-Generation X, Bret Hart and his Hart Foundation, is generally credited with ushering the Attitude Era of WWF programming.

==== Story ====
While real exhibition matches are now not uncommon, most matches tell a story analogous to an episode of a serial drama: the face will from time to time win (triumph) or from time to time lose (tragedy), and longer story arcs can result from a couple of matches. Since most promotions have a championship title, opposition for the championship is a frequent impetus for stories. For added stakes, anything from a character&#x27;s own hair to their job can be wagered in a match.

Some matches are designed to further the story of only one participant. It could be intended to portray an unstoppable force, a lucky underdog, a sore loser, or any other characterization. Sometimes non-wrestling vignettes are shown to enhance a character&#x27;s image without the need for matches.
Other stories result from a natural rivalry. Outside of performance, these are referred to as feuds. A feud can exist between any number of participants and can last from a few days to decades. The feud between Ric Flair and Ricky Steamboat lasted from the late 1970s into the early 1990s and allegedly spanned over two thousand matches (although most of those matches were mere dark matches). The career-spanning history between characters Mike Awesome and Masato Tanaka is another example of a long-running feud, as is the case of Steve Austin vs. Vince McMahon, one of the most lucrative feuds in the World Wrestling Federation during 1998 and 1999.

In theory, the longer a feud is built up, the more audience interest (aka heat) lasts. The main event of a wrestling show is generally the most heated. Commonly, a heel will hold the upper hand over a face until a final showdown, heightening dramatic tension as the face&#x27;s fans desire to see them win.

Throughout the history of professional wrestling, many other elements of media have been utilized in professional wrestling storytelling: pre- and post-match interviews, &quot;backstage&quot; skits, positions of authority and worked behind-the-scenes feuds, division rankings (typically the #1-contendership spot), contracts, lotteries, news stories on websites, and in recent years social media.

Anything that can be used as an element of drama can exist in professional wrestling stories: romantic relationships (including love triangles and marriage), racism, classism, nepotism, favoritism, corporate corruption, family bonds, personal histories, grudges, theft, cheating, assault, betrayal, bribery, seduction, stalking, confidence tricks, extortion, blackmail, substance abuse, self-doubt, self-sacrifice; even kidnapping, sexual fetishism, necrophilia, misogyny, rape and death have been portrayed in wrestling. Some promotions have included supernatural elements such as magic, curses, the undead and Satanic imagery (most notably the Undertaker and his Ministry of Darkness, a stable that regularly performed evil rituals and human sacrifice in Satanic-like worship of a hidden power figure).

Commentators have become important in communicating the relevance of the characters&#x27; actions to the story at hand, filling in past details and pointing out subtle actions that may otherwise go unnoticed.

===== Promos =====

A main part of storytelling in wrestling is a promo, short for promotional interview. Promos are performed, or &quot;cut&quot; in wrestling jargon, for a variety of reasons, including to heighten interest in a wrestler, or to hype an upcoming match.

Since the crowd is often too loud or the venue too large for promos to be heard naturally, wrestlers generally use amplification when speaking in the ring. Unlike most stage acting, large and highly visible handheld microphones are typically used and wrestlers frequently speak directly to the audience.

==== Championships ====
Professional wrestling mimics the structure of title match combat sports. Participants compete for a championship and must defend it after winning it. These titles are represented physically by a title belt that can be worn by the champion. In the case of team wrestling, there is a title belt for each member of the team.

Almost all professional wrestling promotions have at least one title, and some have more. Championships are designated by divisions of weight, height, gender, wrestling style and other qualifications.

Typically, each promotion only recognizes the &quot;legitimacy&quot; of their own titles, although cross-promotion does happen. When one promotion absorbs or purchases another, the titles from the defunct promotion may continue to be defended in the new promotion or be decommissioned. , the bookers in a company will place the title on the most accomplished performer, or those the bookers believe will generate fan interest in terms of event attendance and television viewership. Historically, a world champion was typically a legit shooter/hooker who had the skills to prevent double crosses by shooters who would deviate from the planned finish for personal glory. Lower ranked titles may also be used on the performers who show potential, thus allowing them greater exposure to the audience. Other circumstances may also determine the use of a championship. A combination of a championship&#x27;s lineage, the caliber of performers as champion, and the frequency and manner of title changes, dictates the audience&#x27;s perception of the title&#x27;s quality, significance and reputation.
A wrestler&#x27;s championship accomplishments can be central to their career, becoming a measure of their performance ability and drawing power. In general, a wrestler with multiple title reigns or an extended title reign is indicative of a wrestler&#x27;s ability to maintain audience interest or a wrestler&#x27;s ability to perform in the ring. As such, the most accomplished or decorated wrestlers tend to be revered as legends due to the amount of title reigns they hold. American wrestler Ric Flair has had multiple world heavyweight championship reigns spanning over three decades. Japanese wrestler Último Dragón once held and defended a record ten titles simultaneously.

==== Ring entrance ====

While the wrestling matches themselves are the primary focus of professional wrestling, a key dramatic element of the business can be entrances of the wrestlers to the arena and ring. It is typical for a wrestler to get their biggest crowd reaction (or &quot;pop&quot;) for their ring entrance, rather than for anything they do in the wrestling match itself, especially if former main event stars are returning to a promotion after a long absence.

All notable wrestlers now enter the ring accompanied by music, and regularly add other elements to their entrance. The music played during the ring entrance will usually mirror the wrestler&#x27;s personality. Many wrestlers, particularly in the U.S., have music and lyrics specially written for their ring entrance. While invented long before, the practice of including music with the entrance gained rapid popularity during the 1980s, largely as a result of the huge success of Hulk Hogan and the WWF, and their Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Wrestling Connection. When a match is won, the victor&#x27;s theme music is usually also played in celebration.

Because wrestling is predetermined, a wrestler&#x27;s entrance music will play as they enter the arena, even if they are, in kayfabe, not supposed to be there. For example, in 2012 through 2014, The Shield was a trio of wrestlers who were (in kayfabe) not at the time under contract with WWE (hence their gimmick of entering the ring through the crowd), but they still had entrance music which was played whenever they entered the arena, despite the fact that they were kayfabe invaders.

With the introduction of the Titantron entrance screen in 1997, WWF wrestlers also had entrance videos play along with their music.

Other dramatic elements of a ring entrance can include:

* Pyrotechnics such as a ring of fire for The Brood when they ascend to the stage, multi-colour fireworks (most notably for Edge), fire for Kane and Seth Rollins, a stage of smoke for Finn Bálor and (for a short period of time) falling fireworks for Christian Cage.
* Additional visual graphics or staging props to complement the entrance video/routine or further emphasize the character. For instance, Kane&#x27;s entrance graphics employ heavy use of fire-themed visuals, The Undertaker&#x27;s entrance features dark lighting, fire, fog and dry ice, and lightning-themed effects, and Goldust has been known to use on-screen visual effects in his entrance to simulate the presentation of a feature film (i.e. widescreen, production company credits), as to emphasize his Hollywood-themed film aficionado character. Adam Page is usually accompanied by humerous sub-headings such as &quot;Anxious Millenial Cowboy&quot;, &quot;New Boot Goofin, &quot;Finally Showed Up To Work&quot;, and &quot;For The Love Of God, Give Me A Lower Third This Week Even If It&#x27;s For 1 Frame&quot;.
* A distinct sound or opening note in the music (used to elicit a Pavlovian response from the crowd). For example, the glass shattering in Steve Austin&#x27;s entrance theme, The Undertaker&#x27;s signature bell toll, sirens, such as used by Scott Steiner or Right to Censor, Bret Hart&#x27;s electric guitar stinger, the NYSE trading bell and a cow&#x27;s moo in JBL&#x27;s theme.
* Darkening of the arena, often accompanied by mood lighting or strobe lighting, such as in The Undertaker&#x27;s, Triple H&#x27;s, or Sting&#x27;s entrances. Certain colors of lighting have been associated with specific wrestlers; for instance, blue lighting for The Undertaker and Alexa Bliss, green lighting for Triple H, D-Generation X, and Shane McMahon, a mixture of red and yellow lighting for Brock Lesnar, a lot of red for Seth Rollins (mainly for his &quot;Embrace The Vision&quot; character, also known by his theme named &quot;Visionary&quot;), a mixture of red and orange lighting for Kane, multicolored lighting for John Morrison, gold lighting for Goldust, pink lighting for Val Venis and Trish Stratus, and so forth.
* Driving a vehicle into the arena. For example, Eddie Guerrero arrived in a lowrider, The Undertaker (in his &quot;American Bad Ass&quot; biker gimmick), Chuck Palumbo, Tara, and the Disciples of Apocalypse on motorcycles, The Mexicools on riding lawn mowers, JBL in his limousine, Alberto Del Rio arriving into the arena in various luxury cars, Steve Austin driving an all-terrain vehicle, and Camacho and Hunico entering on a lowrider bicycle. Darby Allin in similar fashion rides a skateboard down to the ring, which is occasionally used as a weapon if the match type permits.
* Talking to the crowd using a distinctive patter. For instance, chanting or rapping along with the music (i.e. Road Dogg, R-Truth). Another example is Vickie Guerrero entering to no music, but announcing her arrival with the words &quot;Excuse me!&quot;. The Acclaimed&#x27;s Max Caster will perform a freestyle rap, usually at the expense of the opponent or a real life figure that has been brought up in recent news.
* Alternative forms of announcing one&#x27;s entrance. Orange Cassidy, whose persona is a carefree individual, has his weight billed as &quot;whatever&quot;, and being billed from &quot;wherever&quot;. In similar fashion, Danhausen (wrestler) is billed as &quot;claiming to stand 6 ft 7 in. tall, and over 300 lbs&quot;, despite being nowhere near either of those statistics. Mr. Kennedy would enter with his theme music, but would notably have a microphone descend from the ceiling when he reached the ring, where he would announce himself, rather than the traditional announcer. Maxwell Jacob Friedman during his heel persona would occasionally have the announcer begrudgingly announce him as &quot;He&#x27;s better than you, and you know it...&quot;, generally after a large victory for the character, or being surrounded by henchman of his that threaten to harm the announcer if they do not read off the card verbatim.
* Many heels with narcissistic gimmicks (Lex Luger, Shawn Michaels, Cody Rhodes, Paul Orndorff, etc.) admired themselves in mirrors on their way to the ring.
* Coming through the audience, such as The Sandman&#x27;s beer drinking and can smashing entrance, or Diamond Dallas Page&#x27;s exit through the crowd, or Jon Moxley entering through the crowd.
* Accompaniment by a ringside crew or personal security, as Goldberg did.
* Entering the arena by a lift in the stage, such as Kurt Angle, The Brood and Rey Mysterio.

Special ring entrances are also developed for big occasions, most notably the WrestleMania event. For example, WrestleMania III and VI both saw all wrestlers enter the arena on motorized miniature wrestling rings. Live bands are sometimes hired to perform live entrance music at special events. John Cena and Triple H are particularly notable in recent years for their highly theatrical entrances at WrestleMania.

== Training and qualifications ==
Physical fitness is considered the minimum requirement for entry in the field, with most professional wrestlers having at least some athletic background or training. Professional wrestlers receive at least some formal training in specialized professional wrestling schools or academies; these institutions can be independent or associated with a specific promotion. Candidates are typically trained and coached by experienced professional wrestlers; training regimens encompass both the athletic and performative aspects of professional wrestling, including physical fitness, choreography, and dramatization. Trainees are often pitted against one another or with their instructors in matches before small crowds to demonstrate and refine their skill in improvisation, mock combat, and stage presence.

=== Occupational hazards ===
Professional wrestling has been characterized by endemic and widespread health risks from its very inception in the 19th century. Although choreographed, the inherently physical nature of the performances, combined with its emphasis on spectacle and showmanship, results in a high chance of injury and even death. Strikes are often stiff, especially in Japan, and in independent wrestling promotions such as Combat Zone Wrestling. The ring is often made out of timber planks. There have been many brutal accidents, hits and injuries. Injuries are commonly sustained on the shoulders, knees, back, neck, and ribs. Professional wrestler Davey Richards said in 2015, &quot;We train to take damage, we know we are going to take damage and we accept that.&quot; 

Occupational hazards have also been attributed to professional wrestling&#x27;s uniquely ambiguous nature—as neither a true sport nor a formal performing art, yet still some combination of the two—which makes it difficult to regulate; as noted by Claire Warden, Professor of Performance and Physical Culture at Loughborough University, &quot;Set up a rugby club tomorrow and the Rugby Football Union would soon be knocking on your door to ask about concussion protocol or safeguarding. Set up a wrestling school or promotion and, well, no-one will demand anything.&quot; Warden also identifies related issues and practices in the industry, such as inadequate health and safety provisions among promotions, lack of unionization or labor representation, and the fact that most professional wrestlers are employed as independent contractors, thereby typically lacking healthcare access while remaining economically precarious.

Some wrestling performers use steroids and suffer from associated health issues. In 2007, American Congressman Cliff Stearns noted that between 1985 and 2006, 89 performers had died under the age of 50. Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), a brain disorder often caused by repeated concussions and head injury, may have been a factor in the 2007 double homicide committed by wrestler Chris Benoit. A 2014 study of male professional wrestlers active between 1985 and 2011 found a &quot;very high premature mortality rate&quot; compared to the generation population; cardiovascular disease was by far the leading cause, while deaths related to drug overdoses and cancer were likewise substantially high, at 122.7 and 6.4 times greater than the general population.

Wrestling performers frequently experience real pain during routine performances. Sociologist R. Tyson Smith attributes wrestlers&#x27; willingness to endure occupational injury to the substantivism of their socioeconomic viewpoint: From this viewpoint, Smith argues, wrestlers are willing to accept bodily pain by both practicing denialism and the sociologic embedded desire for authenticity, solidarity, and dominance. These findings are corroborated by the U.K.-based &quot;Health and Wellbeing in Professional Wrestling&quot; project, which interviewed professional wrestlers and identified common risks such as &quot;downplaying injury to secure that important spot on the card, performing a macho-masculine sense of resilience ... [and] acknowledging that there are always physical risks associated with contact sports.&quot;

== Regional variations and subgenres ==
The United States/Canada, northwest Europe (specifically the U.K, Germany/Austria and France), Japan, and Mexico are the four largest and most popular markets for professional wrestling and known for their distinctive styles and independent development.

Professional wrestling in the U.S., which overlaps into Canada, tends to focus heavily on history building and the establishment of characters and their personalities. There is a story for each match, and often a longer story for successive matches. Stories usually contain characters like faces, heels, and—less often—&quot;tweeners&quot; (antiheroes). It is a &quot;triumph&quot; if the face wins and a &quot;tragedy&quot; if the heel wins. The characters usually have strong and sharp personalities. The opposition between faces and heels is very intense in the story, and the heels may even attack the faces during TV interviews. The relationship between different characters can also be very complex.
Professional wrestling in Mexico, known as Lucha libre, also has stories and characters but with less emphasis. Mexican professional wrestling tradition repeats very usually brutal tactics, specially more aerial holds than professional wrestlers in the U.S. who, more often, rely on power moves and strikes to subdue their opponents. The difference in styles is due to the independent evolution of the sport in Mexico beginning in the 1930s and the fact that wrestlers in the cruiserweight division () are often the most popular wrestlers in Mexican lucha libre. Wrestlers often execute high flying moves characteristic of lucha libre by utilizing the wrestling ring&#x27;s ropes to catapult themselves towards their opponents, using intricate combinations in rapid-fire succession, and applying complex submission holds. Lucha libre is also known for its tag team wrestling matches, in which the teams are often made up of three members, instead of two as is common in the U.S.

Japanese professional wrestling (puroresu) also developed distinctively, initially drawing from traditional American style wrestling and becoming an entity in itself. While the outcome of matches are predetermined, the psychology and presentation of performances differ markedly: Among the largest promotions, such as New Japan Pro-Wrestling, All Japan Pro Wrestling and Pro Wrestling Noah, professional wrestling is treated as a full contact combat sport that mixes hard hitting martial arts strikes with shoot style submission holds, while in the U.S. it is rather more regarded as an entertainment show. Wrestlers incorporate kicks and strikes from martial arts disciplines, and a strong emphasis is placed on submission wrestling, and unlike the use of involved storylines in the U.S., they are not as intricate in Japan; more emphasis is placed on the concept of &quot;fighting spirit&quot;, meaning the wrestlers&#x27; display of physical and mental stamina are valued a lot more than theatrics. Many of Japan&#x27;s wrestlers including top stars such as Shinya Hashimoto, Riki Chōshū and Keiji Mutoh came from a legitimate martial arts background and many Japanese wrestlers in the 1990s began to pursue careers in mixed martial arts organizations such as Pancrase and Shooto which at the time retained the original look of puroresu but were actual competitions. Other companies, such as Michinoku Pro Wrestling and Dragon Gate, wrestle in a style similar to Mexican companies like AAA and CMLL. This is known as &quot;Lucharesu&quot;.

Much of the more serious style of Japanese wrestling derives from wrestling in Europe, particularly traditional British wrestling, which strongly emphasizes pure technical skill (particularly chain sequences of counters/reversals/escapes from holds) and high proportion of clean sportsmanly scientific matches between two &quot;blue-eyes&quot; as babyfaces were called there. This spread across mainland Europe (where it was known as &quot;Catch&quot; in non-English speaking countries) but in the Mediterranean south it soon died out after an initial flush of popularity, with the major league promotions of Italy and Spain closing in 1965 and 1975 respectively and Greece&#x27;s annual stadium show last held in 1980 although some low-grade house shows limped on until 1991. This left the U.K., France and West Germany/Austria as the three strongholds of European wrestling by the 1980s. In Germany and Austria, wrestling shows—particularly major trophy tournaments in Graz, Hamburg, Bremen, Vienna and other cities featuring visiting wrestlers from around the world—were a key part of the celebrations of various cultural festivals. Champion and promoter Otto Wanz maintained strong links with American promotions, frequently importing U.S. talent and even briefly winning the AWA World Heavyweight Championship in 1982. Meanwhile, in both the U.K. and France, national television coverage from the 1950s to the late 1980s made household names of top stars. In the U.K. in the late 1970s and through the 1980s, the dominant Joint Promotions underwent a major boom by rebranding as family entertainment centred around superheavyweight lead blue-eye Big Daddy. Eventually however the sheer lopsided nature of his victories over heels alienated fellow wrestlers and adult fans alike to the point where both groups defected in droves to opposition promoter All Star Wrestling which expanded (taking a share of the final two years of TV coverage) until it eclipsed Joint as dominant promotion, a position it still holds in . During the same period, professional wrestling in France moved to a more acrobatic style of action and colourful gimmick-led presentation, as exemplified by lead babyface Flesh Gordon (Gerard Hervé) who had learned his craft in 1970s Mexico. By the beginning of the 1990s in all three countries, local styles of wrestling were largely supplanted in mainstream popular culture by the WWF and WCW. While the traditional styles survive at grassroots level they face stiff competition not only from the major American wrestling corporations but also from homegrown &quot;American style&quot; promotions conforming to the general pattern of the contemporary U.S. independent wrestling scene.

=== Women&#x27;s wrestling ===

The women&#x27;s division of professional wrestling has maintained a recognized world champion since 1937, when Mildred Burke won the original World Women&#x27;s title. She then formed the World Women&#x27;s Wrestling Association in the early 1950s and recognized herself as the first champion, although the championship was vacated upon her retirement in 1956. The NWA ceased to acknowledge Burke as the Women&#x27;s World champion in 1954 and instead acknowledged June Byers as champion after a controversial finish to a high-profile match between Burke and Byers that year. Upon Byers&#x27;s retirement in 1964, The Fabulous Moolah, who won a junior heavyweight version of the NWA World Women&#x27;s Championship (the predecessor to the WWE Women&#x27;s Championship) in a tournament back in 1958, was recognized by most NWA promoters as champion by default.

=== Intergender ===
For most of its history, men and women rarely worked against each other in professional wrestling, as it was deemed to be unfair and unchivalrous. Andy Kaufman used this to gain notoriety when he created an Intergender Championship and declared it open to any female challenger. This led to a long (worked) feud with Jerry Lawler.
Cathy Davis sued the New York State Athletic Commission (NYSAC) in 1977 because she was denied a boxing license because she was a woman, and the case was decided in her favor later that year, with the judge invalidating New York State rule number 205.15, which stated, &quot;No woman may be licensed as a boxer or second or licensed to compete in any wrestling exhibition with men.&quot; In his opinion the judge cited the precedent set by &quot;Garrett v. New York State Athletic Commission&quot; (1975), which &quot;found the regulation invalid under the equal protection clauses of the State and Federal Constitutions&quot;. The NYSAC filed an appeal of the ruling but later dropped it.

In the 1980s, mixed tag team matches began to take place, with a male and female on each team and a rule stating that each wrestler could only attack the opponent of the same gender. If a tag was made, the other team had to automatically switch their legal wrestler as well. Despite these restrictions, many mixed tag matches do feature some physical interaction between participants of different genders. For example, a heel may take a cheap shot at the female wrestler of the opposing team to draw a negative crowd reaction. In lucha libre, cheap shots and male-female attacks are not uncommon.

Intergender singles bouts were first fought on a national level in the 1990s. This began with Luna Vachon, who faced men in Extreme Championship Wrestling (ECW) and WWF. Later, Chyna became the first female to hold a belt that was not exclusive to women when she won the WWF Intercontinental Championship. Intergender wrestling was uncommon in Impact Wrestling. ODB, had participated in intergender matches and once held the Impact Knockouts Tag Team Championship with Eric Young for a record 478 days. Other notable Impact Knockouts that competed in intergender matches include Scarlett Bordeaux; Tessa Blanchard, who became the first woman to win the Impact World Championship; and Jordynne Grace, who became the inaugural Impact Digital Media Championship.

===Midget wrestling===
Midget wrestling can be traced to professional wrestling&#x27;s carnival and vaudeville origins. In recent years, the popularity and prevalence of midgets in wrestling has greatly decreased due to wrestling companies depriving midget divisions of storyline or feud. WWE has made a few attempts to enter this market with their &quot;minis&quot; in the 1990s and the &quot;junior&#x27;s league&quot; as recent as 2006. It is still a popular form of entertainment in Mexican wrestling, mostly as a &quot;sideshow&quot;.

Some wrestlers may have their own specific &quot;mini me&quot;, like Mascarita Sagrada, Alebrije has Quije, etc. There are also cases in which midgets can become valets for a wrestler, and even get physically involved in matches, like Alushe, who often accompanies Tinieblas, or KeMonito, who is portrayed as Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre&#x27;s mascot and is also a valet for Mistico. Dave Finlay was often aided in his matches by a midget known mainly as Hornswoggle while in WWE, who hid under the ring and gave a shillelagh to Finlay to use on his opponent. Finlay also occasionally threw him at his opponents. Hornswoggle was given a run with the WWE Cruiserweight Championship and feuded with D-X in 2009.

== Culture and sociology ==
Professional wrestling has developed its own unique culture among both spectators and performers. Professional wrestlers have developed a kind of global fraternity, with familial bonds, shared language and passed-down traditions. New performers are expected to &quot;pay their dues&quot; for a few years by working in lower-profile promotions and working as ring crew before working their way upward. The permanent rosters of most promotions develop a backstage pecking order, with veterans mediating conflicts and mentoring younger wrestlers. For many decades (and still to a lesser extent today) performers were expected to keep the illusions of wrestling&#x27;s legitimacy alive even while not performing, essentially acting in character any time they were in public. Some veterans speak of a &quot;sickness&quot; among wrestling performers, an inexplicable pull to remain active in the wrestling world despite the devastating effects the job can have on one&#x27;s life and health.

Fans of professional wrestling likewise have their own subculture, comparable to those of science fiction, video games, or comic books. Like sports fans, many enthusiasts not only attend and view events but take an active interest in backstage occurrences, future storylines, and reasonings behind company decisions; they are catered to by a large and diverse industry of newsletters written by journalists with insider ties to the wrestling industry. Known in the subculture as &quot;rags&quot; or &quot;dirt sheets&quot;, these sources have proliferated online and sometimes provide breaking news; some have expanded into radio shows.

Some fans enjoy collecting recordings of wrestling shows from specific companies, of certain wrestlers, or of specific genres. Since the 1990s, many companies have been founded which deal primarily in wrestling footage. When the WWE purchased both WCW and ECW in 2001, they also obtained the entire past video libraries of both productions and have released many past matches online and on home video. Additionally, the internet has exposed fans to previously unavailable variations of wrestling from around the world.

As in competitive sports, fantasy leagues have developed around professional wrestling. Some take this concept further by creating E-feds (electronic federations), where a user can create their own fictional wrestling character, and role-playing storylines with other users, leading to scheduled &quot;shows&quot; where match results are determined by the organizers, usually based on a combination of the characters&#x27; statistics and the players&#x27; roleplaying aptitude, sometimes with audience voting.

=== Mainstream popularity ===
From the first established world championship, the top professional wrestlers have garnered fame within mainstream society. Each successive generation has produced a number of wrestlers who extend their careers into the realms of music, acting, writing, business, politics or public speaking, and are known to those who are unfamiliar with wrestling in general. Conversely, celebrities from other sports or general pop culture also become involved with wrestling for brief periods of time. A prime example of this is The Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Wrestling Connection of the 1980s, which combined wrestling with MTV.

Professional wrestling is often portrayed within other works using parody, and its general elements have become familiar tropes and memes in American culture.

Some terminology originating in professional wrestling has found its way into the common vernacular. Phrases such as &quot;body slam&quot;, &quot;sleeper hold&quot; and &quot;tag team&quot; are used by those who do not follow professional wrestling. The term &quot;smackdown&quot;, popularized by The Rock and &quot;SmackDown!&quot; in the 1990s, has been included in Merriam-Webster dictionaries since 2007.
Many television shows and films have been produced which portray in-character professional wrestlers as protagonists, such as &quot;Ready to Rumble&quot;, &quot;¡Mucha Lucha!&quot;, &quot;Nacho Libre&quot;, and the Santo film series. 

There have been multiple stage plays set in the world of pro wrestling: &quot;The Baron&quot; is a comedy that retells the life of an actual performer known as Baron von Raschke. &quot;From Parts Unknown...&quot; is an award-nominated Canadian drama about the rise and fall of a fictional wrestler. &quot;Trafford Tanzi&quot; is a play set in a wrestling ring and divided into ten rounds, in which all the cast members participate in wrestling. &quot;The Elaborate Entrance of Chad Deity&quot; is a dramatic comedy about a fictional wrestler, which involves scenes of professional wrestling that take place in a wrestling ring. &quot;Mythos: Ragnarök&quot; adapts Norse mythology for the stage by combining dramatic dialogue with scenes of professional wrestling, in the first example of wrestling being used as theatrical stage combat.

The 2009 &quot;South Park&quot; episode &quot;W.T.F.&quot; played on the soap operatic elements of professional wrestling. One of the lead characters on the Disney Channel series &quot;Kim Possible&quot; was a huge fan of pro wrestling and actually featured it on an episode (with two former WWE wrestlers voicing the two fictitious wrestlers featured in the episode). The 2008 film &quot;The Wrestler&quot;, about a washed-up professional wrestler, garnered several Oscar nominations. The 2017 TV series GLOW, based on the Gorgeous Ladies of Wrestling promotion, gained critical acclaim, including a nomination for Outstanding Comedy Series at the 70th Primetime Emmy Awards.

The 1950 film noir &quot;Night and the City&quot;, directed by Jules Dassin and starring Richard Widmark and Gene Tierney, told the story of a promoter in London trying to make it big, and featured a match involving real professional wrestler Stanislaus Zbyszko. The 2019 &quot;Fighting with My Family&quot; is a biographical sports comedy-drama film that depicts the career of English professional wrestler Paige. Walk Like A Panther is 2018 British comedy film about a group of 1980s wrestlers staging one final show to raise money to save their pub. 

Many professional wrestlers have also become mainstream in their own right, including John Cena, Dave Bautista, and Dwayne &quot;The Rock&quot; Johnson, mainly for acting in major films, as well as Chris Jericho and &quot;Macho Man&quot; Randy Savage for their musical ventures.
Wrestling has also gained a major following on YouTube, with WWE being the most subscribed wrestling channel and sixth most subscribed channel in the world. Other promotions, such as All Elite Wrestling, Major League Wrestling, Impact Wrestling and the National Wrestling Alliance have distributed their own weekly programming on the platform.

==== Measures of popularity ====

Professional wrestling has become especially prominent in North America, Japan and Europe (especially the United Kingdom). In Brazil, there was a very popular wrestling television program that aired from the 1960s to the early 1980s called &quot;Telecatch&quot;. High-profile figures in the sport have become celebrities and even cultural icons in their home countries.

Although professional wrestling started out as a small sideshow in traveling circuses and carnivals, today it is a multi-billion-dollar industry. Revenue is drawn from ticket sales, network television broadcasts, pay-per-view broadcasts, branded merchandise and home video. Wrestling was instrumental in making pay-per-view a viable method of content delivery. Annual shows such as WrestleMania, All In, Bound for Glory, Wrestle Kingdom and formerly Starrcade are among the highest-selling pay-per-view programming each year. In modern day, internet programming has been utilized by a number of companies to air web shows, internet pay per views (IPPVs) or on-demand content, helping to generate internet-related revenue earnings from the evolving World Wide Web.

Home video sales dominate the Billboard charts Recreational Sports DVD sales, with wrestling holding anywhere from 3 to 9 of the top 10 spots every week.
Due to its persistent cultural presence and to its novelty within the performing arts, wrestling constitutes a recurring topic in both academia and the media. Several documentaries have been produced looking at professional wrestling, most notably &quot;Beyond the Mat&quot; directed by Barry W. Blaustein, and &quot;Wrestling with Shadows&quot; featuring retired wrestler Bret Hart and directed by Paul Jay. There have also been many fictional depictions of wrestling; the 2008 film &quot;The Wrestler&quot; received several Oscar nominations and began a career revival for its star Mickey Rourke.

Currently, the largest professional wrestling company worldwide is the United States–based WWE, which bought out many smaller regional companies in the late 20th century, as well as primary competitors World Championship Wrestling (WCW) and ECW in early 2001. Other major companies worldwide include All Elite Wrestling (AEW) in the United States, Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre (CMLL), and Lucha Libre AAA Worldwide (AAA) in Mexico; and New Japan Pro-Wrestling (NJPW), All Japan Pro Wrestling (AJPW), and Pro Wrestling Noah in Japan.

=== Study and analysis ===

With its growing popularity, professional wrestling has attracted attention as a subject of serious academic study and journalistic criticism. Many courses, theses, essays and dissertations have analyzed wrestling&#x27;s conventions, content, and its role in modern society. It is often included as part of studies on theater, sociology, performance, and media. The Massachusetts Institute of Technology developed a course of study on the cultural significance of professional wrestling, and anthropologist Heather Levi has written an ethnography about the culture of lucha libre in Mexico.

In the early 20th century, once it became apparent that the &quot;sport&quot; was worked, pro wrestling was looked down on as a cheap entertainment for the uneducated working class, an attitude that still exists to varying degrees today. The French theorist Roland Barthes was among the first to propose that wrestling was worthy of deeper analysis, in his essay &quot;The World of Wrestling&quot; from his book &quot;Mythologies&quot;, first published in 1957. Barthes argued that it should be looked at not as a scamming of the ignorant, but as spectacle; a mode of theatric performance for a willing, if bloodthirsty, audience. Wrestling is described as performed art which demands an immediate reading of the juxtaposed meanings. The logical conclusion is given least importance over the theatrical performers of the wrestlers and the referee. According to Barthes, the function of a wrestler is not to win: it is to go exactly through the motions which are expected of him and to give the audience a theatrical spectacle. This work is considered a foundation of all later study.

While pro wrestling is often described simplistically as a &quot;soap opera for males&quot;, it has also been cited as filling the role of past forms of literature and theater; a of classical heroics, commedia dell&#x27;arte, revenge tragedies, morality plays, and burlesque. The characters and storylines portrayed by a successful promotion are seen to reflect the current mood, attitudes, and concerns of that promotion&#x27;s society and can in turn influence those same things. For example, wrestling&#x27;s high levels of violence and masculinity make it a vicarious outlet for aggression during peacetime. The displays of masculinity are said to incorporate homoerotic elements and elements of pageantry that have been compared to drag or Ball culture; some scholars posit that the homoerotic undertones target the desires of ostensibly heterosexual male viewers, &quot;[allowing] them the vicarious pleasure of transgressing gender norms&quot; by identifying with &quot;wrestlers who perform culturally transgressive notions of masculinity including flamboyance, attention to physical appearance, and ambiguous sexual identity&quot;.

Documentary filmmakers have studied the lives of wrestlers and the effects the profession has on them and their families. The 1999 theatrical documentary &quot;Beyond the Mat&quot; focused on Terry Funk, a wrestler nearing retirement; Mick Foley, a wrestler within his prime; Jake Roberts, a former star fallen from grace; and a school of wrestling students trying to break into the business. The 2005 release &quot;Lipstick and Dynamite, Piss and Vinegar: The First Ladies of Wrestling&quot; chronicled the development of women&#x27;s wrestling throughout the 20th century. Pro wrestling has been featured several times on HBO&#x27;s &quot;Real Sports with Bryant Gumbel&quot;. MTV&#x27;s documentary series &quot;True Life&quot; featured two episodes titled &quot;I&#x27;m a Professional Wrestler&quot; and &quot;I Want to Be a Professional Wrestler&quot;. Other documentaries have been produced by The Learning Channel (&quot;The Secret World of Professional Wrestling&quot;) and A&amp;E (&quot;Hitman Hart: Wrestling with Shadows&quot;). &quot;Bloodstained Memoirs&quot; explored the careers of several pro wrestlers, including Chris Jericho, Rob Van Dam and Roddy Piper.

== See also ==
* History of professional wrestling
* Independent circuit
* List of professional wrestling video games
* Professional wrestling moves (disambiguation)

=== Terminology ===
* Glossary of professional wrestling terms
* Professional wrestling match types
* Professional wrestling tag team match types
* Professional wrestling tournament

=== Lists of wrestlers ===
* List of family relations in professional wrestling
* List of professional wrestling rosters

=== Types of professional wrestling ===
* All-in professional wrestling
* Backyard wrestling
* Fantasy wrestling
* Hardcore wrestling
* Lucha libre
* Modern Freestyle Wrestling
* Puroresu

=== Related genres and topics ===
* 1950s quiz show scandals
* Scripted reality
* Docufiction

=== Radio programs ===
* &quot;Live Audio Wrestling&quot;
* &quot;Talksport&quot;
* &quot;Wrestling Observer Live&quot;

=== In fiction ===
* List of wrestling-based comic books
* &quot;GLOW&quot;
* &quot;The Wrestler&quot;

== References ==
=== Notes ===
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==

* Online World of Wrestling
* Pro Wrestling History
* Pro-Wrestling Title Histories</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="0" end="22" title="Professional wrestling" label="Professional wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="45" end="58" title="Professional wrestling" label="pro wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="71" end="80" title="Professional wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11635" start="104" end="111" title="theater" label="theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000232" start="128" end="139" title="mock combat" label="mock combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q184485" start="174" end="184" title="Performer" label="performers"/>
<link wikidata="Q838089" start="257" end="274" title="Amateur wrestling" label="amateur wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q25379" start="282" end="290" title="Play (theatre)" label="scripted"/>
<link wikidata="Q989963" start="334" end="346" title="storytelling" label="storytelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477259" start="408" end="419" title="open secret" label="open secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q387294" start="449" end="456" title="kayfabe" label="kayfabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986228" start="499" end="511" title="Sports commentator" label="commentators"/>
<link wikidata="Q155736" start="566" end="575" title="Good faith" label="bona fide"/>
<link wikidata="Q951982" start="620" end="643" title="suspension of disbelief" label="suspension of disbelief"/>
<link wikidata="Q222749" start="706" end="713" title="Acting" label="perform"/>
<link wikidata="Q461070" start="790" end="797" title="Gimmick (professional wrestling)" label="gimmick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077857" start="810" end="817" title="persona" label="persona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055303" start="868" end="878" title="stage name" label="stage name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193470" start="880" end="894" title="Theme music" label="entrance theme"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="967" end="974" title="Professional wrestling match types" label="Matches"/>
<link wikidata="Q847506" start="1079" end="1084" title="Feud (professional wrestling)" label="feuds"/>
<link wikidata="Q721663" start="1107" end="1112" title="Face (professional wrestling)" label="faces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="1140" end="1145" title="Heel (professional wrestling)" label="heels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763849" start="1155" end="1169" title="wrestling ring" label="wrestling ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290113" start="1200" end="1206" title="Boxing ring" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736226" start="1222" end="1232" title="main stage" label="main stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="1339" end="1357" title="reality television" label="reality television"/>
<link wikidata="Q180856" start="1446" end="1458" title="choreography" label="choreography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758095" start="1460" end="1465" title="stunt" label="stunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140700" start="1468" end="1481" title="Improvisational theatre" label="improvisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305765" start="1487" end="1506" title="dramatic convention" label="dramatic convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q184485" start="1603" end="1617" title="performing art" label="performing art"/>
<link wikidata="Q747376" start="1654" end="1666" title="Match fixing" label="match-fixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q224530" start="2017" end="2026" title="spectacle" label="spectacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190039" start="2161" end="2181" title="sports entertainment" label="sports entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11336206" start="2259" end="2269" title="Promotion (professional wrestling)" label="promotions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11396960" start="2308" end="2328" title="Production company" label="production companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q623109" start="2332" end="2345" title="sports league" label="sports league"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062492" start="2448" end="2467" title="independent circuit" label="independent circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868408" start="2577" end="2590" title="Professional wrestling in the United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q927431" start="2592" end="2598" title="Professional wrestling in Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q85794658" start="2600" end="2605" title="Professional wrestling in Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248110" start="2636" end="2650" title="Professional wrestling in the United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q832412" start="2652" end="2667" title="Catch Wrestling Association" label="Germany/Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q123460338" start="2672" end="2678" title="Professional wrestling in France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q215279" start="2825" end="2836" title="Freelancer" label="freelancers"/>
<link wikidata="Q773944" start="2930" end="2951" title="Fandom" label="culture and community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443451" start="2974" end="2984" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="3042" end="3057" title="popular culture" label="popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q110248179" start="3087" end="3093" title="Trope (literature)" label="tropes"/>
<link wikidata="Q901711" start="3128" end="3145" title="Colloquialism" label="everyday language"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="3153" end="3157" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="3159" end="3164" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="3166" end="3176" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="3182" end="3193" title="video games" label="video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q42486" start="3453" end="3462" title="wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q455595" start="3492" end="3499" title="amateur" label="amateur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301024" start="3616" end="3634" title="Real Pro Wrestling" label="Real Pro Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q327223" start="3661" end="3680" title="freestyle wrestling" label="freestyle wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="3759" end="3763" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="3768" end="3773" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q21715278" start="3972" end="3992" title="Pro Wrestling League" label="Pro Wrestling League"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="4683" end="4692" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408025" start="4699" end="4714" title="catch wrestling" label="catch wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q387294" start="6341" end="6348" title="kayfabe" label="kayfabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q26961735" start="6366" end="6371" title="carny" label="carny"/>
<link wikidata="Q466053" start="6526" end="6535" title="Lou Thesz" label="Lou Thesz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="7575" end="7585" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="7628" end="7635" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q28975991" start="8845" end="8856" title="Dick Shikat" label="Dick Shikat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280964" start="9579" end="9589" title="Jim Londos" label="Jim Londos"/>
<link wikidata="Q111167859" start="9594" end="9606" title="Jim Browning (wrestler)" label="Jim Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q16007691" start="9775" end="9786" title="Jack Pfefer" label="Jack Pfefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13436639" start="9842" end="9863" title="New York Daily Mirror" label="New York Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111929" start="10053" end="10064" title="Jack Curley" label="Jack Curley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067299" start="10320" end="10332" title="Toronto Star" label="Toronto Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q14920273" start="10353" end="10362" title="Lou Marsh" label="Lou Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q44430" start="10936" end="10949" title="Vince McMahon" label="Vince McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="10990" end="11016" title="World Wrestling Federation" label="World Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11324680" start="11066" end="11105" title="New Jersey State Athletic Control Board" label="New Jersey State Athletic Control Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190039" start="11303" end="11323" title="sports entertainment" label="sports entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256160" start="11525" end="11535" title="Television in the United States" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q467330" start="12181" end="12211" title="American Wrestling Association" label="American Wrestling Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408025" start="12720" end="12735" title="catch wrestling" label="catch wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772893" start="12915" end="12929" title="Gold Dust Trio" label="Gold Dust Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293072" start="13044" end="13050" title="suplex" label="suplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414917" start="14819" end="14834" title="Gorgeous George" label="Gorgeous George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141118" start="15026" end="15047" title="Pomp and Circumstance" label="Pomp and Circumstance"/>
<link wikidata="Q44430" start="15246" end="15259" title="Vince McMahon" label="Vince McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="15375" end="15385" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179216" start="15525" end="15531" title="cartel" label="cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111929" start="15678" end="15689" title="Jack Curley" label="Jack Curley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149473" start="15701" end="15712" title="Paul Bowser" label="Paul Bowser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817145" start="15717" end="15720" title="Tom Packs" label="Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149473" start="17182" end="17193" title="Paul Bowser" label="Paul Bowser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967826" start="17548" end="17578" title="National Wrestling Association" label="National Wrestling Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q28975991" start="17636" end="17647" title="Dick Shikat" label="Dick Shikat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068680" start="17728" end="17755" title="National Wrestling Alliance" label="National Wrestling Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731249" start="19434" end="19443" title="Joe Dusek" label="Joe Dusek"/>
<link wikidata="Q950279" start="19455" end="19466" title="Verne Gagne" label="Verne Gagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963407" start="19673" end="19684" title="Wally Karbo" label="Wally Karbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="19882" end="19891" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="20170" end="20179" title="Northeastern United States" label="northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="20548" end="20564" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251994" start="20881" end="20897" title="UHF television broadcasting" label="UHF broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q17058983" start="21049" end="21071" title="WWF All American Wrestling" label="All-American Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q248713" start="21085" end="21096" title="USA Network" label="USA Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q543534" start="22350" end="22353" title="TBS (American TV channel)" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931754" start="22558" end="22581" title="Jim Crockett Promotions" label="Jim Crockett Promotions"/>
<link wikidata="Q130171" start="22627" end="22655" title="World Championship Wrestling" label="World Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066467" start="22976" end="23006" title="WCW World Heavyweight Championship" label="World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q25379" start="23260" end="23266" title="Script (theater)" label="script"/>
<link wikidata="Q44453" start="23620" end="23630" title="Kurt Angle" label="Kurt Angle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23650" end="23679" title="Kurt Angle#Professional wrestling style and persona" label="fictional persona eponymously"/>
<link wikidata="Q61102628" start="24134" end="24156" title="Maxwell Jacob Friedman" label="Maxwell Jacob Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16007691" start="25049" end="25060" title="Jack Pfefer" label="Jack Pfefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q466053" start="25615" end="25624" title="Lou Thesz" label="Lou Thesz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190039" start="26221" end="26241" title="sports entertainment" label="sports entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q476300" start="26353" end="26370" title="Sports competition" label="competitive sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="26449" end="26475" title="WWE" label="World Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44430" start="26500" end="26513" title="Vince McMahon" label="Vince McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627204" start="26536" end="26550" title="List of marketing terms" label="marketing term"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067299" start="26704" end="26716" title="Toronto Star" label="Toronto Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q14920273" start="26737" end="26746" title="Lou Marsh" label="Lou Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480298" start="26873" end="26890" title="New Jersey Senate" label="New Jersey Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5693180" start="27268" end="27272" title="heat (professional wrestling)" label="heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q120435068" start="27409" end="27439" title="TKO Group Holdings" label="merged with the parent company"/>
<link wikidata="Q186471" start="27443" end="27473" title="Ultimate Fighting Championship" label="Ultimate Fighting Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880200" start="30259" end="30275" title="ONE Championship" label="ONE Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786678" start="30281" end="30297" title="Matchroom Sport" label="Matchroom Boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777493" start="30386" end="30406" title="theater in the round" label="theater in the round"/>
<link wikidata="Q194428" start="30464" end="30469" title="stage (theater)" label="stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q741726" start="30490" end="30501" title="fourth wall" label="fourth wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409536" start="30543" end="30552" title="pantomime" label="pantomime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356073" start="30662" end="30672" title="spectator sport" label="spectators"/>
<link wikidata="Q721663" start="30943" end="30952" title="Face (professional wrestling)" label="babyfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="31013" end="31018" title="Heel (professional wrestling)" label="heels"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31389" end="31407" title="Wrestling#Modern international disciplines" label="forms of wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q942297" start="31457" end="31461" title="prop" label="prop"/>
<link wikidata="Q381243" start="31467" end="31481" title="special effect" label="special effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11336206" start="31868" end="31900" title="professional wrestling promotion" label="professional wrestling promotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="31907" end="31910" title="WWE" label="WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q35516" start="31984" end="31996" title="WrestleMania" label="WrestleMania"/>
<link wikidata="Q44453" start="32568" end="32578" title="Kurt Angle" label="Kurt Angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q636830" start="32593" end="32611" title="Olympic gold medal" label="Olympic gold medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="32683" end="32708" title="1996 Summer Olympic Games" label="1996 Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q327223" start="32712" end="32731" title="freestyle wrestling" label="freestyle wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q220556" start="32764" end="32776" title="Brock Lesnar" label="Brock Lesnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953049" start="32813" end="32850" title="NCAA Division I Wrestling Championships" label="NCAA Division I National Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q559618" start="33167" end="33185" title="fictional universe" label="fictional universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q24572709" start="33200" end="33218" title="Thomas S. Henricks" label="Thomas S. Henricks"/>
<link wikidata="Q831725" start="33263" end="33276" title="Structuralist sociology" label="structuralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q448266" start="33361" end="33387" title="Instrumental and value-rational action" label="instrumentally rationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763849" start="34336" end="34350" title="wrestling ring" label="wrestling ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259259" start="34371" end="34377" title="canvas" label="canvas"/>
<link wikidata="Q721547" start="35010" end="35017" title="Pin (professional wrestling)" label="Pinning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35150" end="35156" title="#Submission" label="submit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35159" end="35175" title="#Disqualification" label="Disqualification"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35248" end="35256" title="#Countout" label="countout"/>
<link wikidata="Q668642" start="35260" end="35272" title="Knockout" label="Knocking out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194480" start="35757" end="35773" title="genre convention" label="genre convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683628" start="36076" end="36105" title="Admiral-Lord Mountevans rules" label="Admiral-Lord Mountevans rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q483394" start="36501" end="36509" title="subgenre" label="subgenre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744109" start="36751" end="36765" title="Iron Man match" label="Iron Man match"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="37540" end="37544" title="Heel (professional wrestling)" label="Heel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707048" start="37708" end="37723" title="hardcore wrestling" label="no holds barred"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784331" start="37819" end="37835" title="Thing theory" label="thing theoristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178703" start="37873" end="37885" title="ladder match" label="ladder match"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="38606" end="38616" title="professional wrestling match type" label="cage match"/>
<link wikidata="Q14944691" start="38747" end="38759" title="battle royal (professional wrestling)" label="battle royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="39135" end="39138" title="WWE" label="WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q36103" start="39146" end="39158" title="Royal Rumble" label="Royal Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q721051" start="39413" end="39420" title="Referee (professional wrestling)" label="referee"/>
<link wikidata="Q927431" start="39531" end="39542" title="lucha libre" label="lucha libre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304024" start="39624" end="39634" title="Shoot (professional wrestling)" label="legitimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q387294" start="39802" end="39809" title="kayfabe" label="kayfabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="40356" end="40360" title="Heel (professional wrestling)" label="heel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60324825" start="40619" end="40638" title="All Elite Wrestling" label="All Elite Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40768" end="40782" title="Referee (professional wrestling)#Special referees" label="guest referees"/>
<link wikidata="Q459809" start="41196" end="41206" title="Tito Ortiz" label="Tito Ortiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655261" start="41228" end="41245" title="Hard Justice (2005)" label="Hard Justice 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="44573" end="44576" title="WWE" label="WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707048" start="44988" end="45002" title="Hardcore wrestling" label="hardcore rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178703" start="45050" end="45062" title="ladder match" label="ladder match"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="45100" end="45108" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246591" start="45606" end="45621" title="New Age Outlaws" label="New Age Outlaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="46997" end="47002" title="Heel (professional wrestling)" label="heels"/>
<link wikidata="Q380834" start="48002" end="48014" title="Ken Shamrock" label="Ken Shamrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q196092" start="48095" end="48106" title="Submission (combat sports)" label="tapping out"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408025" start="48303" end="48321" title="Catch wrestling" label="catch-as-catch-can"/>
<link wikidata="Q44144" start="48436" end="48449" title="Chris Jericho" label="Chris Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="48451" end="48460" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q81324" start="48462" end="48471" title="Bret Hart" label="Bret Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q44453" start="48473" end="48483" title="Kurt Angle" label="Kurt Angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q380834" start="48485" end="48497" title="Ken Shamrock" label="Ken Shamrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q729508" start="48499" end="48511" title="Dean Malenko" label="Dean Malenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q44292" start="48513" end="48525" title="Chris Benoit" label="Chris Benoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q299355" start="48527" end="48542" title="Bryan Danielson" label="Bryan Danielson"/>
<link wikidata="Q470015" start="48548" end="48552" title="Tazz" label="Tazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5927827" start="48880" end="48892" title="kata ha jime" label="kata ha jime"/>
<link wikidata="Q721834" start="49808" end="49815" title="Manager (professional wrestling)" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q387294" start="50102" end="50109" title="kayfabe" label="kayfabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q835173" start="50156" end="50161" title="Law of agency" label="agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q668642" start="50416" end="50434" title="technical knockout" label="technical knockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q196092" start="50438" end="50458" title="Submission (combat sport)" label="technical submission"/>
<link wikidata="Q721663" start="52623" end="52631" title="face (professional wrestling)" label="babyface"/>
<link wikidata="Q345019" start="54861" end="54873" title="Jerry Lawler" label="Jerry Lawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q275971" start="54901" end="54913" title="Roman Reigns" label="Roman Reigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998999" start="54921" end="54935" title="Superman Punch" label="Superman Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422582" start="55045" end="55055" title="Eye-gouging" label="gouging it"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458906" start="55127" end="55136" title="Sexy Star" label="Sexy Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888093" start="55181" end="55189" title="Rosemary (wrestler)" label="Rosemary"/>
<link wikidata="Q29019694" start="55197" end="55212" title="Triplemanía XXV" label="Triplemanía XXV"/>
<link wikidata="Q960673" start="55382" end="55411" title="AAA Reina de Reinas Championship" label="AAA Women&amp;#x27;s Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350113" start="55662" end="55669" title="ejection (sports)" label="ejected"/>
<link wikidata="Q60324825" start="55766" end="55785" title="All Elite Wrestling" label="All Elite Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531270" start="55829" end="55840" title="Earl Hebner" label="Earl Hebner"/>
<link wikidata="Q101419291" start="55845" end="55859" title="Aubrey Edwards" label="Aubrey Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q31317" start="56105" end="56119" title="Shawn Michaels" label="Shawn Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q387294" start="56139" end="56146" title="kayfabe" label="kayfabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q44692" start="56161" end="56195" title="John Layfield" label="John &amp;quot;Bradshaw&amp;quot; Layfield"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56360" end="56374" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Foreign object" label="foreign object"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707048" start="56431" end="56449" title="hardcore wrestling" label="hardcore wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q206536" start="56735" end="56756" title="Groin attack" label="low blow to the groin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068680" start="57037" end="57064" title="National Wrestling Alliance" label="National Wrestling Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q206536" start="57638" end="57647" title="Groin attack" label="low blows"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57649" end="57661" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#foreign object" label="weapon usage"/>
<link wikidata="Q361235" start="58019" end="58031" title="Dusty Rhodes" label="Dusty Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="59407" end="59413" title="soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q976745" start="59420" end="59431" title="yellow card (sport)" label="yellow card"/>
<link wikidata="Q976745" start="59494" end="59502" title="red card (sport)" label="red card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189642" start="59553" end="59571" title="Stampede Wrestling" label="Stampede Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="59575" end="59582" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066670" start="59847" end="59855" title="tag team" label="tag team"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754" start="60801" end="60811" title="WWE Raw" label="Raw is War"/>
<link wikidata="Q44313" start="60824" end="60847" title="Stone Cold Steve Austin" label="Stone Cold Steve Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q254198" start="60859" end="60892" title="WWE Intercontinental Championship" label="WWE Intercontinental Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q10738" start="60896" end="60904" title="Dwayne Johnson" label="The Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194480" start="61047" end="61063" title="genre convention" label="genre convention"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61342" end="61356" title="The Godfather (wrestler)#The Godfather (1998–2000)" label="Charles Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q220556" start="61883" end="61895" title="Brock Lesnar" label="Brock Lesnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q44304" start="61900" end="61914" title="The Undertaker" label="The Undertaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353458" start="61918" end="61936" title="Unforgiven (2002)" label="Unforgiven in 2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q31317" start="61992" end="62006" title="Shawn Michaels" label="Shawn Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q44567" start="62011" end="62019" title="Triple H" label="Triple H"/>
<link wikidata="Q36744" start="62027" end="62047" title="Royal Rumble (2004)" label="Royal Rumble in 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q61102628" start="62172" end="62175" title="MJF" label="MJF"/>
<link wikidata="Q928045" start="62180" end="62189" title="Adam Cole" label="Adam Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q117459670" start="62193" end="62207" title="All In (2023)" label="All In in 2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q44453" start="62335" end="62345" title="Kurt Angle" label="Kurt Angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375061" start="62391" end="62405" title="triangle choke" label="triangle choke"/>
<link wikidata="Q35622" start="62451" end="62460" title="SmackDown" label="SmackDown"/>
<link wikidata="Q851440" start="64021" end="64033" title="pay-per-view" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077857" start="64303" end="64312" title="Persona" label="character"/>
<link wikidata="Q461070" start="64408" end="64415" title="Gimmick (professional wrestling)" label="gimmick"/>
<link wikidata="Q627603" start="64524" end="64536" title="Cartoon" label="cartoon-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q646459" start="64546" end="64561" title="Doink the Clown" label="Doink the Clown"/>
<link wikidata="Q44144" start="64612" end="64625" title="Chris Jericho" label="Chris Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q10738" start="64627" end="64635" title="Dwayne Johnson" label="The Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="64637" end="64646" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q44313" start="64648" end="64660" title="Stone Cold Steve Austin" label="Steve Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q215447" start="64666" end="64673" title="CM Punk" label="CM Punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q927431" start="64679" end="64690" title="lucha libre" label="lucha libre"/>
<link wikidata="Q930420" start="64731" end="64746" title="secret identity" label="secret identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="64757" end="64766" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498903" start="64772" end="64784" title="supervillain" label="supervillain"/>
<link wikidata="Q81324" start="64922" end="64931" title="Bret Hart" label="Bret Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="64933" end="64942" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q44449" start="64947" end="64958" title="Randy Orton" label="Randy Orton"/>
<link wikidata="Q31317" start="65015" end="65029" title="Shawn Michaels" label="Shawn Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q215447" start="65031" end="65038" title="CM Punk" label="CM Punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q379538" start="65043" end="65058" title="Ricky Steamboat" label="Ricky Steamboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q471865" start="65317" end="65322" title="Rhyno" label="Rhyno"/>
<link wikidata="Q467402" start="65497" end="65510" title="Test (wrestler)" label="Andrew Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q333421" start="65515" end="65522" title="The Ultimate Warrior" label="Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q10738" start="65549" end="65557" title="Dwayne Johnson" label="The Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q44304" start="65562" end="65576" title="The Undertaker" label="The Undertaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="65901" end="65911" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q970321" start="65916" end="65924" title="El Santo" label="El Santo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="65981" end="65989" title="politics" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q45207" start="65991" end="66004" title="Antonio Inoki" label="Antonio Inoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q311161" start="66009" end="66022" title="Jesse Ventura" label="Jesse Ventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="66065" end="66076" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q721663" start="66124" end="66132" title="Face (professional wrestling)" label="babyface"/>
<link wikidata="Q245204" start="66170" end="66180" title="antagonist" label="antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="66287" end="66291" title="Heel (professional wrestling)" label="heel"/>
<link wikidata="Q110910" start="66339" end="66347" title="antihero" label="antihero"/>
<link wikidata="Q381825" start="66561" end="66570" title="Samoa Joe" label="Samoa Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q131728" start="66595" end="66611" title="Impact Wrestling" label="Impact Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66679" end="66683" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Turn" label="turn"/>
<link wikidata="Q549944" start="66926" end="66948" title="New World Order (professional wrestling)" label="Hulk Hogan turned heel"/>
<link wikidata="Q44378" start="67201" end="67209" title="Big Show" label="Big Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q10738" start="67605" end="67619" title="Dwayne Johnson" label="Dwayne Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44313" start="67787" end="67810" title="Stone Cold Steve Austin" label="Stone Cold Steve Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184439" start="67900" end="67909" title="profanity" label="profanity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67947" end="67988" title="Brian Pillman#World Wrestling Federation (1996–1997)" label="breaking into people&amp;#x27;s private homes"/>
<link wikidata="Q849496" start="68162" end="68176" title="D-Generation X" label="D-Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q512696" start="68196" end="68211" title="Hart Foundation" label="Hart Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35560" start="68249" end="68265" title="the Attitude Era" label="the Attitude Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656062" start="68996" end="69005" title="Vignette (literature)" label="vignettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q847506" start="69176" end="69181" title="feud (professional wrestling)" label="feuds"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="69293" end="69302" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q379538" start="69307" end="69322" title="Ricky Steamboat" label="Ricky Steamboat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69461" end="69473" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#D" label="dark matches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340386" start="69523" end="69535" title="Mike Awesome" label="Mike Awesome"/>
<link wikidata="Q719835" start="69540" end="69553" title="Masato Tanaka" label="Masato Tanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q44313" start="69615" end="69627" title="Stone Cold Steve Austin" label="Steve Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44430" start="69632" end="69645" title="Vince McMahon" label="Vince McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5693180" start="69810" end="69814" title="Heat (professional wrestling)" label="heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038191" start="69827" end="69837" title="Card (sports)" label="main event"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443451" start="70270" end="70276" title="Work (professional wrestling)" label="worked"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="70427" end="70439" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189047" start="70536" end="70558" title="Romance (love)" label="romantic relationships"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="70905" end="70913" title="misogyny" label="misogyny"/>
<link wikidata="Q239872" start="71043" end="71049" title="undead" label="undead"/>
<link wikidata="Q133363" start="71054" end="71061" title="Satanism" label="Satanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44304" start="71084" end="71098" title="the Undertaker" label="the Undertaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107405" start="71107" end="71127" title="Ministry of Darkness" label="Ministry of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71131" end="71137" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Stable" label="stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q119094" start="71180" end="71195" title="human sacrifice" label="human sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71524" end="71529" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#P" label="promo"/>
<link wikidata="Q852061" start="72105" end="72116" title="Champion" label="title match"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128792" start="72117" end="72129" title="combat sport" label="combat sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q721063" start="72159" end="72171" title="Championship (professional wrestling)" label="championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132957" start="72254" end="72264" title="Championship belt" label="title belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11336206" start="72393" end="72425" title="professional wrestling promotion" label="professional wrestling promotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q662340" start="72683" end="72698" title="cross-promotion" label="cross-promotion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72876" end="72883" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Book" label="bookers"/>
<link wikidata="Q773944" start="72997" end="73000" title="Fandom" label="fan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73810" end="73817" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Draw" label="drawing"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="74175" end="74184" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q721063" start="74202" end="74232" title="World heavyweight championship (professional wrestling)" label="world heavyweight championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q725379" start="74287" end="74300" title="Último Dragón" label="Último Dragón"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="75315" end="75325" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35489" start="75349" end="75388" title="1980s professional wrestling boom" label="Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Wrestling Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q387294" start="75606" end="75613" title="kayfabe" label="kayfabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q247125" start="75676" end="75686" title="The Shield (professional wrestling)" label="The Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q474100" start="76162" end="76174" title="Pyrotechnics" label="Pyrotechnics"/>
<link wikidata="Q721127" start="76202" end="76211" title="The Brood (professional wrestling)" label="The Brood"/>
<link wikidata="Q44164" start="76284" end="76288" title="Edge (wrestler)" label="Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q44354" start="76300" end="76304" title="Kane (wrestler)" label="Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q715014" start="76309" end="76321" title="Seth Rollins" label="Seth Rollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q984334" start="76344" end="76354" title="Finn Bálor" label="Finn Bálor"/>
<link wikidata="Q44537" start="76410" end="76424" title="Christian Cage" label="Christian Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q44354" start="76563" end="76567" title="Kane (wrestler)" label="Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q44304" start="76634" end="76648" title="The Undertaker" label="The Undertaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q314657" start="76746" end="76753" title="Goldust" label="Goldust"/>
<link wikidata="Q16525240" start="76975" end="76984" title="Adam Page" label="Adam Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q212737" start="77307" end="77316" title="Classical conditioning" label="Pavlovian"/>
<link wikidata="Q536893" start="77380" end="77414" title="WWF The Music, Vol. 3" label="Steve Austin&amp;#x27;s entrance theme"/>
<link wikidata="Q44304" start="77416" end="77430" title="The Undertaker" label="The Undertaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509130" start="77448" end="77457" title="Funeral toll" label="bell toll"/>
<link wikidata="Q467367" start="77483" end="77496" title="Scott Steiner" label="Scott Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498092" start="77500" end="77515" title="Right to Censor" label="Right to Censor"/>
<link wikidata="Q81324" start="77517" end="77533" title="Bret Hart" label="Bret Hart&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77563" end="77580" title="New York Stock Exchange#Opening and closing bells" label="NYSE trading bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7211482" start="77670" end="77683" title="Stage lighting" label="mood lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q8271517" start="77687" end="77699" title="strobe light" label="strobe light"/>
<link wikidata="Q44567" start="77738" end="77746" title="Triple H" label="Triple H"/>
<link wikidata="Q44640" start="77758" end="77763" title="Sting (wrestler)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q44304" start="77887" end="77901" title="The Undertaker" label="The Undertaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16525974" start="77906" end="77917" title="Alexa Bliss" label="Alexa Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q849496" start="77948" end="77962" title="D-Generation X" label="D-Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q861110" start="77968" end="77981" title="Shane McMahon" label="Shane McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q220556" start="78024" end="78036" title="Brock Lesnar" label="Brock Lesnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q715014" start="78055" end="78067" title="Seth Rollins" label="Seth Rollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q44354" start="78221" end="78225" title="Kane (wrestler)" label="Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q259180" start="78253" end="78266" title="John Morrison (wrestler)" label="John Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q314657" start="78286" end="78293" title="Dustin Rhodes" label="Goldust"/>
<link wikidata="Q555510" start="78313" end="78322" title="Sean Morley" label="Val Venis"/>
<link wikidata="Q229310" start="78327" end="78340" title="Trish Stratus" label="Trish Stratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44374" start="78405" end="78419" title="Eddie Guerrero" label="Eddie Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q460357" start="78511" end="78524" title="Chuck Palumbo" label="Chuck Palumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q237314" start="78526" end="78530" title="Lisa Marie Varon" label="Tara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281467" start="78540" end="78563" title="Disciples of Apocalypse" label="Disciples of Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751222" start="78580" end="78593" title="The Mexicools" label="The Mexicools"/>
<link wikidata="Q79231" start="78639" end="78654" title="Alberto Del Rio" label="Alberto Del Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q210988" start="78727" end="78746" title="all-terrain vehicle" label="all-terrain vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320070" start="78752" end="78759" title="Camacho (wrestler)" label="Camacho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191778" start="78764" end="78770" title="Hunico" label="Hunico"/>
<link wikidata="Q60194617" start="78803" end="78814" title="Darby Allin" label="Darby Allin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148351" start="78980" end="78986" title="patter" label="patter"/>
<link wikidata="Q536050" start="79049" end="79058" title="Road Dogg" label="Road Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q310690" start="79060" end="79067" title="Ron Killings" label="R-Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q231501" start="79089" end="79104" title="Vickie Guerrero" label="Vickie Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q116973806" start="79193" end="79206" title="The Acclaimed" label="The Acclaimed"/>
<link wikidata="Q105835710" start="79214" end="79224" title="Max Caster" label="Max Caster"/>
<link wikidata="Q66481446" start="79412" end="79426" title="Orange Cassidy" label="Orange Cassidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104816919" start="79579" end="79599" title="Danhausen (wrestler)" label="Danhausen (wrestler)"/>
<link wikidata="Q297240" start="79733" end="79744" title="Ken Anderson (wrestler)" label="Mr. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q61102628" start="79938" end="79960" title="Maxwell Jacob Friedman" label="Maxwell Jacob Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="80287" end="80292" title="Heel (professional wrestling)" label="heels"/>
<link wikidata="Q115347" start="80321" end="80330" title="Lex Luger" label="Lex Luger"/>
<link wikidata="Q31317" start="80332" end="80346" title="Shawn Michaels" label="Shawn Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q299222" start="80348" end="80359" title="Cody Rhodes" label="Cody Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388872" start="80361" end="80374" title="Paul Orndorff" label="Paul Orndorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q532927" start="80477" end="80495" title="The Sandman (wrestler)" label="The Sandman&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q382078" start="80540" end="80559" title="Diamond Dallas Page" label="Diamond Dallas Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171647" start="80654" end="80667" title="Cornerman" label="ringside crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q44453" start="80760" end="80770" title="Kurt Angle" label="Kurt Angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q721127" start="80772" end="80781" title="The Brood (professional wrestling)" label="The Brood"/>
<link wikidata="Q44152" start="80786" end="80798" title="Rey Mysterio" label="Rey Mysterio"/>
<link wikidata="Q35516" start="80879" end="80891" title="WrestleMania" label="WrestleMania"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="81096" end="81105" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q44567" start="81110" end="81118" title="Triple H" label="Triple H"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066131" start="81737" end="81745" title="Athlete" label="athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q309252" start="81808" end="81824" title="physical fitness" label="physical fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q180856" start="81826" end="81838" title="choreography" label="choreography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038928" start="81844" end="81857" title="dramatization" label="dramatization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="82413" end="82418" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Stiff" label="stiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113590" start="82489" end="82510" title="Combat Zone Wrestling" label="Combat Zone Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q644256" start="82716" end="82730" title="Davey Richards" label="Davey Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434547" start="83151" end="83174" title="Loughborough University" label="Loughborough University"/>
<link wikidata="Q656365" start="83654" end="83677" title="independent contractors" label="independent contractors"/>
<link wikidata="Q166376" start="83791" end="83803" title="Doping in sport" label="use steroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q920096" start="83876" end="83889" title="Cliff Stearns" label="Cliff Stearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114004" start="83968" end="84000" title="Chronic traumatic encephalopathy" label="Chronic traumatic encephalopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047902" start="84105" end="84129" title="Chris Benoit double-murder and suicide" label="the 2007 double homicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q44292" start="84152" end="84164" title="Chris Benoit" label="Chris Benoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502668" start="84716" end="84729" title="substantivism" label="substantivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10567262" start="84862" end="84871" title="denialism" label="denialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079747" start="84880" end="84899" title="Embeddedness" label="sociologic embedded"/>
<link wikidata="Q721663" start="85949" end="85954" title="Face (professional wrestling)" label="faces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="85956" end="85961" title="heel (professional wrestling)" label="heels"/>
<link wikidata="Q110910" start="86000" end="86008" title="antihero" label="antihero"/>
<link wikidata="Q927431" start="86408" end="86419" title="Lucha libre" label="Lucha libre"/>
<link wikidata="Q196249" start="86570" end="86582" title="Professional wrestling holds" label="aerial holds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868408" start="86588" end="86622" title="History of professional wrestling in the United States" label="professional wrestlers in the U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q2954199" start="86841" end="86854" title="Cruiserweight (professional wrestling)" label="cruiserweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763849" start="87017" end="87031" title="wrestling ring" label="wrestling ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066670" start="87221" end="87229" title="tag team" label="tag team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761866" start="87378" end="87386" title="puroresu" label="puroresu"/>
<link wikidata="Q632190" start="87564" end="87574" title="sport psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150494" start="87663" end="87686" title="New Japan Pro-Wrestling" label="New Japan Pro-Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359107" start="87688" end="87711" title="All Japan Pro Wrestling" label="All Japan Pro Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209832" start="87716" end="87734" title="Pro Wrestling Noah" label="Pro Wrestling Noah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87775" end="87787" title="Contact sport#Full-contact sport" label="full contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128792" start="87788" end="87800" title="combat sport" label="combat sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11417" start="87825" end="87837" title="martial arts" label="martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482470" start="87851" end="87862" title="Shoot wrestling" label="shoot style"/>
<link wikidata="Q196092" start="87863" end="87879" title="Submission (combat sports)" label="submission holds"/>
<link wikidata="Q11417" start="87997" end="88009" title="martial arts" label="martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999695" start="88058" end="88078" title="submission wrestling" label="submission wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143055" start="88406" end="88422" title="Shinya Hashimoto" label="Shinya Hashimoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041872" start="88424" end="88435" title="Riki Chōshū" label="Riki Chōshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q927964" start="88440" end="88451" title="Keiji Mutoh" label="Keiji Mutoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q717248" start="88768" end="88779" title="Dragon Gate (wrestling)" label="Dragon Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248110" start="89001" end="89018" title="British wrestling" label="British wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="89680" end="89684" title="U.K." label="U.K."/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="89686" end="89692" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="89697" end="89709" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="89710" end="89717" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q13298" start="89860" end="89864" title="Graz" label="Graz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="89866" end="89873" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="89875" end="89881" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="89883" end="89889" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q85652" start="90047" end="90056" title="Otto Wanz" label="Otto Wanz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720496" start="90169" end="90203" title="AWA World Heavyweight Championship" label="AWA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248110" start="90416" end="90432" title="Joint Promotions" label="Joint Promotions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498727" start="90540" end="90549" title="Shirley Crabtree" label="Big Daddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729676" start="90745" end="90763" title="All Star Wrestling" label="All Star Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q123460338" start="90936" end="90968" title="professional wrestling in France" label="professional wrestling in France"/>
<link wikidata="" start="91083" end="91110" title=":fr:Flesh Gordon (catch)" label="Flesh Gordon (Gerard Hervé)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6850950" start="91744" end="91757" title="Mildred Burke" label="Mildred Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312236" start="92098" end="92108" title="June Byers" label="June Byers"/>
<link wikidata="Q256279" start="92247" end="92266" title="The Fabulous Moolah" label="The Fabulous Moolah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278414" start="92312" end="92347" title="NWA World Women&amp;#x27;s Championship" label="NWA World Women&amp;#x27;s Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q23708951" start="92372" end="92401" title="WWE Women&amp;#x27;s Championship" label="WWE Women&amp;#x27;s Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q299983" start="92662" end="92674" title="Andy Kaufman" label="Andy Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q345019" start="92832" end="92844" title="Jerry Lawler" label="Jerry Lawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053412" start="92846" end="92857" title="Cathy Davis" label="Cathy Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992437" start="92867" end="92901" title="New York State Athletic Commission" label="New York State Athletic Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711462" start="93207" end="93217" title="exhibition fight" label="exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q24649833" start="93292" end="93299" title="Jackie Tonawanda" label="Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859622" start="94135" end="94146" title="Intergender wrestling" label="Intergender"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368832" start="94229" end="94240" title="Luna Vachon" label="Luna Vachon"/>
<link wikidata="Q73002" start="94259" end="94289" title="Extreme Championship Wrestling" label="Extreme Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q466683" start="94312" end="94317" title="Chyna" label="Chyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q254198" start="94406" end="94439" title="WWE Intercontinental Championship" label="WWF Intercontinental Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q131728" start="94479" end="94495" title="Impact Wrestling" label="Impact Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q263707" start="94497" end="94500" title="ODB (wrestler)" label="ODB"/>
<link wikidata="Q891859" start="94560" end="94598" title="Impact Knockouts Tag Team Championship" label="Impact Knockouts Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q933039" start="94604" end="94614" title="Eric Young (wrestler)" label="Eric Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q13561651" start="94714" end="94731" title="Scarlett Bordeaux" label="Scarlett Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q24951169" start="94733" end="94748" title="Tessa Blanchard" label="Tessa Blanchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057466" start="94788" end="94813" title="Impact World Championship" label="Impact World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q60444867" start="94819" end="94833" title="Jordynne Grace" label="Jordynne Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q108771434" start="94860" end="94893" title="Impact Digital Media Championship" label="Impact Digital Media Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6782848" start="95506" end="95523" title="Mascarita Sagrada" label="Mascarita Sagrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382040" start="95672" end="95678" title="KeMonito" label="Alushe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808234" start="95702" end="95711" title="Tinieblas" label="Tinieblas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382040" start="95716" end="95724" title="KeMonito" label="KeMonito"/>
<link wikidata="Q44699" start="95824" end="95835" title="Dave Finlay" label="Dave Finlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q260056" start="95895" end="95906" title="Hornswoggle" label="Hornswoggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006959" start="95955" end="95965" title="Shillelagh (club)" label="shillelagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q26885471" start="96090" end="96120" title="NXT Cruiserweight Championship" label="WWE Cruiserweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q849496" start="96137" end="96140" title="D-Generation X" label="D-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q276548" start="96332" end="96342" title="Secret society" label="fraternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443451" start="96365" end="96380" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms" label="shared language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438403" start="96641" end="96654" title="pecking order" label="pecking order"/>
<link wikidata="Q773944" start="97247" end="97300" title="Fandom" label="those of science fiction, video games, or comic books"/>
<link wikidata="Q193432" start="97307" end="97318" title="Sports fan" label="sports fans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="97671" end="97682" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Dirt sheet" label="dirt sheets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304122" start="97751" end="97764" title="breaking news" label="breaking news"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="97790" end="97795" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434359" start="98350" end="98365" title="Fantasy sport" label="fantasy leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200590" start="98455" end="98461" title="Fantasy wrestling" label="E-feds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361181" start="98557" end="98569" title="role-playing" label="role-playing"/>
<link wikidata="Q35489" start="99382" end="99425" title="1980s professional wrestling boom" label="The Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Wrestling Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="99470" end="99473" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q110248179" start="99597" end="99603" title="Trope (literature)" label="tropes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927074" start="99608" end="99613" title="Internet meme" label="memes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10738" start="99933" end="99941" title="Dwayne Johnson" label="The Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q35622" start="99952" end="99962" title="WWE SmackDown" label="SmackDown!"/>
<link wikidata="Q585329" start="100004" end="100019" title="Merriam-Webster" label="Merriam-Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500944" start="100177" end="100192" title="Ready to Rumble" label="Ready to Rumble"/>
<link wikidata="Q583536" start="100206" end="100219" title="¡Mucha Lucha!" label="¡Mucha Lucha!"/>
<link wikidata="Q909767" start="100233" end="100244" title="Nacho Libre" label="Nacho Libre"/>
<link wikidata="Q371082" start="100441" end="100458" title="James Raschke" label="Baron von Raschke"/>
<link wikidata="Q17034849" start="100586" end="100600" title="Trafford Tanzi" label="Trafford Tanzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16836644" start="100732" end="100768" title="The Elaborate Entrance of Chad Deity" label="The Elaborate Entrance of Chad Deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="100945" end="100960" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="101134" end="101144" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q787009" start="101165" end="101171" title="W.T.F. (South Park)" label="W.T.F."/>
<link wikidata="Q203707" start="101304" end="101316" title="Kim Possible" label="Kim Possible"/>
<link wikidata="Q139326" start="101508" end="101520" title="The Wrestler (2008 film)" label="The Wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q25208966" start="101624" end="101628" title="GLOW (TV series)" label="GLOW"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586265" start="101643" end="101671" title="Gorgeous Ladies of Wrestling" label="Gorgeous Ladies of Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110156" start="101735" end="101760" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Comedy Series" label="Outstanding Comedy Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q54617746" start="101768" end="101794" title="70th Primetime Emmy Awards" label="70th Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q185867" start="101806" end="101815" title="film noir" label="film noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q425904" start="101822" end="101840" title="Night and the City" label="Night and the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q260969" start="101860" end="101872" title="Jules Dassin" label="Jules Dassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q320036" start="101886" end="101901" title="Richard Widmark" label="Richard Widmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q230555" start="101906" end="101918" title="Gene Tierney" label="Gene Tierney"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="101952" end="101958" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q377051" start="102040" end="102058" title="Stanislaus Zbyszko" label="Stanislaus Zbyszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q28840410" start="102075" end="102098" title="Fighting with My Family" label="Fighting with My Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q36279" start="102110" end="102122" title="biographical" label="biographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q349" start="102123" end="102129" title="sports" label="sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="102130" end="102142" title="comedy-drama" label="comedy-drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277711" start="102205" end="102210" title="Saraya Bevis" label="Paige"/>
<link wikidata="Q50572307" start="102212" end="102231" title="Walk Like a Panther (film)" label="Walk Like A Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="102438" end="102447" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q44158" start="102449" end="102462" title="Dave Bautista" label="Dave Bautista"/>
<link wikidata="Q10738" start="102468" end="102503" title="Dwayne Johnson" label="Dwayne &amp;quot;The Rock&amp;quot; Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44144" start="102550" end="102563" title="Chris Jericho" label="Chris Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q59635" start="102568" end="102602" title="Randy Savage" label="&amp;quot;Macho Man&amp;quot; Randy Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="102678" end="102685" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="102692" end="102695" title="WWE" label="WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q60324825" start="102814" end="102833" title="All Elite Wrestling" label="All Elite Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488298" start="102835" end="102857" title="Major League Wrestling" label="Major League Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q131728" start="102859" end="102875" title="Impact Wrestling" label="Impact Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068680" start="102884" end="102911" title="National Wrestling Alliance" label="National Wrestling Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248110" start="103101" end="103130" title="Professional wrestling in the United Kingdom" label="especially the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="103136" end="103142" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695780" start="103256" end="103265" title="Telecatch" label="Telecatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139104" start="103340" end="103353" title="cultural icon" label="cultural icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534976" start="103436" end="103444" title="sideshow" label="sideshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q47928" start="103458" end="103464" title="circus" label="circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q259037" start="103471" end="103480" title="traveling carnival" label="carnivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q851440" start="103594" end="103606" title="pay-per-view" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q35516" start="103763" end="103775" title="WrestleMania" label="WrestleMania"/>
<link wikidata="Q120908000" start="103777" end="103783" title="All In (professional wrestling)" label="All In"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150485" start="103785" end="103800" title="Bound for Glory (wrestling pay-per-view)" label="Bound for Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q123347712" start="103802" end="103817" title="Wrestle Kingdom" label="Wrestle Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360379" start="103831" end="103840" title="Starrcade" label="Starrcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="104129" end="104143" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754079" start="104176" end="104192" title="Billboard charts" label="Billboard charts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="104409" end="104457" title="#Study and analysis" label="a recurring topic in both academia and the media"/>
<link wikidata="Q117698" start="104554" end="104568" title="Beyond the Mat" label="Beyond the Mat"/>
<link wikidata="" start="104617" end="104639" title="Hitman Hart: Wrestling with Shadows" label="Wrestling with Shadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q81324" start="104673" end="104682" title="Bret Hart" label="Bret Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q139326" start="104790" end="104802" title="The Wrestler (2008 film)" label="The Wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="104826" end="104831" title="Academy Award" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q178552" start="104884" end="104897" title="Mickey Rourke" label="Mickey Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="104991" end="104994" title="WWE" label="WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q130171" start="105102" end="105130" title="World Championship Wrestling" label="World Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q60324825" start="105200" end="105219" title="All Elite Wrestling" label="All Elite Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207955" start="105248" end="105278" title="Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre" label="Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre"/>
<link wikidata="Q730713" start="105291" end="105316" title="Lucha Libre AAA Worldwide" label="Lucha Libre AAA Worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150494" start="105338" end="105361" title="New Japan Pro-Wrestling" label="New Japan Pro-Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359107" start="105370" end="105393" title="All Japan Pro Wrestling" label="All Japan Pro Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209832" start="105406" end="105424" title="Pro Wrestling Noah" label="Pro Wrestling Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="105564" end="105572" title="Academia" label="academic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11030" start="105583" end="105595" title="Journalism" label="journalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q367293" start="105685" end="105696" title="convention (norm)" label="conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="105830" end="105867" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q15130551" start="105971" end="105983" title="Heather Levi" label="Heather Levi"/>
<link wikidata="Q179109" start="106314" end="106328" title="Roland Barthes" label="Roland Barthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396027" start="106474" end="106485" title="Mythologies (book)" label="Mythologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q224530" start="106603" end="106612" title="spectacle" label="spectacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="107206" end="107216" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="107294" end="107304" title="literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11635" start="107309" end="107316" title="theater" label="theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="107323" end="107332" title="Classics" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q162244" start="107333" end="107337" title="hero" label="hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q191890" start="107342" end="107365" title="commedia dell&amp;#x27;arte" label="commedia dell&amp;#x27;arte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417744" start="107367" end="107384" title="Revenge play" label="revenge tragedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q929047" start="107386" end="107399" title="morality play" label="morality play"/>
<link wikidata="Q107198899" start="107406" end="107415" title="American burlesque" label="burlesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q331769" start="107515" end="107519" title="Mood (psychology)" label="mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q622645" start="107521" end="107530" title="attitude (psychology)" label="attitudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425" start="107570" end="107577" title="society" label="society"/>
<link wikidata="Q124490" start="107668" end="107676" title="violence" label="violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076509" start="107681" end="107692" title="masculinity" label="masculinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q191797" start="107724" end="107734" title="aggression" label="aggression"/>
<link wikidata="Q454" start="107742" end="107751" title="peacetime" label="peacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069508" start="107805" end="107815" title="homoerotic" label="homoerotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q337084" start="107878" end="107882" title="Drag queen" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130022" start="107886" end="107898" title="Ball culture" label="Ball culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="108283" end="108294" title="Documentary film" label="Documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526255" start="108295" end="108305" title="Film director" label="filmmakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q117698" start="108443" end="108457" title="Beyond the Mat" label="Beyond the Mat"/>
<link wikidata="Q470019" start="108475" end="108485" title="Terry Funk" label="Terry Funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q946865" start="108506" end="108516" title="retirement" label="retirement"/>
<link wikidata="Q10731" start="108518" end="108528" title="Mick Foley" label="Mick Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q919492" start="108559" end="108571" title="Jake Roberts" label="Jake Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="108610" end="108640" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#School" label="a school of wrestling students"/>
<link wikidata="" start="108699" end="108769" title="Lipstick and Dynamite, Piss and Vinegar: The First Ladies of Wrestling" label="Lipstick and Dynamite, Piss and Vinegar: The First Ladies of Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="108907" end="108910" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301065" start="108924" end="108954" title="Real Sports with Bryant Gumbel" label="Real Sports with Bryant Gumbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q28725" start="108998" end="109007" title="True Life" label="True Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q130866" start="109184" end="109204" title="TLC (TV channel)" label="The Learning Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q277561" start="109266" end="109273" title="A&amp;amp;E (TV channel)" label="A&amp;amp;E"/>
<link wikidata="" start="109281" end="109316" title="Hitman Hart: Wrestling with Shadows" label="Hitman Hart: Wrestling with Shadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928014" start="109331" end="109351" title="Bloodstained Memoirs" label="Bloodstained Memoirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q44144" start="109415" end="109428" title="Chris Jericho" label="Chris Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q44628" start="109430" end="109441" title="Rob Van Dam" label="Rob Van Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q59630" start="109446" end="109457" title="Roddy Piper" label="Roddy Piper"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112061" start="109477" end="109510" title="History of professional wrestling" label="History of professional wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062492" start="109513" end="109532" title="Independent circuit" label="Independent circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625382" start="109535" end="109577" title="List of professional wrestling video games" label="List of professional wrestling video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q111097768" start="109580" end="109625" title="Professional wrestling moves (disambiguation)" label="Professional wrestling moves (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443451" start="109649" end="109689" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms" label="Glossary of professional wrestling terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="109692" end="109726" title="Professional wrestling match types" label="Professional wrestling match types"/>
<link wikidata="Q11316150" start="109729" end="109772" title="Professional wrestling tag team match types" label="Professional wrestling tag team match types"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248116" start="109775" end="109808" title="Professional wrestling tournament" label="Professional wrestling tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619203" start="109839" end="109889" title="List of family relations in professional wrestling" label="List of family relations in professional wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244585" start="109892" end="109930" title="List of professional wrestling rosters" label="List of professional wrestling rosters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728357" start="109974" end="110003" title="All-in professional wrestling" label="All-in professional wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779477" start="110006" end="110024" title="Backyard wrestling" label="Backyard wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200590" start="110027" end="110044" title="Fantasy wrestling" label="Fantasy wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707048" start="110047" end="110065" title="Hardcore wrestling" label="Hardcore wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q927431" start="110068" end="110079" title="Lucha libre" label="Lucha libre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683628" start="110082" end="110108" title="Admiral-Lord Mountevans rules" label="Modern Freestyle Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761866" start="110111" end="110119" title="Puroresu" label="Puroresu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123570" start="110157" end="110181" title="1950s quiz show scandals" label="1950s quiz show scandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q288608" start="110184" end="110200" title="Scripted reality" label="Scripted reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q472637" start="110203" end="110214" title="Docufiction" label="Docufiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654985" start="110247" end="110267" title="Live Audio Wrestling" label="Live Audio Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679885" start="110282" end="110291" title="Talksport" label="Talksport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="110306" end="110329" title="Dave Meltzer#Wrestling Observer Live" label="Wrestling Observer Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645851" start="110358" end="110393" title="List of wrestling-based comic books" label="List of wrestling-based comic books"/>
<link wikidata="Q25208966" start="110402" end="110406" title="GLOW (TV series)" label="GLOW"/>
<link wikidata="Q139326" start="110421" end="110433" title="The Wrestler (2008 film)" label="The Wrestler"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24868" wikidata="Q336233" url="?curid=24868" title="Pauli matrices">
<text>In mathematical physics and mathematics, the Pauli matrices are a set of three complex matrices that are traceless, Hermitian, involutory and unitary. Usually indicated by the Greek letter sigma (), they are occasionally denoted by tau () when used in connection with isospin symmetries.
formula_1

These matrices are named after the physicist Wolfgang Pauli. In quantum mechanics, they occur in the Pauli equation, which takes into account the interaction of the spin of a particle with an external electromagnetic field. They also represent the interaction states of two polarization filters for horizontal/vertical polarization, 45 degree polarization (right/left), and circular polarization (right/left).

Each Pauli matrix is Hermitian, and together with the identity matrix (sometimes considered as the zeroth Pauli matrix ), the Pauli matrices form a basis of the vector space of Hermitian matrices over the real numbers, under addition. This means that any Hermitian matrix can be written in a unique way as a linear combination of Pauli matrices, with all coefficients being real numbers.

The Pauli matrices satisfy the useful product relation:formula_2

Hermitian operators represent observables in quantum mechanics, so the Pauli matrices span the space of observables of the complex two-dimensional Hilbert space. In the context of Pauli&#x27;s work, represents the observable corresponding to spin along the th coordinate axis in three-dimensional Euclidean space formula_3

The Pauli matrices (after multiplication by to make them anti-Hermitian) also generate transformations in the sense of Lie algebras: the matrices form a basis for the real Lie algebra formula_4, which exponentiates to the special unitary group SU(2). The algebra generated by the three matrices is isomorphic to the Clifford algebra of formula_5 and the (unital) associative algebra generated by functions identically (is isomorphic) to that of quaternions (formula_6).

== Algebraic properties ==

All three of the Pauli matrices can be compacted into a single expression:
:formula_7
where the solution to is the &quot;imaginary unit&quot;, and is the Kronecker delta, which equals if and 0 otherwise. This expression is useful for &quot;selecting&quot; any one of the matrices numerically by substituting values of in turn useful when any of the matrices (but no particular one) is to be used in algebraic manipulations.

The matrices are &quot;involutory&quot;:
:formula_8
where is the identity matrix.

The determinants and traces of the Pauli matrices are
:formula_9
from which we can deduce that each matrix has eigenvalues +1 and −1.

With the inclusion of the identity matrix (sometimes denoted ), the Pauli matrices form an orthogonal basis (in the sense of Hilbert–Schmidt) of the Hilbert space formula_10 of Hermitian matrices over formula_11, and the Hilbert space formula_12 of all complex matrices over formula_13.

=== Commutation and anti-commutation relations ===
==== Commutation relations====
The Pauli matrices obey the following commutation relations:
:formula_14
where the Levi-Civita symbol is used.

These commutation relations make the Pauli matrices the generators of a representation of the Lie algebra formula_15

==== Anticommutation relations====
They also satisfy the anticommutation relations:
:formula_16

where formula_17 is defined as formula_18 and is the Kronecker delta. denotes the identity matrix.

These anti-commutation relations make the Pauli matrices the generators of a representation of the Clifford algebra for formula_19 denoted formula_20

The usual construction of generators formula_21 of formula_22 using the Clifford algebra recovers the commutation relations above, up to unimportant numerical factors.

A few explicit commutators and anti-commutators are given below as examples:
=== Eigenvectors and eigenvalues ===
Each of the (Hermitian) Pauli matrices has two eigenvalues: and . The corresponding normalized eigenvectors are
:formula_23

== Pauli vectors ==
The Pauli vector is defined by
formula_24
where formula_25, formula_26, and formula_27 are an equivalent notation for the more familiar formula_28, formula_29, and formula_30.

The Pauli vector provides a mapping mechanism from a vector basis to a Pauli matrix basis as follows:
formula_31

More formally, this defines a map from formula_32 to the vector space of traceless Hermitian formula_33 matrices. This map encodes structures of formula_32 as a normed vector space and as a Lie algebra (with the cross-product as its Lie bracket) via functions of matrices, making the map an isomorphism of Lie algebras. This makes the Pauli matrices intertwiners from the point of view of representation theory.

Another way to view the Pauli vector is as a formula_33 Hermitian traceless matrix-valued dual vector, that is, an element of formula_36 that maps formula_37

=== Completeness relation ===

Each component of formula_38 can be recovered from the matrix (see completeness relation below) 
formula_39
This constitutes an inverse to the map formula_40, making it manifest that the map is a bijection.

=== Determinant ===

The norm is given by the determinant (up to a minus sign)
formula_41
Then, considering the conjugation action of an formula_42 matrix formula_43 on this space of matrices,
: formula_44
we find formula_45 and that formula_46 is Hermitian and traceless. It then makes sense to define formula_47 where formula_48 has the same norm as formula_49 and therefore interpret formula_43 as a rotation of three-dimensional space. In fact, it turns out that the &quot;special&quot; restriction on formula_43 implies that the rotation is orientation preserving. This allows the definition of a map formula_52 given by
: formula_53
where formula_54 This map is the concrete realization of the double cover of formula_55 by formula_56 and therefore shows that formula_57 The components of formula_58 can be recovered using the tracing process above:
: formula_59

=== Cross-product ===

The cross-product is given by the matrix commutator (up to a factor of formula_60)
formula_61
In fact, the existence of a norm follows from the fact that formula_32 is a Lie algebra (see Killing form).

This cross-product can be used to prove the orientation-preserving property of the map above.

=== Eigenvalues and eigenvectors ===

The eigenvalues of formula_63 are formula_64 This follows immediately from tracelessness and explicitly computing the determinant.

More abstractly, without computing the determinant, which requires explicit properties of the Pauli matrices, this follows from formula_65 since this can be factorised into formula_66 A standard result in linear algebra (a linear map that satisfies a polynomial equation written in distinct linear factors is diagonal) means this implies formula_63 is diagonal with possible eigenvalues formula_68 The tracelessness of formula_63 means it has exactly one of each eigenvalue.

Its normalized eigenvectors are 
formula_70
These expressions become singular for formula_71. They can be rescued by letting formula_72 and taking the limit formula_73, which yields the correct eigenvectors (0,1) and (1,0) of formula_74.

Alternatively, one may use spherical coordinates formula_75 to obtain the eigenvectors formula_76 and formula_77.

=== Pauli 4-vector ===

The Pauli 4-vector, used in spinor theory, is written formula_78 with components
:formula_79
This defines a map from formula_80 to the vector space of Hermitian matrices,
:formula_81
which also encodes the Minkowski metric (with &quot;mostly minus&quot; convention) in its determinant:
:formula_82

This 4-vector also has a completeness relation. It is convenient to define a second Pauli 4-vector
:formula_83
and allow raising and lowering using the Minkowski metric tensor. The relation can then be written
formula_84

Similarly to the Pauli 3-vector case, we can find a matrix group that acts as isometries on formula_85 in this case the matrix group is formula_86 and this shows formula_87 Similarly to above, this can be explicitly realized for formula_88 with components
:formula_89

In fact, the determinant property follows abstractly from trace properties of the formula_90 For formula_91 matrices, the following identity holds:
:formula_92
That is, the &#x27;cross-terms&#x27; can be written as traces. When formula_93 are chosen to be different formula_94 the cross-terms vanish. It then follows, now showing summation explicitly,
formula_95 Since the matrices are formula_96 this is equal to formula_97

===Relation to dot and cross product===
Pauli vectors elegantly map these commutation and anticommutation relations to corresponding vector products. Adding the commutator to the anticommutator gives
:formula_98
so that, 
Contracting each side of the equation with components of two -vectors and (which commute with the Pauli matrices, i.e., for each matrix and vector component (and likewise with ) yields
:formula_99

Finally, translating the index notation for the dot product and cross product results in 
If is identified with the pseudoscalar then the right hand side becomes formula_100, which is also the definition for the product of two vectors in geometric algebra.

If we define the spin operator as , then satisfies the commutation relation:formula_101Or equivalently, the Pauli vector satisfies:formula_102

=== Some trace relations ===
The following traces can be derived using the commutation and anticommutation relations.

:formula_103

If the matrix is also considered, these relationships become

formula_104

where Greek indices and assume values from and the notation formula_105 is used to denote the sum over the cyclic permutation of the included indices.

===Exponential of a Pauli vector===
For 
:formula_106

one has, for even powers, 
:formula_107

which can be shown first for the case using the anticommutation relations. For convenience, the case is taken to be by convention.

For odd powers, 
:formula_108

Matrix exponentiating, and using the Taylor series for sine and cosine,
:formula_109.

In the last line, the first sum is the cosine, while the second sum is the sine; so, finally,
which is analogous to Euler&#x27;s formula, extended to quaternions.

Note that
:formula_110,

while the determinant of the exponential itself is just , which makes it the generic group element of SU(2).

A more abstract version of formula for a general matrix can be found in the article on matrix exponentials. A general version of for an analytic (at &quot;a&quot; and −&quot;a&quot;) function is provided by application of Sylvester&#x27;s formula,
:formula_111

====The group composition law of ====
A straightforward application of formula provides a parameterization of the composition law of the group . One may directly solve for in 
formula_112

which specifies the generic group multiplication, where, manifestly, 
formula_113
the spherical law of cosines. Given , then, 
formula_114

Consequently, the composite rotation parameters in this group element (a closed form of the respective BCH expansion in this case) simply amount to

formula_115

(Of course, when formula_116 is parallel to formula_117, so is formula_118, and .)
====Adjoint action====
It is also straightforward to likewise work out the adjoint action on the Pauli vector, namely rotation of any angle formula_119 along any axis formula_120:
formula_121

Taking the dot product of any unit vector with the above formula generates the expression of any single qubit operator under any rotation. For example, it can be shown that formula_122.

=== Completeness relation ===
An alternative notation that is commonly used for the Pauli matrices is to write the vector index in the superscript, and the matrix indices as subscripts, so that the element in row and column of the -th Pauli matrix is 

In this notation, the &quot;completeness relation&quot; for the Pauli matrices can be written
:formula_123

As noted above, it is common to denote the 2 × 2 unit matrix by so The completeness relation can alternatively be expressed as
formula_124

The fact that any Hermitian complex 2 × 2 matrices can be expressed in terms of the identity matrix and the Pauli matrices also leads to the Bloch sphere representation of 2 × 2 mixed states’ density matrix, (positive semidefinite 2 × 2 matrices with unit trace. This can be seen by first expressing an arbitrary Hermitian matrix as a real linear combination of as above, and then imposing the positive-semidefinite and trace conditions.

For a pure state, in polar coordinates, formula_125 the idempotent density matrix
formula_126

acts on the state eigenvector formula_127 with eigenvalue +1, hence it acts like a projection operator.

=== Relation with the permutation operator ===
Let be the transposition (also known as a permutation) between two spins and living in the tensor product space 
:formula_128

This operator can also be written more explicitly as Dirac&#x27;s spin exchange operator,
:formula_129

Its eigenvalues are therefore 1 or −1. It may thus be utilized as an interaction term in a Hamiltonian, splitting the energy eigenvalues of its symmetric versus antisymmetric eigenstates.

== SU(2) ==
The group SU(2) is the Lie group of unitary matrices with unit determinant; its Lie algebra is the set of all anti-Hermitian matrices with trace 0. Direct calculation, as above, shows that the Lie algebra formula_130 is the three-dimensional real algebra spanned by the set . In compact notation,
:formula_131

As a result, each can be seen as an infinitesimal generator of SU(2). The elements of SU(2) are exponentials of linear combinations of these three generators, and multiply as indicated above in discussing the Pauli vector. Although this suffices to generate SU(2), it is not a proper representation of, as the Pauli eigenvalues are scaled unconventionally. The conventional normalization is so that
:formula_132

As SU(2) is a compact group, its Cartan decomposition is trivial.

=== SO(3) ===
The Lie algebra formula_133 is isomorphic to the Lie algebra formula_134, which corresponds to the Lie group SO(3), the group of rotations in three-dimensional space. In other words, one can say that the are a realization (and, in fact, the lowest-dimensional realization) of &quot;infinitesimal&quot; rotations in three-dimensional space. However, even though formula_133 and formula_134 are isomorphic as Lie algebras, and are not isomorphic as Lie groups. is actually a double cover of , meaning that there is a two-to-one group homomorphism from to , see relationship between SO(3) and SU(2).

=== Quaternions ===

The real linear span of is isomorphic to the real algebra of quaternions, formula_6, represented by the span of the basis vectors formula_138 The isomorphism from formula_6 to this set is given by the following map (notice the reversed signs for the Pauli matrices):
formula_140

Alternatively, the isomorphism can be achieved by a map using the Pauli matrices in reversed order,
:formula_141

As the set of versors forms a group isomorphic to , gives yet another way of describing . The two-to-one homomorphism from to may be given in terms of the Pauli matrices in this formulation.

== Physics ==

=== Classical mechanics ===
In classical mechanics, Pauli matrices are useful in the context of the Cayley-Klein parameters. The matrix corresponding to the position formula_142 of a point in space is defined in terms of the above Pauli vector matrix,
:formula_143

Consequently, the transformation matrix for rotations about the -axis through an angle may be written in terms of Pauli matrices and the unit matrix as
:formula_144

Similar expressions follow for general Pauli vector rotations as detailed above.

=== Quantum mechanics ===

In quantum mechanics, each Pauli matrix is related to an angular momentum operator that corresponds to an observable describing the spin of a spin particle, in each of the three spatial directions. As an immediate consequence of the Cartan decomposition mentioned above, are the generators of a projective representation (spin representation) of the rotation group SO(3) acting on non-relativistic particles with spin . The states of the particles are represented as two-component spinors. In the same way, the Pauli matrices are related to the isospin operator.

An interesting property of spin particles is that they must be rotated by an angle of 4 in order to return to their original configuration. This is due to the two-to-one correspondence between SU(2) and SO(3) mentioned above, and the fact that, although one visualizes spin up/down as the north–south pole on the 2-sphere they are actually represented by orthogonal vectors in the two-dimensional complex Hilbert space.

For a spin particle, the spin operator is given by , the fundamental representation of SU(2). By taking Kronecker products of this representation with itself repeatedly, one may construct all higher irreducible representations. That is, the resulting spin operators for higher spin systems in three spatial dimensions, for arbitrarily large &quot;j&quot;, can be calculated using this spin operator and ladder operators. They can be found in . The analog formula to the above generalization of Euler&#x27;s formula for Pauli matrices, the group element in terms of spin matrices, is tractable, but less simple.

Also useful in the quantum mechanics of multiparticle systems, the general Pauli group is defined to consist of all -fold tensor products of Pauli matrices.

=== Relativistic quantum mechanics ===
In relativistic quantum mechanics, the spinors in four dimensions are 4 × 1 (or 1 × 4) matrices. Hence the Pauli matrices or the Sigma matrices operating on these spinors have to be 4 × 4 matrices. They are defined in terms of 2 × 2 Pauli matrices as
:formula_145

It follows from this definition that the formula_146 matrices have the same algebraic properties as the matrices.

However, relativistic angular momentum is not a three-vector, but a second order four-tensor. Hence formula_147 needs to be replaced by , the generator of Lorentz transformations on spinors. By the antisymmetry of angular momentum, the are also antisymmetric. Hence there are only six independent matrices.

The first three are the formula_148 The remaining three, formula_149 where the Dirac matrices are defined as

:formula_150

The relativistic spin matrices are written in compact form in terms of commutator of gamma matrices as
:formula_151

=== Quantum information ===
In quantum information, single-qubit quantum gates are 2 × 2 unitary matrices. The Pauli matrices are some of the most important single-qubit operations. In that context, the Cartan decomposition given above is called the &quot;Z–Y decomposition of a single-qubit gate&quot;. Choosing a different Cartan pair gives a similar &quot;X–Y &quot;decomposition of a single-qubit gate&quot;.

== See also ==
*Algebra of physical space
*Spinors in three dimensions
* Gamma matrices
* Angular momentum
* Gell-Mann matrices
* Poincaré group
* Generalizations of Pauli matrices
* Bloch sphere
* Euler&#x27;s four-square identity
* For higher spin generalizations of the Pauli matrices, see 
* Exchange matrix (the first Pauli matrix is an exchange matrix of order two)
* Split-quaternion

== Remarks ==
== Notes ==
== References ==
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q156495" start="3" end="23" title="mathematical physics" label="mathematical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="28" end="39" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q336233" start="45" end="59" title="Pauli matrices" label="Pauli matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="79" end="86" title="complex number" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q44337" start="87" end="95" title="matrix (mathematics)" label="matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q321102" start="105" end="114" title="traceless" label="traceless"/>
<link wikidata="Q652941" start="116" end="125" title="Hermitian matrix" label="Hermitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052516" start="127" end="137" title="Involutory matrix" label="involutory"/>
<link wikidata="Q727103" start="142" end="149" title="Unitary matrix" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="176" end="181" title="Greek (alphabet)" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q14413" start="189" end="194" title="sigma" label="sigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q14415" start="232" end="235" title="tau" label="tau"/>
<link wikidata="Q836938" start="268" end="275" title="isospin" label="isospin"/>
<link wikidata="Q65989" start="344" end="358" title="Wolfgang Pauli" label="Wolfgang Pauli"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="363" end="380" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q604572" start="400" end="414" title="Pauli equation" label="Pauli equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="464" end="468" title="Spin (physics)" label="spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q177625" start="500" end="521" title="electromagnetic field" label="electromagnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q652941" start="731" end="740" title="Hermitian matrix" label="Hermitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q189569" start="858" end="863" title="Basis (linear algebra)" label="basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="871" end="883" title="vector space" label="vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="915" end="927" title="real number" label="real numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q652941" start="965" end="981" title="Hermitian matrix" label="Hermitian matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628" start="1018" end="1036" title="linear combination" label="linear combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500908" start="1165" end="1183" title="Hermitian operator" label="Hermitian operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q845789" start="1195" end="1205" title="observable" label="observable"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="1288" end="1295" title="complex number" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q190056" start="1312" end="1325" title="Hilbert space" label="Hilbert space"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="1462" end="1477" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268788" start="1546" end="1560" title="skew-Hermitian" label="anti-Hermitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q664495" start="1608" end="1619" title="Lie algebra" label="Lie algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q19810382" start="1690" end="1703" title="Exponential map (Lie theory)" label="exponentiates"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1733" end="1738" title="SU(2)#n = 2" label="SU(2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000660" start="1744" end="1751" title="Algebra over a field" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q189112" start="1787" end="1797" title="isomorphic" label="isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q674689" start="1805" end="1821" title="Clifford algebra" label="Clifford algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q744960" start="1852" end="1871" title="associative algebra" label="associative algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q189112" start="1908" end="1921" title="isomorphism" label="is isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173853" start="1934" end="1944" title="quaternion" label="quaternion"/>
<link wikidata="Q193796" start="2109" end="2123" title="imaginary unit" label="imaginary unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q192826" start="2142" end="2157" title="Kronecker delta" label="Kronecker delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052516" start="2430" end="2452" title="Involutory matrix" label="&amp;quot;involutory&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q193794" start="2478" end="2493" title="identity matrix" label="identity matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q178546" start="2500" end="2511" title="determinant" label="determinant"/>
<link wikidata="Q321102" start="2517" end="2522" title="trace of a matrix" label="trace"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="2607" end="2618" title="eigenvalues" label="eigenvalues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518047" start="2756" end="2771" title="Hilbert–Schmidt operator" label="Hilbert–Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q190056" start="2780" end="2793" title="Hilbert space" label="Hilbert space"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="2884" end="2891" title="complex number" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989763" start="3039" end="3050" title="commutator" label="commutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q623761" start="3084" end="3102" title="Levi-Civita symbol" label="Levi-Civita symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989763" start="3288" end="3303" title="anticommutator" label="anticommutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192826" start="3381" end="3396" title="Kronecker delta" label="Kronecker delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q674689" start="3527" end="3543" title="Clifford algebra" label="Clifford algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q652941" start="3875" end="3884" title="Hermitian matrix" label="Hermitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="3909" end="3920" title="eigenvalues" label="eigenvalues"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362761" start="3946" end="3956" title="Normalisable wavefunction" label="normalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="3957" end="3969" title="eigenvectors" label="eigenvectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q178192" start="4510" end="4523" title="cross-product" label="cross-product"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4968" end="4989" title="#completeness anchor" label="completeness relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q634557" start="6189" end="6201" title="Killing form" label="Killing form"/>
<link wikidata="Q464794" start="7530" end="7546" title="Minkowski metric" label="Minkowski metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q428091" start="8762" end="8773" title="tensor contraction" label="Contracting"/>
<link wikidata="Q181365" start="9008" end="9019" title="dot product" label="dot product"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9024" end="9037" title="cross product#Index notation for tensors" label="cross product"/>
<link wikidata="Q212130" start="9677" end="9695" title="cyclic permutation" label="cyclic permutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191722" start="9981" end="10002" title="Matrix exponential" label="Matrix exponentiating"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10018" end="10051" title="Taylor series#List of Maclaurin series of some common functions" label="Taylor series for sine and cosine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10171" end="10180" title="quaternions and spatial rotation#Using quaternion as rotations" label="analogous"/>
<link wikidata="Q184871" start="10184" end="10204" title="Euler&amp;#x27;s formula" label="Euler&amp;#x27;s formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q173853" start="10218" end="10229" title="quaternions" label="quaternions"/>
<link wikidata="Q684363" start="10359" end="10364" title="SU(2)" label="SU(2)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10454" end="10473" title="Matrix exponential#Evaluation by Laurent series" label="matrix exponentials"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660748" start="10589" end="10613" title="Sylvester&amp;#x27;s formula" label="Sylvester&amp;#x27;s formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996944" start="10904" end="10928" title="spherical law of cosines" label="spherical law of cosines"/>
<link wikidata="Q804316" start="11061" end="11074" title="Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula" label="BCH expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="12112" end="12119" title="complex number" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q884593" start="12225" end="12237" title="Bloch sphere" label="Bloch sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q230883" start="12262" end="12273" title="mixed state (physics)" label="mixed state"/>
<link wikidata="Q77601250" start="12293" end="12314" title="Positive semidefinite matrix" label="positive semidefinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q321102" start="12504" end="12509" title="Trace (linear algebra)" label="trace"/>
<link wikidata="Q368988" start="12579" end="12589" title="idempotent" label="idempotent"/>
<link wikidata="Q519967" start="12701" end="12720" title="projection (linear algebra)" label="projection operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q212130" start="12781" end="12794" title="transposition (mathematics)" label="transposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163016" start="12861" end="12875" title="tensor product" label="tensor product"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12950" end="12985" title="Exchange interaction#Inclusion of spin" label="Dirac&amp;#x27;s spin exchange operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q684363" start="13212" end="13217" title="SU(2)" label="SU(2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="13225" end="13234" title="Lie group" label="Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q727103" start="13238" end="13245" title="unitary matrix" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q664495" start="13282" end="13293" title="Lie algebra" label="Lie algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q664495" start="13395" end="13406" title="Lie algebra" label="Lie algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q209812" start="13457" end="13464" title="linear span" label="spanned"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13549" end="13572" title="Lie group#The Lie algebra associated with a Lie group" label="infinitesimal generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314224" start="13797" end="13814" title="Representation theory of SU(2)" label="representation of"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042798" start="13959" end="13979" title="Cartan decomposition" label="Cartan decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q189112" start="14038" end="14048" title="isomorphism" label="isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256500" start="14116" end="14121" title="Rotation group SO(3)" label="SO(3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="14127" end="14132" title="group (mathematics)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q107617" start="14136" end="14144" title="rotation" label="rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179253" start="14480" end="14492" title="Double covering group" label="double cover"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14566" end="14602" title="Rotation group SO(3)#Connection between SO(3) and SU(2)" label="relationship between SO(3) and SU(2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q173853" start="14687" end="14698" title="quaternions" label="quaternions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518235" start="15034" end="15040" title="versor" label="versor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="15258" end="15277" title="classical mechanics" label="classical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="15771" end="15788" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190143" start="15825" end="15850" title="angular momentum operator" label="angular momentum operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q845789" start="15874" end="15884" title="observable" label="observable"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="15900" end="15904" title="Spin (physics)" label="spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118037" start="15910" end="15914" title="spin-1/2" label="spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249476" start="16063" end="16088" title="projective representation" label="projective representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256500" start="16118" end="16138" title="rotation group SO(3)" label="rotation group SO(3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43514" start="16149" end="16165" title="theory of relativity" label="non-relativistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q606855" start="16192" end="16198" title="mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577646" start="16249" end="16256" title="Spinors in three dimensions" label="spinors"/>
<link wikidata="Q836938" start="16313" end="16329" title="Isospin" label="isospin operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="16645" end="16653" title="2-sphere" label="2-sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q215067" start="16687" end="16697" title="orthogonal" label="orthogonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190056" start="16737" end="16750" title="Hilbert space" label="Hilbert space"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427416" start="16810" end="16836" title="fundamental representation" label="fundamental representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314224" start="16840" end="16845" title="representation theory of SU(2)" label="SU(2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238125" start="16857" end="16874" title="Kronecker product" label="Kronecker product"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="17004" end="17017" title="spin operator" label="spin operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="17138" end="17151" title="spin operator" label="spin operator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17156" end="17172" title="Ladder operator#Angular momentum" label="ladder operators"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="17384" end="17401" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154882" start="17440" end="17451" title="Pauli group" label="Pauli group"/>
<link wikidata="Q188524" start="17487" end="17493" title="tensor" label="tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332147" start="17565" end="17595" title="relativistic quantum mechanics" label="relativistic quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099729" start="17951" end="17980" title="relativistic angular momentum" label="relativistic angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031215" start="18023" end="18034" title="four-tensor" label="four-tensor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18097" end="18131" title="representation theory of the Lorentz group#The (1/2, 0) ⊕ (0, 1/2) spin representation" label="Lorentz transformations on spinors"/>
<link wikidata="Q272621" start="18329" end="18343" title="Dirac equation" label="Dirac matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151645" start="18459" end="18473" title="gamma matrices" label="gamma matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122243" start="18522" end="18541" title="quantum information" label="quantum information"/>
<link wikidata="Q378201" start="18550" end="18555" title="qubit" label="qubit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118982" start="18556" end="18568" title="quantum gate" label="quantum gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q727103" start="18580" end="18596" title="unitary matrices" label="unitary matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893020" start="18921" end="18946" title="Algebra of physical space" label="Algebra of physical space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577646" start="18948" end="18975" title="Spinors in three dimensions" label="Spinors in three dimensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151645" start="18978" end="18992" title="Gamma matrices" label="Gamma matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q161254" start="18995" end="19011" title="Angular momentum" label="Angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008943" start="19014" end="19032" title="Gell-Mann matrices" label="Gell-Mann matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066449" start="19035" end="19049" title="Poincaré group" label="Poincaré group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532423" start="19052" end="19085" title="Generalizations of Pauli matrices" label="Generalizations of Pauli matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q884593" start="19088" end="19100" title="Bloch sphere" label="Bloch sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149225" start="19103" end="19136" title="Euler&amp;#x27;s four-square identity" label="Euler&amp;#x27;s four-square identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750339" start="19201" end="19216" title="Exchange matrix" label="Exchange matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996919" start="19279" end="19295" title="Split-quaternion" label="Split-quaternion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24869" wikidata="Q2445104" url="?curid=24869" title="Pie menu">
<text>In user interface design, a pie menu or radial menu is a circular context menu where selection depends on direction. It is a graphical control element. A pie menu is made of several &quot;pie slices&quot; around an inactive center and works best with stylus input, and well with a mouse. Pie slices are drawn with a hole in the middle for an easy way to exit the menu.

Pie menus work well with keyboard acceleration, particularly four and eight item menus, on the cursor keys and the number pad. A goal of pie menus is to provide a smooth, reliable gestural style of interaction for novices and experts. A slice can lead to another pie menu; selecting this may center the pointer in the new menu.

A marking menu is a variant of this technique that makes the menu less sensitive to variance in gesture size.

As a kind of context menu, pie menus are often context-sensitive, showing different options depending on what the pointer was pointing at when the menu was requested.

==History==

The first documented radial menu is attributed to a system called PIXIE in 1969. Some universities explored alternative visual layouts.

In 1986, Mike Gallaher and Don Hopkins together independently arrived at the concept of a context menu based on the angle to the origin where the exact angle and radius could be passed as parameters to a command, and a mouse click could be used to trigger an item or submenu.

The first performance comparison to linear menus was performed in 1988, and showed an increase in performance of 15% less time and a reduction of selection errors.

The role-playing video game &quot;Secret of Mana&quot; featured an innovative icon-based radial menu system in 1993. Its ring menu system was adopted by later video games.

==Usage==

Pie menus are a self-revealing gestural interface: they display multiple options to a user and direct them to select one. 

Users operate the menu by observing the labels or icons present as options, moving the pointer in the desired direction, then clicking to make a selection. This action is called a &quot;mark ahead&quot; (&quot;mouse ahead&quot; in the case of a mouse, &quot;wave ahead&quot; in the case of a dataglove).

Repetition of actions and memorization of the interface further simplify the user experience. Pie menus take advantage of the body&#x27;s ability to remember muscle motion and direction, even when the mind has forgotten the corresponding symbolic labels.

==Comparison with other interaction techniques==
Pie menus are faster and more reliable to select from than linear menus, because selection depends on direction instead of distance. The circular menu slices are large in size and near the pointer for fast interaction (see Fitts&#x27;s law). Experienced users use muscle memory without looking at the menu while selecting from it. Nested pie menus can efficiently offer many options, and some pie menus can pop up linear menus, and combine linear and radial items in the same menu. Pie menus, just like any popup menu, are shown only when requested, resulting in less visual distraction and cognitive load than toolbars and menu bars that are always shown.

Pie menus show available options, in contrast to invisible mouse gestures. Pie menus, which delay appearance until the pointer is not moving, reduce intrusiveness to the same level as mouse gestures for experienced users. Pie menus take up more screen space than linear menus, and the number of slices in an individual menu must be kept low for effectiveness by using submenus. When using pie menus, submenus may overlap with the parent menu, but the parent menu may become translucent or hidden.

Pie menus are most suited for actions that have been laid out by humans, and have logical grouping choices. Linear menus are most suited for dynamic, large menus that have many possible options, without any logical grouping, since pie menus can only show a limited number of menu items. Around 3-12 items can be reasonably accommodated in a radial layout, but additional items past that tend to counteract the benefits of using pie menus in the first place. This can be overcome with related techniques that allow chaining commands in one single gesture through submenus.

However, using interaction techniques that are not pointer-based have proven problematic with both pie and linear menus for cluttered digital tabletop, where physical objects might occlude menu items.

Pie menus are unavailable as standard graphical control element in common commercial toolkits. Video games often require custom widget development, so pie menu cost is lower in that particular scenario.

== Notable implementations ==

===Software===
*Pie Menu for Mac OS can trigger a Pie Menu for every active app
*Pieoneer for macOS lets users switch between running apps and launch favorites ones
*Android Browser in Android
*Autodesk Maya, a commercial 3D modelling program
*Blender, an open source 3D modelling program, which currently has pie menus as an optional feature
*BumpTop, a computer desktop created to mimic paper files on a real world desk that uses pie menus as many of its control menus
*PowerAnimator, a commercial 3D modelling program that used marking menus
*Mozilla and Mozilla Firefox extensions RadialContext and easyGestures
*Metisse and Unix Desktop Environment, window managers for the X Window System
*modo, an advanced polygon and subdivision surface modeling package
*SolidWorks, a 3D modeling software.
*Songza, a music search engine and internet jukebox that uses a pie menu for its main mode of interaction, by Aza Raskin
*Quicksilver via the Constellation plug-in
*Sugar, GUI implementation for the One Laptop per Child project
*OneNote App for Windows 8 and Windows RT
* The Cherry mouse driver for the Power Pad mouse M-1000 optionally offers a circular context menu
* The Samsung Galaxy Note series, starting with the Note 3
* RadialMenu, lightweight free software for Windows programmed with AutoHotkey

===Games===
* In the game Counter-Strike: Global Offensive, the buy menu is a radial menu.
* The 2000 videogame &quot;The Sims&quot; extensively utilized pie menus for player-directed interaction. These pie menus were primarily developed by Don Hopkins.
* The videogame &quot;Grand Theft Auto V&quot;, for weapon and radio station selection
*&quot;Secret of Mana&quot; and its successor &quot;Secret of Evermore&quot; (where the menu was used to accelerate the pacing of combat)
* &quot;The Curse of Monkey Island&quot;, also called a &quot;Verb Coin&quot;

==See also==
* Crossing-based interface
* Menu (computing)
* Pie chart

==References==

==External links==
*JavaScript/jQuery Radmenu Plugin, Open source
* The Flower Menu is a marking menu implementation for Qt
*Tcl/Tk - A simple implementation in pure Tcl/Tk
*Pie Menus in c2 wiki
*Pie Menus for Qt
*Pie Menus for OLPC Sugar User Interface, in Python with GTK, Cairo and Pango modules
*Slashdot article: Pie-menus in Mozilla
*Asymetrix [ToolBook] pie menu component, by Paolo Tosolini. Source code: Piemenu.com Piemenu.com.
*Python - Open source Python pie menus for GTK/Cairo/Pango/OLPC/Sugar user interface, by Don Hopkins.
*OpenLaszlo - Open source OpenLaszlo pie menus for Flash, by Don Hopkins.
*JavaScript - Open source JavaScript pie menus for the Internet Explorer browser, by Don Hopkins.
*JavaScript/jQuery Radmenu Plugin, Open source JavaScript radial / pie menus for ALL browsers, by Nirvana Tikku.
*ActiveX - Open source C++ ActiveX pie menus for the Internet Explorer browser, by Don Hopkins.
*X11 - Open source &quot;piewm&quot; X11 window manager with pie menus, by Don Hopkins, maintained by Russ Nelson.
*TCL/Tk - Free software Pie Menus for TCK/Tk, written in 1992 for &quot;SimCity&quot; by Don Hopkins.
*NeWS - Free software Pie Menus for NeWS 1.1 written in March 1988 by Don Hopkins.
*X10 - Free software Pie Menus for X10 &quot;uwm&quot; Window Manager, written in June 1986 by Don Hopkins.
*Suntools - Free software Pie Menus for Suntools, written in January 1987 by Mark Weiser.
*X10 - Free software Theta menus, proof of concept prototype for X10, written in June 1986 by Don Hopkins.
*Pie Menu Articles by Don Hopkins.
*Circle Menus, by Greg Bronevetsky.
*3D Circle Menu Variation - Cube Menu , by conquex with source code.
*Asymetrix [ToolBook] pie menu component, by Paolo Tosolini. Source code: Piemenu.com Piemenu.com.
*Pie Menus for Windows, Dr. Dobb&#x27;s Journal, November 1992, pp 30–39, by Carl Rollo.
*Pie Menus Demonstration in Java, by Carl Rollo.
*Pie Menu for libGDX, an open-source library for Java game developers. Demonstration available.
*WPF Pie Menu, by Christoph Menge.
*wheelnav.js, Animated JavaScript navigation component based on Raphaël (JavaScript library) (SVG/VML) by softwaretailoring.net.
* Annotated Bibliography of References to Gestures, Touchscreens, and Pen Computing.
* RadialMenu, lightweight free software for Windows programmed with AutoHotkey.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q135707" start="3" end="24" title="user interface design" label="user interface design"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445104" start="28" end="36" title="Pie menu" label="pie menu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445104" start="40" end="51" title="Pie menu" label="radial menu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17278" start="57" end="65" title="circle" label="circular"/>
<link wikidata="Q734215" start="66" end="78" title="context menu" label="context menu"/>
<link wikidata="Q605117" start="125" end="150" title="graphical control element" label="graphical control element"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227035" start="251" end="257" title="Stylus (computing)" label="stylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987" start="281" end="286" title="mouse (computing)" label="mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q199306" start="485" end="495" title="number pad" label="number pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q107602" start="673" end="680" title="pointer (graphical user interfaces)" label="pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445104" start="701" end="713" title="Pie menu" label="marking menu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165167" start="857" end="874" title="context sensitive user interface" label="context-sensitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q592931" start="1155" end="1166" title="Don Hopkins" label="Don Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800173" start="1604" end="1618" title="Secret of Mana" label="Secret of Mana"/>
<link wikidata="Q658018" start="1785" end="1803" title="mouse gesture" label="gestural interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987" start="2123" end="2128" title="mouse (computing)" label="mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172433" start="2170" end="2179" title="wired glove" label="dataglove"/>
<link wikidata="Q17164969" start="2332" end="2368" title="muscle memory" label="remember muscle motion and direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137548" start="2711" end="2727" title="Fitts&amp;#x27;s law" label="Fitts&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q17164969" start="2752" end="2765" title="muscle memory" label="muscle memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q734215" start="2995" end="3005" title="popup menu" label="popup menu"/>
<link wikidata="Q658018" start="3205" end="3219" title="mouse gestures" label="mouse gestures"/>
<link wikidata="Q18921192" start="4232" end="4254" title="interaction techniques" label="interaction techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q107602" start="4268" end="4275" title="pointer (graphical user interfaces)" label="pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q605117" start="4457" end="4482" title="Graphical control element (software)" label="graphical control element"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193246" start="4504" end="4511" title="widget toolkit" label="toolkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="4683" end="4689" title="MacOS" label="Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619298" start="4820" end="4835" title="Android Browser" label="Android Browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="4839" end="4846" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q272597" start="4848" end="4861" title="Autodesk Maya" label="Autodesk Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q173136" start="4898" end="4905" title="Blender (software)" label="Blender"/>
<link wikidata="Q851935" start="4998" end="5005" title="BumpTop" label="BumpTop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400838" start="5126" end="5139" title="PowerAnimator" label="PowerAnimator"/>
<link wikidata="Q538588" start="5200" end="5207" title="Mozilla Application Suite" label="Mozilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q698" start="5212" end="5227" title="Mozilla Firefox" label="Mozilla Firefox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785363" start="5271" end="5278" title="Metisse" label="Metisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q10749865" start="5283" end="5307" title="UDE" label="Unix Desktop Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q857566" start="5309" end="5324" title="X window manager" label="window managers"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="5333" end="5348" title="X Window System" label="X Window System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050465" start="5350" end="5354" title="modo (software)" label="modo"/>
<link wikidata="Q751281" start="5418" end="5428" title="SolidWorks" label="SolidWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561658" start="5455" end="5461" title="Songza" label="Songza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057010" start="5564" end="5574" title="Aza Raskin" label="Aza Raskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q945034" start="5576" end="5587" title="Quicksilver (software)" label="Quicksilver"/>
<link wikidata="Q620707" start="5619" end="5624" title="Sugar (GUI)" label="Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q842120" start="5653" end="5673" title="One Laptop per Child" label="One Laptop per Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q706480" start="5683" end="5690" title="OneNote" label="OneNote"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046" start="5699" end="5708" title="Windows 8" label="Windows 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q17424" start="5713" end="5723" title="Windows RT" label="Windows RT"/>
<link wikidata="Q136112" start="5730" end="5736" title="Cherry (keyboards)" label="Cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410478" start="5829" end="5855" title="Samsung Galaxy Note series" label="Samsung Galaxy Note series"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5988" end="6020" title="Counter-Strike:_Global_Offensive" label="Counter-Strike: Global Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q184816" start="6080" end="6088" title="The Sims (video game)" label="The Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q592931" start="6203" end="6214" title="Don Hopkins" label="Don Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q17452" start="6238" end="6256" title="Grand Theft Auto V" label="Grand Theft Auto V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800173" start="6310" end="6324" title="Secret of Mana" label="Secret of Mana"/>
<link wikidata="Q958761" start="6355" end="6373" title="Secret of Evermore" label="Secret of Evermore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137217" start="6449" end="6475" title="The Curse of Monkey Island" label="The Curse of Monkey Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188646" start="6535" end="6559" title="Crossing-based interface" label="Crossing-based interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q846925" start="6562" end="6578" title="Menu (computing)" label="Menu (computing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q273404" start="6581" end="6590" title="Pie chart" label="Pie chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q201904" start="6729" end="6731" title="Qt (software)" label="Qt"/>
<link wikidata="Q616360" start="6774" end="6780" title="Tcl/Tk" label="Tcl/Tk"/>
<link wikidata="Q592931" start="7135" end="7146" title="Don Hopkins" label="Don Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453422" start="7631" end="7642" title="Russ Nelson" label="Russ Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798922" start="7716" end="7723" title="SimCity (1989 video game)" label="SimCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q62913" start="8014" end="8025" title="Mark Weiser" label="Mark Weiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3419387" start="8706" end="8734" title="Raphaël (JavaScript library)" label="Raphaël (JavaScript library)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24872" wikidata="Q58734" url="?curid=24872" title="Pollution">
<text>Pollution is the introduction of contaminants into the natural environment that cause harm. Pollution can take the form of any substance (solid, liquid, or gas) or energy (such as radioactivity, heat, sound, or light). Pollutants, the components of pollution, can be either foreign substances/energies or naturally occurring contaminants.

Although environmental pollution can be caused by natural events, the word pollution generally implies that the contaminants have a human source – that is, a source created by human activities, such as manufacturing, extractive industries, poor waste management, transportation or agriculture. Pollution is often classed as point source (coming from a highly concentrated specific site, such as a factory, mine, construction site), or nonpoint source pollution (coming from a widespread distributed sources, such as microplastics or agricultural runoff).

Many sources of pollution were unregulated parts of industrialization during the 19th and 20th centuries until the emergence of environmental regulation and pollution policy in the later half of the 20th century. Sites where historically polluting industries released persistent pollutants may have legacy pollution long after the source of the pollution is stopped. Major forms of pollution include air pollution, water pollution, litter, noise pollution, plastic pollution, soil contamination, radioactive contamination, thermal pollution, light pollution, and visual pollution.

Pollution has widespread consequences on human and environmental health, having systematic impact on social and economic systems. In 2019, pollution killed approximately nine million people worldwide (about one in six deaths that year); about three-quarters of these deaths were caused by air pollution.&lt;ref name=&quot;10.1016/S2542-5196(22)00090-0&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; A 2022 literature review found that levels of anthropogenic chemical pollution have exceeded planetary boundaries and now threaten entire ecosystems around the world. Pollutants frequently have outsized impacts on vulnerable populations, such as children and the elderly, and marginalized communities, because polluting industries and toxic waste sites tend to be collocated with populations with less economic and political power. This outsized impact is a core reason for the formation of the environmental justice movement, and continues to be a core element of environmental conflicts, particularly in the Global South.

Because of the impacts of these chemicals, local and international countries&#x27; policy have increasingly sought to regulate pollutants, resulting in increasing air and water quality standards, alongside regulation of specific waste streams. Regional and national policy is typically supervised by environmental agencies or ministries, while international efforts are coordinated by the UN Environmental Program and other treaty bodies. Pollution mitigation is an important part of all of the Sustainable Development Goals.

==Definitions and types==
Various definitions of pollution exist, which may or may not recognize certain types, such as noise pollution or greenhouse gases. The United States Environmental Protection Administration defines pollution as &quot;Any substances in water, soil, or air that degrade the natural quality of the environment, offend the senses of sight, taste, or smell, or cause a health hazard. The usefulness of the natural resource is usually impaired by the presence of pollutants and contaminants.&quot; In contrast, the United Nations considers pollution to be the &quot;presence of substances and heat in environmental media (air, water, land) whose nature, location, or quantity produces undesirable environmental effects.&quot;
The major forms of pollution are listed below along with the particular contaminants relevant to each of them:
* Air pollution: the release of chemicals and particulates into the atmosphere. Common gaseous pollutants include carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide, chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and nitrogen oxides produced by industry and motor vehicles. Photochemical ozone and smog are created as nitrogen oxides and hydrocarbons react to sunlight. Particulate matter, or fine dust is characterized by their micrometre size PM10 to PM2.5.
* Electromagnetic pollution: the overabundance of electromagnetic radiation in their non-ionizing form, such as radio and television transmissions, Wi-fi etc. Although there is no demonstrable effect on humans there can be interference with radio-astronomy and effects on safety systems of aircraft and cars.
* Light pollution: includes light trespass, over-illumination and astronomical interference.
* Littering: the criminal throwing of inappropriate man-made objects, unremoved, onto public and private properties.
* Noise pollution: which encompasses roadway noise, aircraft noise, industrial noise as well as high-intensity sonar.
* Plastic pollution: involves the accumulation of plastic products and microplastics in the environment that adversely affects wildlife, wildlife habitat, or humans.
* Soil contamination occurs when chemicals are released by spill or underground leakage. Among the most significant soil contaminants are hydrocarbons, heavy metals, MTBE, herbicides, pesticides and chlorinated hydrocarbons.
* Radioactive contamination, resulting from 20th century activities in atomic physics, such as nuclear power generation and nuclear weapons research, manufacture and deployment. (See alpha emitters and actinides in the environment.)
* Thermal pollution, is a temperature change in natural water bodies caused by human influence, such as use of water as coolant in a power plant.
* Visual pollution, which can refer to the presence of overhead power lines, motorway billboards, scarred landforms (as from strip mining), open storage of trash, municipal solid waste or space debris.
* Water pollution, caused by the discharge of industrial wastewater from commercial and industrial waste (intentionally or through spills) into surface waters; discharges of untreated sewage and chemical contaminants, such as chlorine, from treated sewage; and releases of waste and contaminants into surface runoff flowing to surface waters (including urban runoff and agricultural runoff, which may contain chemical fertilizers and pesticides, as well as human feces from open defecation).

==Natural causes==
One of the most significant natural sources of pollution are volcanoes, which during eruptions release large quantities of harmful gases into the atmosphere. Volcanic gases include carbon dioxide, which can be fatal in large concentrations and contributes to climate change, hydrogen halides which can cause acid rain, sulfur dioxides, which are harmful to animals and damage the ozone layer, and hydrogen sulfides, which are capable of killing humans at concentrations of less than 1 part per thousand. Volcanic emissions also include fine and ultrafine particles which may contain toxic chemicals and substances such as arsenic, lead, and mercury.

Wildfires, which can be caused naturally by lightning strikes, are also a significant source of air pollution. Wildfire smoke contains significant quantities of both carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide, which can cause suffocation. Large quantities of fine particulates are found within wildfire smoke as well, which pose a health risk to animals.

== Human generation ==

Motor vehicle emissions are one of the leading causes of air pollution. China, United States, Russia, India, Mexico, and Japan are the world leaders in air pollution emissions. Principal stationary pollution sources include chemical plants, coal-fired power plants, oil refineries, petrochemical plants, nuclear waste disposal activity, incinerators, large livestock farms (dairy cows, pigs, poultry, etc.), PVC factories, metals production factories, plastics factories, and other heavy industry. Agricultural air pollution comes from contemporary practices which include clear felling and burning of natural vegetation as well as spraying of pesticides and herbicides.

About 400 million metric tons of hazardous wastes are generated each year. The United States alone produces about 250 million metric tons. Americans constitute less than 5% of the world&#x27;s population, but produce roughly 25% of the world&#x27;s , and generate approximately 30% of world&#x27;s waste. In 2007, China overtook the United States as the world&#x27;s biggest producer of , while still far behind based on per capita pollution (ranked 78th among the world&#x27;s nations).

Chlorinated hydrocarbons (CFH), heavy metals (such as chromium, cadmium – found in rechargeable batteries, and lead – found in lead paint, aviation fuel, and even in certain countries, gasoline), MTBE, zinc, arsenic, and benzene are some of the most frequent soil contaminants. A series of press reports published in 2001, culminating in the publication of the book Fateful Harvest, revealed a widespread practise of recycling industrial leftovers into fertilizer, resulting in metal poisoning of the soil. Ordinary municipal landfills are the source of many chemical substances entering the soil environment (and often groundwater), emanating from the wide variety of refuse accepted, especially substances illegally discarded there, or from pre-1970 landfills that may have been subject to little control in the U.S. or EU. There have also been some unusual releases of polychlorinated dibenzodioxins, commonly called &quot;dioxins&quot; for simplicity, such as TCDD.

Pollution can also occur as a result of natural disasters. Hurricanes, for example, frequently result in sewage contamination and petrochemical spills from burst boats or automobiles. When coastal oil rigs or refineries are involved, larger-scale and environmental damage is not unusual. When accidents occur, some pollution sources, such as nuclear power stations or oil ships, can create extensive and potentially catastrophic emissions.

Plastic pollution is choking our oceans by making plastic gyres, entangling marine animals, poisoning our food and water supply, and ultimately inflicting havoc on the health and well-being of humans and wildlife globally. With the exception of a small amount that has been incinerating, virtually every piece of plastic that was ever made in the past still exists in one form or another. And since most of the plastics do not biodegrade in any meaningful sense, all that plastic waste could exist for hundreds or even thousands of years. If plastic production is not circumscribed, plastic pollution will be disastrous and will eventually outweigh fish in oceans.

=== Greenhouse gas emissions ===

Carbon dioxide, while vital for photosynthesis, is sometimes referred to as pollution, because raised levels of the gas in the atmosphere are affecting the Earth&#x27;s climate. Disruption of the environment can also highlight the connection between areas of pollution that would normally be classified separately, such as those of water and air. Recent studies have investigated the potential for long-term rising levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide to cause slight but critical increases in the acidity of ocean waters, and the possible effects of this on marine ecosystems.

In February 2007, a report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), representing the work of 2,500 scientists, economists, and policymakers from more than 120 countries, confirmed that humans have been the primary cause of global warming since 1950. Humans have ways to cut greenhouse gas emissions and avoid the consequences of global warming, a major climate report concluded. But to change the climate, the transition from fossil fuels like coal and oil needs to occur within decades, according to the final report this year from the UN&#x27;s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).

==Effects==
===Human health===

Pollution affects humans in every part of the world. An October 2017 study by the Lancet Commission on Pollution and Health found that global pollution, specifically toxic air, water, soil and workplaces, kills nine million people annually, which is triple the number of deaths caused by AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria combined, and 15 times higher than deaths caused by wars and other forms of human violence. The study concluded that &quot;pollution is one of the great existential challenges of the Anthropocene era. Pollution endangers the stability of the Earth&#x27;s support systems and threatens the continuing survival of human societies.&quot;

Adverse air quality can kill many organisms, including humans. Ozone pollution can cause respiratory disease, cardiovascular disease, throat inflammation, chest pain, and congestion. A 2010 analysis estimated that 1.2 million people died prematurely each year in China alone because of air pollution. China&#x27;s high smog levels can damage the human body and cause various diseases. In 2019, air pollution caused 1.67 million deaths in India (17.8% of total deaths nationally). Studies have estimated that the number of people killed annually in the United States could be over 50,000. A study published in 2022 in &quot;GeoHealth&quot; concluded that energy-related fossil fuel emissions in the United States cause 46,900–59,400 premature deaths each year and PM2.5-related illness and death costs the nation $537–$678 billion annually. In the US, deaths caused by coal pollution were highest in 1999, but decreased sharply after 2007. The number dropped by about 95% by 2020, as coal plants have been closed or have scrubbers installed.

In 2019, water pollution caused 1.4 million premature deaths. Contamination of drinking water by untreated sewage in developing countries is an issue, for example, over 732 million Indians (56% of the population) and over 92 million Ethiopians (92.9% of the population) do not have access to basic sanitation. In 2013 over 10 million people in India fell ill with waterborne illnesses in 2013, and 1,535 people died, most of them children. , nearly 500 million Chinese lack access to safe drinking water.

Acute exposure to certain pollutants can have short and long term effects. Oil spills can cause skin irritations and rashes. Noise pollution induces hearing loss, high blood pressure, stress, and sleep disturbance. Mercury has been linked to developmental deficits in children and neurologic symptoms. Older people are significantly exposed to diseases induced by air pollution. Those with heart or lung disorders are at additional risk. Children and infants are also at serious risk. Lead and other heavy metals have been shown to cause neurological problems, intellectual disabilities and behavioural problems. Chemical and radioactive substances can cause cancer and birth defects.

==== Socio economic impacts ====
The health impacts of pollution have both direct and lasting social consequences. A 2021 study found that exposure to pollution causes an increase in violent crime. A 2019 paper linked pollution to adverse school outcomes for children. A number of studies show that pollution has an adverse effect on the productivity of both indoor and outdoor workers.

===Environment===

Pollution has been found to be present widely in the natural environment. A 2022 study published in &quot;Environmental Science &amp; Technology&quot; found that levels of anthropogenic chemical pollution have exceeded planetary boundaries and now threaten entire ecosystems around the world.

There are a number of effects of this:
* Biomagnification describes situations where toxins (such as heavy metals) may pass through trophic levels, becoming exponentially more concentrated in the process.
* Carbon dioxide emissions cause ocean acidification, the ongoing decrease in the pH of the Earth&#x27;s oceans as becomes dissolved.
* The emission of greenhouse gases leads to global warming which affects ecosystems in many ways.
* Invasive species can outcompete native species and reduce biodiversity. Invasive plants can contribute debris and biomolecules (allelopathy) that can alter soil and chemical compositions of an environment, often reducing native species competitiveness.
* Nitrogen oxides are removed from the air by rain and fertilise land which can change the species composition of ecosystems.
* Smog and haze can reduce the amount of sunlight received by plants to carry out photosynthesis and leads to the production of tropospheric ozone which damages plants.
* Soil can become infertile and unsuitable for plants. This will affect other organisms in the food web.
* Sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides can cause acid rain which lowers the pH value of soil.
* Organic pollution of watercourses can deplete oxygen levels and reduce species diversity.

==Regulation and monitoring==
==Control==
Pollution control is a term used in environmental management. It refers to the control of emissions and effluents into air, water or soil. Without pollution control, the waste products from overconsumption, heating, agriculture, mining, manufacturing, transportation and other human activities, whether they accumulate or disperse, will degrade the environment. In the hierarchy of controls, pollution prevention and waste minimization are more desirable than pollution control. In the field of land development, low impact development is a similar technique for the prevention of urban runoff.

Policy, law and monitoring/transparency/life-cycle assessment-attached economics could be developed and enforced to control pollution. A review concluded that there is a lack of attention and action such as work on a globally supported &quot;formal science–policy interface&quot;, e.g. to &quot;inform intervention, influence research, and guide funding&quot;.

In September 2023 a Global Framework on Chemicals aiming to reduce pollution was agreed during an international conference in Bonn, Germany. The framework includes 28 targets, for example, to &quot;end the use of hazardous pesticides in agriculture where the risks have not been managed&quot; by 2035.

===Practices===
* Recycling
* Reusing
* Waste minimisation
* Mitigating
* Pollution prevention
* Compost

===Devices===
* Air pollution control
** Green wall
** Smog Tower
** Thermal oxidizer
* Bioremediation
* Dust collection systems
** Baghouses
** Cyclones
** Electrostatic precipitators
* Scrubbers
** Baffle spray scrubber
** Cyclonic spray scrubber
** Ejector venturi scrubber
** Mechanically aided scrubber
** Spray tower
** Wet scrubber
* Sewage treatment
** Sedimentation (Primary treatment)
** Activated sludge biotreaters (Secondary treatment; also used for industrial wastewater)
** Aerated lagoons
** Constructed wetlands (also used for urban runoff)
* Industrial wastewater treatment
** API oil-water separators
** Biofilters
** Dissolved air flotation (DAF)
** Powdered activated carbon treatment
** Ultrafiltration
* Vapor recovery systems
* Phytoremediation

==Cost==
Pollution has a cost. Manufacturing activities that cause air pollution impose health and clean-up costs on the whole of society. A manufacturing activity that causes air pollution is an example of a negative externality in production. A negative externality in production occurs &quot;when a firm&#x27;s production reduces the well-being of others who are not compensated by the firm.&quot; For example, if a laundry firm exists near a polluting steel manufacturing firm, there will be increased costs for the laundry firm because of the dirt and smoke produced by the steel manufacturing firm. If external costs exist, such as those created by pollution, the manufacturer will choose to produce more of the product than would be produced if the manufacturer were required to pay all associated environmental costs. Because responsibility or consequence for self-directed action lies partly outside the self, an element of externalization is involved. If there are external benefits, such as in public safety, less of the good may be produced than would be the case if the producer were to receive payment for the external benefits to others. Goods and services that involve negative externalities in production, such as those that produce pollution, tend to be overproduced and underpriced since the externality is not being priced into the market.

Pollution can also create costs for the firms producing the pollution. Sometimes firms choose, or are forced by regulation, to reduce the amount of pollution that they are producing. The associated costs of doing this are called abatement costs, or marginal abatement costs if measured by each additional unit. In 2005 pollution abatement capital expenditures and operating costs in the US amounted to nearly $27 billion.

== Dirtiest industries ==
The Pure Earth, an international non-for-profit organization dedicated to eliminating life-threatening pollution in the developing world, issues an annual list of some of the world&#x27;s most polluting industries. Below is the list for 2016:
* Lead–acid battery recycling
* Mining and extractive metallurgy
* Lead smelting
* Tanning
* Artisanal mining
* Landfills
* Industrial parks
* Chemical industry
* Manufacturing
* Dyeing

A 2018 report by the Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy and GRAIN says that the meat and dairy industries are poised to surpass the oil industry as the world&#x27;s worst polluters.

=== Textile industry ===
=== Fossil fuel related industries ===
Outdoor air pollution attributable to fossil fuel use alone causes ~3.61 million deaths annually, making it one of the top contributors to human death, beyond being a major driver of climate change whereby greenhouse gases are considered per se as a form of pollution .

== Socially optimal level ==

Society derives some indirect utility from pollution; otherwise, there would be no incentive to pollute. This utility may come from the consumption of goods and services that inherently create pollution (albeit the level can vary) or lower prices or lower required efforts (or inconvenience) to abandon or substitute these goods and services. Therefore, it is important that policymakers attempt to balance these indirect benefits with the costs of pollution in order to achieve an efficient outcome.

It is possible to use environmental economics to determine which level of pollution is deemed the social optimum. For economists, pollution is an &quot;external cost and occurs only when one or more individuals suffer a loss of welfare&quot;. There is a socially optimal level of pollution at which welfare is maximized. This is because consumers derive utility from the good or service manufactured, which will outweigh the social cost of pollution until a certain point. At this point the damage of one extra unit of pollution to society, the marginal cost of pollution, is exactly equal to the marginal benefit of consuming one more unit of the good or service.

Moreover, the feasibility of pollution reduction rates could also be a factor of calculating optimal levels. While a study puts the global mean loss of life expectancy (LLE; similar to YPLL) from air pollution in 2015 at 2.9 years (substantially more than, for example, 0.3 years from all forms of direct violence), it also indicated that a significant fraction of the LLE is unavoidable in terms of current economical-technological feasibility such as aeolian dust and wildfire emission control.&lt;ref name=&quot;10.1093/cvr/cvaa025&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

In markets with pollution, or other negative externalities in production, the free market equilibrium will not account for the costs of pollution on society. If the social costs of pollution are higher than the private costs incurred by the firm, then the true supply curve will be higher. The point at which the social marginal cost and market demand intersect gives the socially optimal level of pollution. At this point, the quantity will be lower and the price will be higher in comparison to the free market equilibrium. Therefore, the free market outcome could be considered a market failure because it &quot;does not maximize efficiency&quot;.

This model can be used as a basis to evaluate different methods of internalizing the externality, such as tariffs, a Pigouvian tax (such as a carbon tax) and cap and trade systems.

== History ==
=== Prior to 19th century ===
Air pollution has always accompanied civilizations. Pollution started from prehistoric times, when humans created the first fires. According to a 1983 article in the journal &quot;Science,&quot; &quot;soot&quot; found on ceilings of prehistoric caves provides ample evidence of the high levels of pollution that was associated with inadequate ventilation of open fires.&quot;

Metal forging appears to be a key turning point in the creation of significant air pollution levels outside the home. Core samples of glaciers in Greenland indicate increases in pollution associated with Greek, Roman, and Chinese metal production.
The burning of coal and wood, and the presence of many horses in concentrated areas made the cities the primary sources of pollution. King Edward I of England banned the burning of mineral coal by proclamation in London in 1306, after its smoke became a problem; the fuel was named sea-coal at the time, getting its name from the fact that it was delivered form overseas (as opposed to charcoal, which was referred to as &quot;coal&quot;).

=== 19th century ===
The Industrial Revolution gave birth to environmental pollution as we know it today. London also recorded one of the earliest extreme cases of water quality problems with the Great Stink on the Thames of 1858, which led to the construction of the London sewerage system soon afterward. Pollution issues escalated as population growth far exceeded the ability of neighborhoods to handle their waste problem. Reformers began to demand sewer systems and clean water.

In 1870, the sanitary conditions in Berlin were among the worst in Europe. August Bebel recalled conditions before a modern sewer system was built in the late 1870s:

=== 20th and 21st century ===
The primitive conditions were intolerable for a world national capital, and the Imperial German government brought in its scientists, engineers, and urban planners to solve the deficiencies and forge Berlin as the world&#x27;s model city. A British expert in 1906 concluded that Berlin represented &quot;the most complete application of science, order and method of public life,&quot; adding &quot;it is a marvel of civic administration, the most modern and most perfectly organized city that there is.&quot;

The emergence of great factories and consumption of immense quantities of coal gave rise to unprecedented air pollution, and the large volume of industrial chemical discharges added to the growing load of untreated human waste. Chicago and Cincinnati were the first two American cities to enact laws ensuring cleaner air in 1881. Pollution became a significant issue in the United States in the early twentieth century, as progressive reformers took issue with air pollution caused by coal burning, water pollution caused by bad sanitation, and street pollution caused by the three million horses who worked in American cities in 1900, generating large quantities of urine and manure. As historian Martin Melosi notes, the generation that first saw automobiles replacing horses saw cars as &quot;miracles of cleanliness&quot;. By the 1940s, automobile-caused smog was a significant issue in Los Angeles.

Other cities followed around the country until early in the 20th century when the short-lived Office of Air Pollution was created under the Department of the Interior. The cities of Los Angeles experienced extreme smog events and Donora, Pennsylvania, in the late 1940s, serving as another public reminder.

Air pollution would continue to be a problem in England, especially later during the Industrial Revolution, and extending into the recent past with the Great Smog of 1952. Awareness of atmospheric pollution spread widely after World War II, with fears triggered by reports of radioactive fallout from atomic warfare and testing. Then a non-nuclear event – the Great Smog of 1952 in London – killed at least 4000 people. This prompted some of the first major modern environmental legislation: the Clean Air Act of 1956.

Pollution began to draw significant public attention in the United States between the mid-1950s and early 1970s, when Congress passed the Noise Control Act, the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act, and the National Environmental Policy Act. 

Severe incidents of pollution helped increase consciousness. PCB dumping in the Hudson River resulted in a ban by the EPA on consumption of its fish in 1974. National news stories in the late 1970s – especially the long-term dioxin contamination at Love Canal starting in 1947 and uncontrolled dumping in Valley of the Drums – led to the Superfund legislation of 1980. The pollution of industrial land gave rise to the name brownfield, a term now common in city planning.

The development of nuclear science introduced radioactive contamination, which can remain lethally radioactive for hundreds of thousands of years. Lake Karachay – named by the Worldwatch Institute as the &quot;most polluted spot&quot; on earth – served as a disposal site for the Soviet Union throughout the 1950s and 1960s. Chelyabinsk, Russia, is considered the &quot;Most polluted place on the planet&quot;.

Nuclear weapons continued to be tested in the Cold War, especially in the earlier stages of their development. The toll on the worst-affected populations and the growth since then in understanding the critical threat to human health posed by radioactivity has also been a prohibitive complication associated with nuclear power. Though extreme care is practiced in that industry, the potential for disaster suggested by incidents such as those at Three Mile Island, Chernobyl, and Fukushima pose a lingering specter of public mistrust. Worldwide publicity has been intense on those disasters. Widespread support for test ban treaties has ended almost all nuclear testing in the atmosphere.

International catastrophes such as the wreck of the Amoco Cadiz oil tanker off the coast of Brittany in 1978 and the Bhopal disaster in 1984 have demonstrated the universality of such events and the scale on which efforts to address them needed to engage. The borderless nature of the atmosphere and oceans inevitably resulted in the implication of pollution on a planetary level with the issue of global warming. Most recently, the term persistent organic pollutant (POP) has come to describe a group of chemicals such as PBDEs and PFCs, among others. Though their effects remain poorly understood owing to a lack of experimental data, they have been detected in various ecological habitats far removed from industrial activity, such as the Arctic, demonstrating diffusion and bioaccumulation after only a relatively brief period of widespread use.

The Great Pacific Garbage Patch is a concentration of plastics in the North Pacific Gyre. It and other garbage patches contain debris that can transport invasive species and that can entangle and be ingested by wildlife. Organizations such as 5 Gyres and the Algalita Marine Research Foundation have researched the Great Pacific Garbage Patch and found microplastics in the water.

Pollution introduced by light at night is becoming a global problem, more severe in urban centres, but contaminating also large territories, far away from towns.

Growing evidence of local and global pollution and an increasingly informed public over time have given rise to environmentalism and the environmental movement, which generally seek to limit human impact on the environment.

==See also==
* Biological contamination
* Brain health and pollution
* Chemical contamination
* Environmental health
* Environmental racism
* Hazardous Substances Data Bank
* Overpopulation
* Neuroplastic effects of pollution
* Pollutant release and transfer register
* Polluter pays principle
* Pollution haven hypothesis
* Regulation of greenhouse gases under the Clean Air Act
* &quot;Pollution is Colonialism&quot;
* Sacrifice zone

==References==
==External links==
* OEHHA proposition 65 list
* National Toxicology Program – from US National Institutes of Health. Reports and studies on how pollutants affect people
* TOXNET – NIH databases and reports on toxicology
* TOXMAP – Geographic Information System (GIS) that uses maps of the United States to help users visually explore data from the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Toxics Release Inventory and Superfund Basic Research Programs
* EPA.gov – manages Superfund sites and the pollutants in them (CERCLA). Map the EPA Superfund
* Toxic Release Inventory – tracks how much waste US companies release into the water and air. Gives permits for releasing specific quantities of these pollutants each year.
* Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry – Top 20 pollutants, how they affect people, what US industries use them and the products in which they are found
* Chelyabinsk: The Most Contaminated Spot on the Planet Documentary Film by Slawomir Grünberg (1996)
* Nieman Reports | Tracking Toxics When the Data Are Polluted</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="0" end="9" title="Pollution" label="Pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q60528603" start="33" end="44" title="contaminant" label="contaminant"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="55" end="74" title="natural environment" label="natural environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q19829510" start="219" end="228" title="Pollutant" label="Pollutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q574376" start="465" end="484" title="Human impact on the environment" label="have a human source"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="542" end="555" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385203" start="557" end="578" title="Extractivism" label="extractive industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q180388" start="585" end="601" title="waste management" label="waste management"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693969" start="621" end="632" title="Agricultural pollution" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735963" start="664" end="676" title="point source pollution" label="point source"/>
<link wikidata="Q83405" start="737" end="744" title="factory" label="factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381247" start="746" end="750" title="Environmental effects of mining" label="mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="752" end="769" title="construction site" label="construction site"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736556" start="775" end="800" title="nonpoint source pollution" label="nonpoint source pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839919" start="856" end="869" title="microplastics" label="microplastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693969" start="873" end="892" title="agricultural runoff" label="agricultural runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="948" end="965" title="Industrialisation" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q428148" start="1038" end="1048" title="regulation" label="regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156854" start="1063" end="1069" title="policy" label="policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q912951" start="1164" end="1174" title="Persistent organic pollutant" label="persistent"/>
<link wikidata="Q116854575" start="1195" end="1211" title="legacy pollution" label="legacy pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="1296" end="1309" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="1311" end="1326" title="water pollution" label="water pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780867" start="1328" end="1334" title="litter" label="litter"/>
<link wikidata="Q92251" start="1336" end="1351" title="noise pollution" label="noise pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202090" start="1353" end="1370" title="plastic pollution" label="plastic pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q212734" start="1372" end="1390" title="soil contamination" label="soil contamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q817114" start="1392" end="1417" title="radioactive contamination" label="radioactive contamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914309" start="1419" end="1436" title="thermal pollution" label="thermal pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q180644" start="1438" end="1453" title="light pollution" label="light pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745851" start="1459" end="1475" title="visual pollution" label="visual pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q932068" start="1529" end="1549" title="environmental health" label="environmental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="1767" end="1780" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q961310" start="1945" end="1965" title="planetary boundaries" label="planetary boundaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479527" start="2347" end="2377" title="environmental justice movement" label="environmental justice movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683226" start="2417" end="2439" title="environmental conflict" label="environmental conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203182" start="2462" end="2474" title="Global South" label="Global South"/>
<link wikidata="Q917441" start="2777" end="2813" title="Environmental agency" label="environmental agencies or ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q182016" start="2866" end="2890" title="United Nations Environment Programme" label="UN Environmental Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q110664635" start="2901" end="2914" title="Treaty body" label="treaty bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881760" start="2926" end="2936" title="mitigation" label="mitigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649586" start="2972" end="3001" title="Sustainable Development Goals" label="Sustainable Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q92251" start="3124" end="3139" title="noise pollution" label="noise pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="3143" end="3157" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381152" start="3179" end="3218" title="Environmental Protection Administration" label="Environmental Protection Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3538" end="3552" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q60528603" start="3821" end="3833" title="contaminants" label="contaminants"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="3862" end="3875" title="Air pollution" label="Air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="3906" end="3918" title="particulates" label="particulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="3974" end="3989" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="3991" end="4005" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q960800" start="4007" end="4025" title="chlorofluorocarbon" label="chlorofluorocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q424418" start="4038" end="4052" title="nitrogen oxide" label="nitrogen oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="4066" end="4074" title="Secondary sector" label="industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q36933" start="4109" end="4114" title="ozone" label="ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q169994" start="4119" end="4123" title="smog" label="smog"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="4159" end="4170" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="4191" end="4209" title="Atmospheric particulate matter" label="Particulate matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="4250" end="4260" title="micrometre" label="micrometre"/>
<link wikidata="Q14932259" start="4283" end="4308" title="Electromagnetic pollution" label="Electromagnetic pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="4331" end="4356" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q596860" start="4366" end="4378" title="non-ionizing" label="non-ionizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q180644" start="4592" end="4607" title="Light pollution" label="Light pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q180644" start="4634" end="4651" title="over-illumination" label="over-illumination"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="4656" end="4668" title="astronomical" label="astronomical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780867" start="4685" end="4694" title="Littering" label="Littering"/>
<link wikidata="Q92251" start="4802" end="4817" title="Noise pollution" label="Noise pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850027" start="4837" end="4850" title="roadway noise" label="roadway noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q598572" start="4852" end="4866" title="aircraft noise" label="aircraft noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520446" start="4868" end="4884" title="industrial noise" label="industrial noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q133220" start="4911" end="4916" title="sonar" label="sonar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202090" start="4920" end="4937" title="Plastic pollution" label="Plastic pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839919" start="4989" end="5002" title="microplastics" label="microplastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q212734" start="5086" end="5104" title="Soil contamination" label="Soil contamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q212734" start="5200" end="5216" title="soil contaminant" label="soil contaminant"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="5222" end="5233" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q105789" start="5236" end="5248" title="heavy metals" label="heavy metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q412346" start="5250" end="5254" title="Methyl tert-butyl ether" label="MTBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q178266" start="5256" end="5266" title="herbicides" label="herbicides"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="5268" end="5278" title="pesticides" label="pesticides"/>
<link wikidata="Q426809" start="5283" end="5307" title="chlorinated hydrocarbons" label="chlorinated hydrocarbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q817114" start="5311" end="5336" title="Radioactive contamination" label="Radioactive contamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q26383" start="5380" end="5394" title="atomic physics" label="atomic physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q103517" start="5492" end="5505" title="alpha emitter" label="alpha emitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676887" start="5511" end="5539" title="actinides in the environment" label="actinides in the environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914309" start="5544" end="5561" title="Thermal pollution" label="Thermal pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="5568" end="5579" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745851" start="5690" end="5706" title="Visual pollution" label="Visual pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q200928" start="5752" end="5763" title="electric power transmission" label="power lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q623149" start="5774" end="5784" title="billboard (advertising)" label="billboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q271669" start="5794" end="5802" title="landform" label="landform"/>
<link wikidata="Q756944" start="5813" end="5825" title="strip mining" label="strip mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q18538" start="5851" end="5872" title="municipal solid waste" label="municipal solid waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q275450" start="5876" end="5888" title="space debris" label="space debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444790" start="6191" end="6205" title="surface runoff" label="surface runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="6463" end="6470" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="6661" end="6675" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q40178" start="6710" end="6719" title="acid rain" label="acid rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q79995" start="6782" end="6793" title="ozone layer" label="ozone layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="6799" end="6815" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="7024" end="7031" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="7033" end="7037" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="7043" end="7050" title="Mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="7053" end="7061" title="Wildfire" label="Wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15120872" start="7097" end="7113" title="lightning strike" label="lightning strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q193840" start="7271" end="7282" title="suffocation" label="suffocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="7304" end="7321" title="Particulates" label="fine particulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q320173" start="7425" end="7448" title="Motor vehicle emissions" label="Motor vehicle emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755206" start="7497" end="7502" title="Air pollution in China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698360" start="7504" end="7517" title="Air pollution in the United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946766" start="7519" end="7525" title="Air pollution in Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698355" start="7527" end="7532" title="Air pollution in India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q580061" start="7534" end="7540" title="Air pollution in Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q905286" start="7649" end="7663" title="chemical plant" label="chemical plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="7677" end="7689" title="power plants" label="power plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353044" start="7691" end="7705" title="oil refinery" label="oil refineries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364904" start="7707" end="7720" title="petrochemical" label="petrochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q185252" start="7729" end="7742" title="nuclear waste" label="nuclear waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288465" start="7782" end="7797" title="Environmental impact of meat production" label="livestock farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q146368" start="7833" end="7836" title="Polyvinyl chloride" label="PVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q622662" start="7907" end="7921" title="heavy industry" label="heavy industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069369" start="8130" end="8145" title="hazardous waste" label="hazardous waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q11188" start="8277" end="8300" title="world&amp;#x27;s population" label="world&amp;#x27;s population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="8346" end="8346" title="carbon dioxide" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q45701" start="8382" end="8400" title="waste" label="world&amp;#x27;s waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="8411" end="8416" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q152810" start="9112" end="9120" title="landfill" label="landfill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11087111" start="9458" end="9488" title="polychlorinated dibenzodioxins" label="polychlorinated dibenzodioxins"/>
<link wikidata="Q52822" start="9550" end="9554" title="2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin" label="TCDD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202090" start="10470" end="10483" title="plastic waste" label="plastic waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="10698" end="10712" title="Carbon dioxide" label="Carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="10730" end="10744" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q855711" start="11179" end="11219" title="ocean acidification" label="increases in the acidity of ocean waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q171183" start="11311" end="11352" title="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change" label="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="11719" end="11731" title="fossil fuels" label="fossil fuels"/>
<link wikidata="Q26841" start="12425" end="12437" title="Anthropocene" label="Anthropocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="12586" end="12597" title="air quality" label="air quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286546" start="12667" end="12686" title="respiratory disease" label="respiratory disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="12688" end="12710" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q16364" start="12712" end="12718" title="throat" label="throat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245488" start="12749" end="12759" title="Nasal congestion" label="congestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="12841" end="12846" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13201" end="13210" title="American Geophysical Union#Publications" label="GeoHealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439322" start="13598" end="13607" title="scrubbers" label="scrubbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="13629" end="13644" title="water pollution" label="water pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="13682" end="13713" title="Water pollution" label="Contamination of drinking water"/>
<link wikidata="Q10966166" start="13727" end="13733" title="sewage" label="sewage"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="13737" end="13757" title="developing countries" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q949149" start="13918" end="13928" title="sanitation" label="sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259911" start="14222" end="14226" title="human skin" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q653197" start="14243" end="14247" title="rash" label="rash"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="14275" end="14287" title="hearing loss" label="hearing loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="14289" end="14308" title="high blood pressure" label="high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="14310" end="14316" title="stress (medicine)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q177190" start="14322" end="14339" title="sleep disturbance" label="sleep disturbance"/>
<link wikidata="Q408089" start="14341" end="14348" title="Mercury poisoning" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087172" start="14368" end="14390" title="developmental disorder" label="developmental deficits"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="14407" end="14417" title="neurology" label="neurologic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="14470" end="14503" title="Health effects of air pollution" label="diseases induced by air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q110315" start="14611" end="14615" title="Lead poisoning" label="Lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215775" start="14626" end="14638" title="Toxic metal" label="heavy metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="14752" end="14763" title="radioactive" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q187661" start="14779" end="14784" title="Carcinogen" label="cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="14785" end="14791" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q727096" start="14796" end="14808" title="birth defect" label="birth defect"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="15280" end="15291" title="environment (biophysical)" label="environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q689027" start="15325" end="15363" title="Environmental Science &amp;amp; Technology" label="Environmental Science &amp;amp; Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q961310" start="15438" end="15458" title="planetary boundaries" label="planetary boundaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304799" start="15554" end="15570" title="Biomagnification" label="Biomagnification"/>
<link wikidata="Q105789" start="15614" end="15626" title="heavy metals" label="heavy metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053008" start="15645" end="15658" title="trophic level" label="trophic level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="15720" end="15734" title="Carbon dioxide" label="Carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q855711" start="15751" end="15770" title="ocean acidification" label="ocean acidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="15870" end="15884" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="15896" end="15910" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="15952" end="15968" title="Invasive species" label="Invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="16010" end="16022" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q190334" start="16080" end="16091" title="allelopathy" label="allelopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45767" start="16188" end="16203" title="competition (biology)" label="competitiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q424418" start="16207" end="16221" title="Nitrogen oxide" label="Nitrogen oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="16260" end="16269" title="fertiliser" label="fertilise"/>
<link wikidata="Q169994" start="16333" end="16337" title="Smog" label="Smog"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="16413" end="16427" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298060" start="16459" end="16477" title="tropospheric ozone" label="tropospheric ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="16578" end="16586" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775153" start="16595" end="16603" title="food web" label="food web"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="16607" end="16621" title="Sulfur dioxide" label="Sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q424418" start="16626" end="16640" title="nitrogen oxide" label="nitrogen oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q40178" start="16652" end="16661" title="acid rain" label="acid rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="16679" end="16681" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="16745" end="16751" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q929380" start="16868" end="16892" title="environmental management" label="environmental management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745938" start="16922" end="16931" title="emission standard" label="emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057706" start="16936" end="16945" title="effluents" label="effluents"/>
<link wikidata="Q45701" start="17002" end="17007" title="waste" label="waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174091" start="17022" end="17037" title="overconsumption" label="overconsumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="17181" end="17192" title="environment (biophysical)" label="environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q319970" start="17249" end="17267" title="waste minimization" label="waste minimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484056" start="17327" end="17343" title="land development" label="land development"/>
<link wikidata="Q6432882" start="17345" end="17367" title="Low-impact development (Canada/US)" label="low impact development"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358090" start="17413" end="17425" title="urban runoff" label="urban runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156854" start="17428" end="17434" title="Policy" label="Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="17436" end="17439" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q581950" start="17468" end="17489" title="life-cycle assessment" label="life-cycle assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="17499" end="17508" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524235" start="17645" end="17653" title="global governance" label="globally"/>
<link wikidata="Q28797" start="17677" end="17684" title="applied science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156854" start="17685" end="17691" title="policy" label="policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q388791" start="17723" end="17729" title="Group decision-making" label="inform"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17810" end="17839" title="Global Framework on Chemicals" label="Global Framework on Chemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="17916" end="17920" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q132580" start="18111" end="18120" title="Recycling" label="Recycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q846574" start="18123" end="18130" title="Reuse" label="Reusing"/>
<link wikidata="Q319970" start="18133" end="18151" title="Waste minimisation" label="Waste minimisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317119" start="18154" end="18164" title="Environmental mitigation" label="Mitigating"/>
<link wikidata="Q212254" start="18190" end="18197" title="Compost" label="Compost"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="18215" end="18236" title="Air pollution" label="Air pollution control"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562744" start="18240" end="18250" title="Green wall" label="Green wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q60767354" start="18254" end="18264" title="Smog tower" label="Smog Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q25386891" start="18268" end="18284" title="Thermal oxidiser" label="Thermal oxidizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q816441" start="18287" end="18301" title="Bioremediation" label="Bioremediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345503" start="18304" end="18327" title="Dust collector" label="Dust collection systems"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18331" end="18340" title="Dust collector#Types of baghouses" label="Baghouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q633570" start="18344" end="18352" title="Cyclonic separation" label="Cyclones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326895" start="18356" end="18382" title="Electrostatic precipitator" label="Electrostatic precipitator"/>
<link wikidata="Q943331" start="18386" end="18394" title="Scrubber" label="Scrubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841336" start="18399" end="18420" title="Baffle spray scrubber" label="Baffle spray scrubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198905" start="18424" end="18447" title="Cyclonic spray scrubber" label="Cyclonic spray scrubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4422580" start="18451" end="18475" title="Ejector venturi scrubber" label="Ejector venturi scrubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804559" start="18479" end="18506" title="Mechanically aided scrubber" label="Mechanically aided scrubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533616" start="18510" end="18521" title="Spray tower" label="Spray tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990022" start="18525" end="18537" title="Wet scrubber" label="Wet scrubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q221275" start="18540" end="18556" title="Sewage treatment" label="Sewage treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q150330" start="18560" end="18573" title="Sedimentation (water treatment)" label="Sedimentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36333" start="18597" end="18625" title="Activated sludge" label="Activated sludge biotreaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000546" start="18688" end="18702" title="Aerated lagoon" label="Aerated lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376406" start="18707" end="18727" title="Constructed wetlands" label="Constructed wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592216" start="18759" end="18790" title="Industrial wastewater treatment" label="Industrial wastewater treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q296153" start="18794" end="18817" title="API oil-water separator" label="API oil-water separator"/>
<link wikidata="Q864323" start="18822" end="18831" title="Biofilter" label="Biofilter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028063" start="18836" end="18859" title="Dissolved air flotation" label="Dissolved air flotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236022" start="18869" end="18904" title="Powdered activated carbon treatment" label="Powdered activated carbon treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q559573" start="18908" end="18923" title="Ultrafiltration" label="Ultrafiltration"/>
<link wikidata="Q360958" start="18926" end="18948" title="Vapor recovery" label="Vapor recovery systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q283180" start="18951" end="18967" title="Phytoremediation" label="Phytoremediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="19036" end="19049" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q275372" start="19187" end="19198" title="externality" label="externality"/>
<link wikidata="Q275372" start="19902" end="19917" title="Cost externalization" label="externalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q294240" start="19974" end="19987" title="public safety" label="public safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q14785280" start="20579" end="20602" title="marginal abatement cost" label="marginal abatement cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q145590" start="20783" end="20793" title="Blacksmith Institute" label="Pure Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q337724" start="21024" end="21041" title="Lead–acid battery" label="Lead–acid battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="21054" end="21060" title="Mining" label="Mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084299" start="21065" end="21086" title="extractive metallurgy" label="extractive metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q883633" start="21089" end="21102" title="Lead smelting" label="Lead smelting"/>
<link wikidata="Q211578" start="21105" end="21112" title="Tanning (leather)" label="Tanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746365" start="21115" end="21131" title="Artisanal mining" label="Artisanal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q152810" start="21134" end="21142" title="Landfill" label="Landfill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662100" start="21146" end="21161" title="Industrial park" label="Industrial park"/>
<link wikidata="Q207652" start="21165" end="21182" title="Chemical industry" label="Chemical industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="21185" end="21198" title="Manufacturing" label="Manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164991" start="21201" end="21207" title="Dyeing" label="Dyeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039145" start="21230" end="21272" title="Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy" label="Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486670" start="21277" end="21282" title="GRAIN" label="GRAIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q16879561" start="21576" end="21614" title="List of causes of death by rate" label="of the top contributors to human death"/>
<link wikidata="Q466707" start="21795" end="21802" title="utility" label="utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q753291" start="22289" end="22312" title="environmental economics" label="environmental economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="22566" end="22573" title="welfare spending" label="welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300947" start="22692" end="22703" title="social cost" label="social cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q382444" start="22812" end="22825" title="marginal cost" label="marginal cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q842271" start="22864" end="22880" title="marginal benefit" label="marginal benefit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852035" start="23118" end="23122" title="Years of potential life lost" label="YPLL"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="23569" end="23580" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q4402708" start="23836" end="23842" title="demand" label="demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q622657" start="24074" end="24088" title="market failure" label="market failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="24249" end="24255" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q931921" start="24260" end="24273" title="Pigouvian tax" label="Pigouvian tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q288401" start="24285" end="24295" title="carbon tax" label="carbon tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q8348417" start="24301" end="24314" title="Emissions trading" label="cap and trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="24369" end="24382" title="Air pollution" label="Air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="24444" end="24461" title="prehistoric times" label="prehistoric times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="24493" end="24497" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q13174856" start="24570" end="24574" title="soot" label="soot"/>
<link wikidata="Q193057" start="24752" end="24759" title="forging" label="forging"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621708" start="24880" end="24901" title="List of glaciers in Greenland" label="glaciers in Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="25128" end="25141" title="Edward I of England" label="King Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="25175" end="25187" title="mineral coal" label="mineral coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="25207" end="25213" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440267" start="25276" end="25284" title="Seacoal" label="sea-coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q177463" start="25380" end="25388" title="charcoal" label="charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q625376" start="25599" end="25612" title="water quality" label="water quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q546233" start="25631" end="25642" title="Great Stink" label="Great Stink"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="25650" end="25656" title="River Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573031" start="25703" end="25725" title="London sewerage system" label="London sewerage system"/>
<link wikidata="Q386191" start="25772" end="25789" title="population growth" label="population growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="25957" end="25963" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q76520" start="25996" end="26008" title="August Bebel" label="August Bebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q156849" start="26045" end="26050" title="sewerage" label="sewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="26198" end="26213" title="Imperial Germany" label="Imperial German"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="26734" end="26747" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="26856" end="26863" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="26868" end="26878" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635158" start="27051" end="27072" title="Progressive Era" label="progressive reformers"/>
<link wikidata="Q185716" start="27305" end="27311" title="manure" label="manure"/>
<link wikidata="Q169994" start="27487" end="27491" title="smog" label="smog"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="27519" end="27530" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="27673" end="27699" title="United States Department of the Interior" label="Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134745" start="27763" end="27783" title="Donora, Pennsylvania" label="Donora, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q913640" start="27993" end="28011" title="Great Smog of 1952" label="Great Smog of 1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q474044" start="28117" end="28136" title="radioactive fallout" label="radioactive fallout"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130457" start="28337" end="28358" title="Clean Air Act 1956" label="Clean Air Act of 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047682" start="28499" end="28516" title="Noise Control Act" label="Noise Control Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978744" start="28522" end="28535" title="Clean Air Act (United States)" label="Clean Air Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978742" start="28541" end="28556" title="Clean Water Act" label="Clean Water Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972479" start="28566" end="28599" title="National Environmental Policy Act" label="National Environmental Policy Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q211171" start="28664" end="28667" title="Polychlorinated biphenyl" label="PCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="28683" end="28695" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="28721" end="28724" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="EPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11087111" start="28828" end="28834" title="Polychlorinated dibenzodioxins" label="dioxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872409" start="28852" end="28862" title="Love Canal" label="Love Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q180388" start="28897" end="28904" title="Waste disposal" label="dumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912344" start="28908" end="28927" title="Valley of the Drums" label="Valley of the Drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504641" start="28941" end="28950" title="Superfund (environmental law)" label="Superfund"/>
<link wikidata="Q896586" start="29027" end="29037" title="brownfield" label="brownfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="29060" end="29073" title="city planning" label="city planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q817114" start="29122" end="29147" title="radioactive contamination" label="radioactive contamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q827202" start="29223" end="29236" title="Lake Karachay" label="Lake Karachay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427926" start="29252" end="29272" title="Worldwatch Institute" label="Worldwatch Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="29356" end="29368" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q175802" start="29401" end="29412" title="Ozyorsk, Chelyabinsk Oblast" label="Chelyabinsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="29488" end="29503" title="Nuclear weapons" label="Nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="29534" end="29542" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="29730" end="29743" title="radioactivity" label="radioactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="29801" end="29814" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q840847" start="29934" end="29951" title="Three Mile Island accident" label="Three Mile Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q486" start="29953" end="29962" title="Chernobyl disaster" label="Chernobyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q171178" start="29968" end="29977" title="Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster" label="Fukushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q521306" start="30103" end="30120" title="Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty" label="test ban treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q473794" start="30230" end="30241" title="Amoco Cadiz" label="Amoco Cadiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="30270" end="30278" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q129029" start="30295" end="30310" title="Bhopal disaster" label="Bhopal disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="30576" end="30590" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q912951" start="30616" end="30644" title="persistent organic pollutant" label="persistent organic pollutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q205944" start="30701" end="30705" title="PBDE" label="PBDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q23305225" start="30711" end="30715" title="Fluorocarbon" label="PFCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q864231" start="30956" end="30971" title="bioaccumulation" label="bioaccumulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q638904" start="31033" end="31060" title="Great Pacific Garbage Patch" label="Great Pacific Garbage Patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112270" start="31099" end="31117" title="North Pacific Gyre" label="North Pacific Gyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823974" start="31272" end="31279" title="5 Gyres" label="5 Gyres"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839919" start="31382" end="31395" title="microplastics" label="microplastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="31686" end="31702" title="environmentalism" label="environmentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189417" start="31711" end="31733" title="environmental movement" label="environmental movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q574376" start="31765" end="31796" title="human impact on the environment" label="human impact on the environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q864360" start="31814" end="31838" title="Biological contamination" label="Biological contamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q124842282" start="31841" end="31867" title="Brain health and pollution" label="Brain health and pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q21167512" start="31870" end="31892" title="Chemical hazards" label="Chemical contamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q932068" start="31895" end="31915" title="Environmental health" label="Environmental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491965" start="31918" end="31938" title="Environmental racism" label="Environmental racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687720" start="31941" end="31971" title="Hazardous Substances Data Bank" label="Hazardous Substances Data Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q331439" start="31974" end="31988" title="Human overpopulation" label="Overpopulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q124842282" start="31991" end="32024" title="Neuroplastic effects of pollution" label="Neuroplastic effects of pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q362695" start="32027" end="32066" title="Pollutant release and transfer register" label="Pollutant release and transfer register"/>
<link wikidata="Q819131" start="32069" end="32092" title="Polluter pays principle" label="Polluter pays principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225741" start="32095" end="32121" title="Pollution haven hypothesis" label="Pollution haven hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309670" start="32124" end="32178" title="Regulation of greenhouse gases under the Clean Air Act" label="Regulation of greenhouse gases under the Clean Air Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q62956908" start="32187" end="32211" title="Max Liboiron" label="Pollution is Colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353204" start="32220" end="32234" title="Sacrifice zone" label="Sacrifice zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="32338" end="32367" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="32600" end="32645" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830419" start="32652" end="32676" title="Toxics Release Inventory" label="Toxics Release Inventory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643385" start="32681" end="32713" title="Superfund Basic Research Program" label="Superfund Basic Research Program"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24873" wikidata="Q649107" url="?curid=24873" title="Polearm">
<text>A polearm or pole weapon is a close combat weapon in which the main fighting part of the weapon is fitted to the end of a long shaft, typically of wood, extending the user&#x27;s effective range and striking power. Polearms are predominantly melee weapons, with a subclass of spear-like designs fit for thrusting and/or throwing. Because many polearms were adapted from agricultural implements or other fairly abundant tools, and contained relatively little metal, they were cheap to make and readily available. When belligerents in warfare had a poorer class who could not pay for dedicated military weapons, they would often appropriate tools as cheap weapons. The cost of training was comparatively low, since these conscripted farmers had spent most of their lives using these &quot;weapons&quot; in the fields. This made polearms the favoured weapon of peasant levies and peasant rebellions the world over.

Polearms can be divided into three broad categories: those designed for extended reach and thrusting tactics used in pike square or phalanx combat; those designed to increase leverage (due to hands moving freely on a pole) to maximize angular force (swinging tactics) against cavalry; and those designed for throwing tactics used in skirmish line combat. The hook on weapons such as the halberd was used for pulling or grappling tactics, especially against horsemen. Because of their versatility, high effectiveness and low cost, there were many variants of polearm, which were much-used weapons on the battlefield. Bills, picks, dane axes, spears, glaives, guandaos, pudaos, pikes, poleaxes, halberds, harpoons, sovnyas, tridents, naginatas, bardiches, war scythes, and lances are all varieties of polearms.

Polearms were common weapons on post-classical battlefields of Asia and Europe. Their range and impact force made them effective weapons against armoured warriors on horseback, unhorsing the opponent and to some extent effective to penetrate armour. The Renaissance saw a plethora of varieties. Polearms in modern times are largely constrained to ceremonial military units such as the Papal Swiss Guard or Yeomen of the Guard, or traditional martial arts. Chinese martial arts in particular have preserved a wide variety of weapons and techniques.

==Classification difficulties==

The classification of polearms can be difficult, and European weapon classifications in particular can be confusing. This can be due to a number of factors, including uncertainty in original descriptions, changes in weapons or nomenclature through time, mistranslation of terms, and the well-meaning inventiveness of later experts. For example, the word &quot;halberd&quot; is also used to translate the Chinese ji and also a range of medieval Scandinavian weapons as described in sagas, such as the atgeir. As well, all polearms developed from three early tools (the axe, the scythe, and the knife) and one weapon, the spear.

In the words of the arms expert Ewart Oakeshott,

While men-at-arms may have been armed with custom designed military weapons, militias were often armed with whatever was available. These may or may not have been mounted on poles and described by one of more names. The problems with precise definitions can be inferred by a contemporary description of Royalist infantry which were engaged in the Battle of Birmingham (1643) during the first year of English Civil War (in the early modern period). The infantry regiment that accompanied Prince Rupert&#x27;s cavalry were armed:

==List of polearms==

===Ancient polearms===
====European====
* Dory (spear)
* Falx
* Kontos (weapon)
* Rhomphaia
* Sarissa
* Trident
* Xyston

====Asian====
=====Dagger-axe=====

The &quot;dagger-axe&quot; (Chinese: 戈; pinyin: gē; Wade–Giles: ko; sometimes confusingly translated &quot;halberd&quot;) is a type of weapon that was in use from Shang dynasty until at least Han dynasty China. It consists of a dagger-shaped blade made of bronze (or later iron) mounted by the tang to a perpendicular wooden shaft: a common Bronze Age infantry weapon, also used by charioteers. Some dagger axes include a spear-point. There is a (rare) variant type with a divided two-part head, consisting of the usual straight blade and a scythe-like blade. Other rarities include archaeology findings with two or sometimes three blades stacked in line on top of a pole, but were generally thought as ceremonial polearms. Though the weapon saw frequent use in ancient China, the use of the dagger-axe decreased dramatically after the Qin and Han dynasties. The &quot;ji&quot; combines the dagger axe with a spear. By the post-classical Chinese dynasties, with the decline of chariot warfare, the use of the dagger-axe was almost nonexistent.

=====&quot;Ji&quot;=====

The &quot;ji&quot; (Chinese: 戟) was created by combining the dagger-axe with a spear. It was used as a military weapon at least as early as the Shang dynasty until the end of the Northern and Southern dynasties.

=====&quot;Ngao&quot;=====

The &quot;ngao&quot; or &quot;ngau&quot; (ง้าว,ของ้าว) is a Thai polearm that was traditionally used by elephant-riding infantry and is still used by practitioners of &quot;krabi krabong&quot;. Known in Malay as a &quot;dap&quot;, it consists of a wooden shaft with a curved blade fashioned onto the end, and is similar in design to the Korean &quot;woldo&quot;. Usually, it also had a hook (ขอ) between the blade and shaft used for commanding the elephant. The elephant warrior used the &quot;ngao&quot; like a blade from atop an elephant or horse during battle.

===Post-classical polearms===
====European====
=====Dane axe=====

The Dane axe is a weapon with a heavy crescent-shaped head mounted on a haft in length. Originally a Viking weapon, it was adopted by the Anglo-Saxons and Normans in the 11th century, spreading through Europe in the 12th and 13th centuries. Variants of this basic weapon continued in use in Scotland and Ireland into the 16th century. A form of &#x27;long axe&#x27;.

=====Sparth axe=====
In the 13th century, variants on the Danish axe are seen. Described in English as a &quot;sparth&quot; (from the Old Norse ) or &quot;pale-axe&quot;, the weapon featured a larger head with broader blade, the rearward part of the crescent sweeping up to contact (or even be attached to) the haft.

In Ireland, this axe was known as a &quot;sparr axe&quot;. Originating in either Western Scotland or Ireland, the &quot;sparr&quot; was widely used by the galloglass. Although sometimes said to derive from the Irish for a joist or beam, a more likely definition is as a variant of sparth. Although attempts have been made to suggest that the sparr had a distinctive shaped head, illustrations and surviving weapons show there was considerable variation and the distinctive feature of the weapon was its long haft.

=====Fauchard=====

A fauchard is a type of polearm which was used in medieval Europe from the 11th through the 14th centuries. The design consists of a curved blade put atop a pole. The blade bears a moderate to strong curve along its length; however, unlike a bill or &quot;guisarme&quot;, the cutting edge is on the convex side.

=====Guisarme=====

A &quot;guisarme&quot; (sometimes &quot;gisarme&quot;, &quot;giserne&quot; or &quot;bisarme&quot;) is a polearm used in Europe primarily between 1000 and 1400. It was used primarily to dismount knights and horsemen. Like most polearms it was developed by peasants by combining hand tools with long poles, in this case by putting a pruning hook onto a spear shaft. While early designs were simply a hook on the end of a long pole, later designs implemented a small reverse spike on the back of the blade. Eventually weapon makers incorporated the usefulness of the hook in a variety of different polearms and &quot;guisarme&quot; became a catch-all for any weapon that included a hook on the blade. Ewart Oakeshott has proposed an alternative description of the weapon as a crescent shaped socketed axe.

=====Glaive=====

A &quot;glaive&quot; is a polearm consisting of a single-edged tapering blade similar in shape to a modern kitchen knife on the end of a pole. The blade was around long, on the end of a pole long. However, instead of having a tang like a sword or naginata, the blade is affixed in a socket-shaft configuration similar to an axe head, both the blade and shaft varying in length. Illustrations in the 13th century Maciejowski Bible show a short staffed weapon with a long blade used by both infantry and cavalry. Occasionally glaive blades were created with a small hook or spike on the reverse side. Such glaives are named glaive-guisarme.

=====Voulge=====

A &quot;voulge&quot; (occasionally called a &quot;pole cleaver&quot;) is a curved blade attached to a pole by binding the lower two-thirds of the blade to the side of the pole, to form a sort of axe. Looks very similar to a glaive.

=====Svärdstav=====

A &quot;svärdstav&quot; (literally sword-staff) is a Swedish medieval polearm that consists of a two-edged sword blade attached to a staff. The illustrations often show the weapon being equipped with sword-like quillons. The illustrations sometimes show a socket mount and reinforcing langets being used, but sometimes they are missing; it is possible this weapon was sometimes manufactured by simply attaching an old sword blade onto a long pole on its tang, not unlike a &quot;naginata&quot;.

====Asian====
=====Naginata=====

A &quot;naginata&quot; (なぎなた or 薙刀) is a Japanese polearm that was traditionally used by members of the samurai class. A naginata consists of a wood shaft with a curved blade on the end. Usually it also had a sword-like guard (tsuba) between the blade and shaft. It was mounted with a tang and held in place with a pin or pins, rather than going over the shaft using a socket. The naginata was developed based on the hoko yari from the 1st millennium AD or the tachi from the late Heian period (794ー1185). It was appreciated by samurai who fought on foot as a weapon to maintain optimal distance from the enemy in close combat, but after the Onin War in the 15th century, large groups of mobilized infantry called asigaru began to equip themselves with yari (spear) yumi (longbow) and tanegashima (gun), making naginata and tachi (long sword) obsolete on the battlefield and often replaced with nagamaki and katana. From the Edo period, naginata has been recognized as a martial art practiced by women in the samurai class.

=====Yari=====

A &quot;yari&quot; (やり or 槍) is a Japanese polearm that was traditionally used by members of the samurai class. There are various types of yari, which have different names depending on the shape of the blade attached to the end of the wooden shaft. For example, &#x27;Jumonji yari&#x27; refers to a yari with a cross-shaped blade, and &#x27;Sasaho yari&#x27; refers to a yari with a blade shaped like a sasa leaf. During the Sengoku period, a large group of ashigaru in a formation used yari as one of their main weapons and exerted tremendous power on the battlefield. Honda Tadakatsu a vassal of Tokugawa Ieyasu, had gained a reputation as a master of one of the Three Great Spears of Japan, Tonbokiri.

=====Woldo=====

The Korean &quot;woldo&quot; was a variation of the Chinese guan dao. It was originally used by the post-classical Shilla warriors. Wielding the woldo took time due to its weight, but in the hands of a trained soldier, the woldo was a fearsome, agile weapon famous for enabling a single soldier to cut down ranks of infantrymen. The woldo was continually in use for the military in Korea with various modifications made over the decades. Unlike the Chinese with the guan dao, the Koreans found the woldo unwieldy on horseback, and thus, it was specifically tailored to the needs of infantrymen. The Joseon government implemented rigorous training regimens requiring soldiers to be proficient with swordsmanship, and the use of the woldo. Though it was never widely used as a standard weapon, the woldo saw action on many fronts and was considered by many Korean troops to be a versatile weapon. Recently, a contemporary revival in various martial arts in Korea has brought interest into the application of the woldo and its history.

=====Guandao=====

A &quot;guandao&quot; or &quot;kwan tou&quot; is a type of Chinese polearm. In Chinese, it is properly called a &quot;yanyue dao&quot; (偃月刀), &#x27;reclining moon blade&#x27;. Some believed it comes from the late Han Era and was supposedly used by the late Eastern Han dynasty general Guan Yu, but archaeological findings have shown that Han dynasty armies generally used straight, single-edged blades, and curved blades came several centuries later. There is no reason to believe their polearms had curved blades on them. Besides, historical accounts of the Three Kingdoms era describe Guan Yu thrusting his opponents down (probably with a spear-like polearm) in battle, not cutting them down with a curved blade. The guandao is also known as the &quot;chun qiu da dao&quot; (&#x27;spring autumn great knife&#x27;), again probably related to the depiction of Guan Yu in the Ming dynasty novel &quot;Romance of the Three Kingdoms&quot;, but possibly a Ming author&#x27;s invention. It consists of a heavy blade mounted atop a wooden or metal pole with a pointed metal counter weight used for striking and stabbing on the opposite end.

The blade is very deep and curved on its face, resembling a Chinese saber, or dao. Variant designs include rings along the length of the straight back edge, as found in the nine-ring guandao. The &quot;elephant&quot; guandao&#x27;s tip curls into a rounded spiral, while the dragon head guandao features a more ornate design.

======Podao======

A &quot;podao&quot;, &#x27;long-handled sabre&#x27;, is a Chinese polearm, also known as the zhan ma dao (&#x27;horsecutter sabre&#x27;), which has a lighter blade and a ring at the end. A podao is an infantryman&#x27;s weapon, mainly used for cutting the legs off oncoming charging horses to bring down the riders.

======Fangtian ji======
In the Song dynasty, several weapons were referred to as &quot;ji&quot;, but they were developed from spears, not from ancient &quot;ji&quot;. One variety was called the &quot;qinglong ji&quot; (), and had a spear tip with a crescent blade on one side. Another type was the &quot;fangtian ji&quot; (), which had a spear tip with crescent blades on both sides. They had multiple means of attack: the side blade or blades, the spear tip, plus often a rear counterweight that could be used to strike the opponent. The way the side blades were fixed to the shaft differs, but usually there were empty spaces between the pole and the side blade. The wielder could strike with the shaft, with the option of then pulling the weapon back to hook with a side blade; or, he could slap his opponent with the flat side of the blade to knock him off his horse.

======Barcha and Ballam======

The &quot;Barcha&quot; is a type of lance with a wooden handle, once common in South Asia in the 16th century and was popular weapon of choice in the Maratha Empire. Variations of the &quot;barcha&quot; is the hand-like &quot;Karpa Barcha&quot; and the serpent-like &quot;Nagni Barcha&quot;. Another variant included the &quot;Ballam&quot;, a javelin effective at bringing down infantry and cavalry at a distance. &quot;Nagni Barcha&quot; is identified as the weapon used by the Sikh warrior Bhai Bachittar Singh to kill a drunken Mughal war elephant at the Siege of Lohgarh.

===Later polearms===
====European====
* Bardiche
* Bec de Corbin
* Bill
* Bohemian earspoon
* Brandistock
* Lochaber axe
* Lucerne hammer
* Military fork
* Partisan
* Pike
* Ranseur
* Scottish polearms
* Sovnya
* Spetum
* Viking halberd
* War scythe
=====Corseque=====

A &quot;corseque&quot; has a three-bladed head on a haft which, like the partisan, is similar to the winged spear or spetum in the later Middle Ages. It was popular in Europe in the 16th and 17th centuries. Surviving examples have a variety of head forms but there are two main variants, one with the side blades (known as flukes or wings) branching from the neck of the central blade at 45 degrees, the other with hooked blades curving back towards the haft. The corseque is usually associated with the rawcon, ranseur and runka. Another possible association is with the &quot;three-grayned staff&quot; listed as being in the armoury of Henry VIII in 1547 (though the same list also features 84 rawcons, suggesting the weapons were not identical in 16th century English eyes). Another modern term used for particularly ornate-bladed corseques is the &quot;chauve-souris&quot;.

=====Halberd=====

A &quot;halberd&quot; (or &quot;Swiss voulge&quot;) is a two-handed polearm that came to prominent use during the 14th and 15th centuries but has continued in use as a ceremonial weapon to the present day. First recorded as &quot;hellembart&quot; in 1279, the word &quot;halberd&quot; possibly comes from the German words &quot;Halm&quot; (staff) or &quot;Helm&quot; (helmet), and &quot;Barte&quot; (axe). The halberd consists of an axe blade topped with a spike mounted on a long shaft. It always has a hook or thorn on the back side of the axe blade for grappling mounted combatants. Early forms are very similar in many ways to certain forms of voulge, while 16th century and later forms are similar to the pollaxe. The Swiss were famous users of the halberd in the medieval and renaissance eras, with various cantons evolving regional variations of the basic form.

=====Poleaxe=====

In the 14th century, the basic long axe gained an armour-piercing spike on the back and another on the end of the haft for thrusting. This is similar to the pollaxe of 15th century. The poleaxe emerged in response to the need for a weapon that could penetrate plate armour and featured various combinations of an axe-blade, a back-spike and a hammer. It was the favoured weapon for men-at-arms fighting on foot into the sixteenth century.

==See also==
* Spear
* Stick-fighting

==References==
==External links==

* Spotlight: The Medieval Poleaxe by Alexi Goranov
* (As used in &quot;NetHack&quot;.)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q649107" start="2" end="9" title="Polearm" label="polearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q649107" start="13" end="24" title="Polearm" label="pole weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102423" start="30" end="42" title="close combat" label="close combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494647" start="370" end="392" title="Garden tool" label="agricultural implement"/>
<link wikidata="Q571132" start="1030" end="1041" title="pike square" label="pike square"/>
<link wikidata="Q180335" start="1045" end="1052" title="phalanx" label="phalanx"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="1189" end="1196" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481555" start="1246" end="1259" title="Skirmisher" label="skirmish line"/>
<link wikidata="Q185623" start="1300" end="1307" title="halberd" label="halberd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619960" start="1529" end="1533" title="Bill (weapon)" label="Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142182" start="1536" end="1540" title="horseman&amp;#x27;s pick" label="pick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269770" start="1543" end="1551" title="dane axe" label="dane axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q44475" start="1554" end="1559" title="spear" label="spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080039" start="1562" end="1568" title="glaive" label="glaive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191706" start="1571" end="1578" title="guandao" label="guandao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227496" start="1581" end="1586" title="Podao" label="pudao"/>
<link wikidata="Q220016" start="1589" end="1593" title="Pike (weapon)" label="pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573577" start="1596" end="1603" title="poleaxe" label="poleaxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q185623" start="1606" end="1613" title="halberd" label="halberd"/>
<link wikidata="Q207574" start="1616" end="1623" title="harpoon" label="harpoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q774924" start="1626" end="1632" title="sovnya" label="sovnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q271628" start="1635" end="1642" title="trident" label="trident"/>
<link wikidata="Q546116" start="1645" end="1653" title="naginata" label="naginata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195310" start="1656" end="1664" title="bardiche" label="bardiche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724691" start="1667" end="1677" title="war scythe" label="war scythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003053" start="1684" end="1689" title="lance" label="lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234117" start="1755" end="1769" title="post-classical history" label="post-classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q171504" start="2114" end="2125" title="Swiss Guard" label="Swiss Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q431122" start="2129" end="2148" title="Yeomen of the Guard" label="Yeomen of the Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11417" start="2165" end="2177" title="martial arts" label="martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="2179" end="2199" title="Chinese martial arts" label="Chinese martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368004" start="2717" end="2719" title="Ji (halberd)" label="ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="2749" end="2760" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180494" start="2786" end="2790" title="saga" label="saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813150" start="2805" end="2811" title="atgeir" label="atgeir"/>
<link wikidata="Q39397" start="2873" end="2876" title="axe" label="axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q130912" start="2882" end="2888" title="scythe" label="scythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q32489" start="2898" end="2903" title="knife" label="knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q44475" start="2925" end="2930" title="spear" label="spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q709512" start="2965" end="2980" title="Ewart Oakeshott" label="Ewart Oakeshott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889457" start="2989" end="3000" title="men-at-arms" label="men-at-arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870622" start="3330" end="3350" title="Battle of Birmingham" label="Battle of Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="3383" end="3400" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q76930" start="3470" end="3490" title="Prince Rupert" label="Prince Rupert&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q384589" start="3576" end="3588" title="Dory (spear)" label="Dory (spear)"/>
<link wikidata="Q605140" start="3591" end="3595" title="Falx" label="Falx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129265" start="3598" end="3613" title="Kontos (weapon)" label="Kontos (weapon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q382982" start="3616" end="3625" title="Rhomphaia" label="Rhomphaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q271113" start="3628" end="3635" title="Sarissa" label="Sarissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q271628" start="3638" end="3645" title="Trident" label="Trident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326525" start="3648" end="3654" title="Xyston" label="Xyston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355195" start="3986" end="3990" title="tang (tools)" label="tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q49696" start="4942" end="4973" title="Northern and Southern dynasties" label="Northern and Southern dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079789" start="5177" end="5190" title="krabi krabong" label="krabi krabong"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="5207" end="5212" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="5737" end="5743" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="5774" end="5786" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="5791" end="5798" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612845" start="6477" end="6487" title="gallowglass" label="galloglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q838811" start="7445" end="7452" title="peasant" label="peasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q44475" start="7541" end="7546" title="spear" label="spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q330946" start="8084" end="8089" title="blade" label="blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q599312" start="8119" end="8132" title="kitchen knife" label="kitchen knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355195" start="8238" end="8242" title="tang (tools)" label="tang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8634" end="8649" title="glaive-guisarme" label="glaive-guisarme"/>
<link wikidata="Q938509" start="8725" end="8732" title="cleaver" label="cleaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080039" start="8894" end="8900" title="glaive" label="glaive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438900" start="8959" end="8970" title="swordstaff" label="sword-staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355832" start="9135" end="9143" title="quillons" label="quillons"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="9558" end="9565" title="samurai" label="samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q371798" start="9681" end="9686" title="tsuba" label="tsuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5878224" start="9871" end="9880" title="hoko yari" label="hoko yari"/>
<link wikidata="Q120676" start="9915" end="9920" title="tachi" label="tachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q193292" start="9935" end="9947" title="Heian period" label="Heian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q385676" start="10096" end="10104" title="Onin War" label="Onin War"/>
<link wikidata="Q725340" start="10168" end="10175" title="asigaru" label="asigaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q749087" start="10207" end="10211" title="yari" label="yari"/>
<link wikidata="Q918499" start="10220" end="10224" title="yumi" label="yumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q358057" start="10239" end="10250" title="Tanegashima (gun)" label="tanegashima"/>
<link wikidata="Q120676" start="10278" end="10283" title="tachi" label="tachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304426" start="10349" end="10357" title="nagamaki" label="nagamaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q172736" start="10362" end="10368" title="katana" label="katana"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="10379" end="10389" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322484" start="10898" end="10902" title="Sasa (plant)" label="sasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q204023" start="10920" end="10934" title="Sengoku period" label="Sengoku period"/>
<link wikidata="Q467417" start="11065" end="11080" title="Honda Tadakatsu" label="Honda Tadakatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q171977" start="11093" end="11108" title="Tokugawa Ieyasu" label="Tokugawa Ieyasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814039" start="11160" end="11187" title="Three Great Spears of Japan" label="Three Great Spears of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814033" start="11189" end="11198" title="Tonbokiri" label="Tonbokiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456" start="11333" end="11339" title="Silla" label="Shilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="11817" end="11823" title="Joseon" label="Joseon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="12528" end="12547" title="Eastern Han dynasty" label="Eastern Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q222797" start="12556" end="12563" title="Guan Yu" label="Guan Yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q70806" start="13171" end="13200" title="Romance of the Three Kingdoms" label="Romance of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="13223" end="13227" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q650169" start="13485" end="13488" title="Dao (Chinese sword)" label="dao"/>
<link wikidata="Q215605" start="13682" end="13688" title="Chinese dragon" label="dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465921" start="13846" end="13857" title="zhan ma dao" label="zhan ma dao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="14101" end="14113" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="15053" end="15063" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="15124" end="15138" title="Maratha Confederacy" label="Maratha Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="15453" end="15457" title="Sikh" label="Sikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179185" start="15458" end="15465" title="Nihang" label="warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q4900726" start="15471" end="15486" title="Bachittar Singh" label="Bachittar Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794346" start="15505" end="15511" title="Army of the Mughal Empire" label="Mughal"/>
<link wikidata="Q223694" start="15512" end="15524" title="war elephant" label="war elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q19882269" start="15532" end="15548" title="Battle of Lohgarh" label="Siege of Lohgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195310" start="15591" end="15599" title="Bardiche" label="Bardiche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930986" start="15602" end="15615" title="Bec de Corbin" label="Bec de Corbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619960" start="15618" end="15622" title="Bill (weapon)" label="Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938122" start="15625" end="15642" title="Bohemian earspoon" label="Bohemian earspoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9246099" start="15645" end="15656" title="Brandistock" label="Brandistock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1597621" start="15659" end="15671" title="Lochaber axe" label="Lochaber axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q29623" start="15674" end="15688" title="Lucerne hammer" label="Lucerne hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788767" start="15691" end="15704" title="Military fork" label="Military fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q125161" start="15707" end="15715" title="Partisan (weapon)" label="Partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q220016" start="15718" end="15722" title="Pike (weapon)" label="Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400675" start="15725" end="15732" title="Ranseur" label="Ranseur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438110" start="15735" end="15752" title="Scottish polearms" label="Scottish polearms"/>
<link wikidata="Q774924" start="15755" end="15761" title="Sovnya" label="Sovnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433772" start="15764" end="15770" title="Spetum" label="Spetum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929492" start="15773" end="15787" title="Viking halberd" label="Viking halberd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724691" start="15790" end="15800" title="War scythe" label="War scythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q125161" start="15894" end="15902" title="partisan (weapon)" label="partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433772" start="15938" end="15944" title="spetum" label="spetum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400675" start="16333" end="16340" title="ranseur" label="ranseur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578504" start="17367" end="17373" title="voulge" label="voulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573577" start="17429" end="17436" title="pollaxe (Polearm)" label="pollaxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311958" start="17532" end="17539" title="canton (administrative division)" label="cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573577" start="17765" end="17772" title="Pollaxe (Polearm)" label="pollaxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391846" start="17868" end="17880" title="plate armour" label="plate armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q44475" start="18063" end="18068" title="Spear" label="Spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690145" start="18071" end="18085" title="Stick-fighting" label="Stick-fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q856904" start="18193" end="18200" title="NetHack" label="NetHack"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24874" wikidata="Q396907" url="?curid=24874" title="PHD">
<text>PHD or PhD may refer to:

* Doctor of Philosophy (PhD), an academic qualification
==Comics==
* &quot;&quot;, a Korean comic series
* &quot;Piled Higher and Deeper&quot; or &quot;PhD Comics&quot;, a webcomic

==Music==
* Ph.D. (band), a 1980s British group
** &quot;Ph.D.&quot; (Ph.D. album)
* &quot;Ph.D.&quot; (Art Farmer album)
* &quot;PHD&quot;, a song on the album &quot;Tweekend&quot; by the Crystal Method

==Other uses==
* PHD finger, a protein sequence
* Harry Clever Field (IATA and FAA LID: PHD), a US airport

==See also==
* EGLN2 or PHD1, an enzyme
* EGLN1 or PHD2, an enzyme
* EGLN3 or PHD3, an enzyme
* Naval Surface Warfare Center Port Hueneme (NSWC PHD), California, US</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q396907" start="0" end="3" title="PHD" label="PHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q396907" start="7" end="10" title="PHD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="28" end="48" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="Doctor of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084690" start="139" end="162" title="Piled Higher and Deeper" label="Piled Higher and Deeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522084" start="220" end="232" title="Ph.D. (band)" label="Ph.D. (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618806" start="259" end="290" title="Ph.D. (Ph.D. album)" label="&amp;quot;Ph.D.&amp;quot; (Ph.D. album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16589872" start="293" end="329" title="Ph.D. (Art Farmer album)" label="&amp;quot;Ph.D.&amp;quot; (Art Farmer album)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="369" end="389" title="Tweekend#Track listing" label="&amp;quot;Tweekend&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119217" start="430" end="440" title="PHD finger" label="PHD finger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5667966" start="463" end="481" title="Harry Clever Field" label="Harry Clever Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q18048843" start="536" end="541" title="EGLN2" label="EGLN2"/>
<link wikidata="Q18041122" start="563" end="568" title="EGLN1" label="EGLN1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18048844" start="590" end="595" title="EGLN3" label="EGLN3"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981961" start="617" end="658" title="Naval Surface Warfare Center Port Hueneme" label="Naval Surface Warfare Center Port Hueneme"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24875" wikidata="Q7170598" url="?curid=24875" title="Personal jurisdiction">
<text>Personal jurisdiction is a court&#x27;s jurisdiction over the &quot;parties&quot;, as determined by the facts in evidence, which bind the parties to a lawsuit, as opposed to subject-matter jurisdiction, which is jurisdiction over the &quot;law&quot; involved in the suit. Without personal jurisdiction over a party, a court&#x27;s rulings or decrees cannot be enforced upon that party, except by comity; i.e., to the extent that the sovereign which has jurisdiction over the party allows the court to enforce them upon that party. A court that has &quot;personal&quot; jurisdiction has both the authority to rule on the law and facts of a suit and the power to enforce its decision upon a party to the suit. In some cases, territorial jurisdiction may also constrain a court&#x27;s reach, such as preventing hearing of a case concerning events occurring on foreign territory between two citizens of the home jurisdiction. A similar principle is that of standing or &quot;locus standi&quot;, which is the ability of a party to demonstrate to the court sufficient connection to and harm from the law or action challenged to support that party&#x27;s participation in the case.

==International principles==
Since there is no world government which all countries recognize to arbitrate disputes over jurisdiction, sovereign powers can find themselves in conflict over which is the more appropriate venue to hear a case, or which country&#x27;s laws should apply. These conflicts are sometimes resolved &quot;de facto&quot; by physical factors, such as which country has physical possession of a defendant or property, or sometimes by use of physical police or military force to seize people or property. A country with loose rule of law – for example an absolute monarchy with no independent judiciary – may arbitrarily choose to assert jurisdiction over a case without citing any particular justification. Such assertion can cause problems, such as encouraging other countries to take arbitrary actions over foreign citizens and property, or even provoking skirmishes or armed conflict.

In practice, many countries operate by one or another principle, either in written law or in practice, which communicate when the country will and will not assert jurisdiction:
* nationality principle – A country asserts jurisdiction over the conduct of its citizens, anywhere in the world.
* passive personality principle – A country asserts jurisdiction over acts committed against its citizens, anywhere in the world.
* protective principle – A country asserts jurisdiction over issues that affect its interests, such as conspiracies to overthrow its government, or resources critical to its economy (such as access to an international waterway)
* territorial principle – A country asserts jurisdiction over people, property, and events taking place on its own territory.
* treaty jurisdiction – An international treaty explicitly decides the issue.
* universal jurisdiction – A country asserts jurisdiction over certain acts committed by anyone, anywhere in the world. Usually reserved for exceptionally serious crimes, such as war crimes and crimes against humanity.

Different principles are applied by different countries, and different principles may be applied by the same country in different circumstances. Determination of whether or not a court has jurisdiction to hear a case is the first stage of a conflict of laws proceeding, potentially followed by choice of law to determine which jurisdiction&#x27;s laws apply. Executive prosecutorial authority and foreign policy also play a role in scope and practical impact of jurisdiction choices.

Any assertion of jurisdiction based on anything other than the territorial principle is known as extraterritorial jurisdiction. Prosecution of a case against an out-of-territory defendant is known as assertion of long-arm jurisdiction.

When a person commits a crime in a foreign country against the laws of that country, usually the host country is responsible for prosecution. The Vienna Convention on Consular Relations requires that the host country notify the foreign embassy, potentially allowing the foreign country to assist in legal defense and monitor conditions of detention. (Most countries protect their citizens against foreign powers in general.)

Foreign diplomats enjoy diplomatic immunity in many countries based on the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations or bilateral agreement, and foreign military personnel may be subject to the jurisdiction of their home country based on a status of forces agreement or Visiting Forces Agreement.

If a person is not physically present in the country which wishes to prosecute a case, that country may either wait until the person enters the national territory, or pursue extradition by legal or extralegal means, and with or without a general extradition treaty. Some countries (like China) prefer to prosecute their own citizens for crimes committed abroad rather than extradite them. Other countries defer to the host country.

When a crime is committed outside the territory of any country, such as in Antarctica, on watercraft in international waters, on aircraft in international airspace, and on spacecraft, jurisdiction is usually determined by the nationality of defendants or victims, or by the flag state of the vessel. This is determined by the admiralty law of the countries involved and in international agreements.

==History in English and U.S. law==

The concept of personal jurisdiction in English law has its origin in the idea that a monarch could not exercise power over persons or property located outside of his or her kingdom. To some degree, this was a &quot;de facto&quot; rule; the monarch&#x27;s men could not arrest people or seize property outside the kingdom without risking physical conflict with the soldiers and police of other kingdoms. Slowly this principle was incorporated into written law, but problems arose in cases where property owners could not be sued because they had left the kingdom or had died and therefore were not present within the kingdom at the time they were being sued. To solve this problem, the courts created another type of jurisdiction, called &quot;quasi in rem&quot;, that is, jurisdiction over the land itself, even if the person who owned the land was not in the country. However, this jurisdiction was limited to the settlement of debts owed by the owner of the land.

In the United States, the exercise of personal jurisdiction by a court must both comply with Constitutional limitations, and be authorized by a statute. In the United Kingdom, the exercise of personal jurisdiction does not need a statutory basis, since the United Kingdom does not have a written constitution.

==United States==
The intersection of American federalism and the rules and theories of jurisdiction inherited from the common law of England has resulted in a highly complex body of law respecting personal jurisdiction in the United States. These rules limit both state and federal courts in their ability to hear cases.

===Principles===

Three fundamentals of personal jurisdiction constrain the ability of courts in the United States to bind individuals or property to its decisions: consent, power, and notice.

====Consent====
The United States legal system is an adversarial system. Civil suits cannot be initiated by third parties, but must be filed by the aggrieved party who seeks redress. Generally, the action is initiated in the jurisdiction where the event occurred, where the defendant can be served or where the parties have agreed to have the case located. The filing of a complaint or &quot;prayer for relief&quot; is a voluntary action by the person aggrieved, and as a necessity of this request, the person seeking relief consents to be bound by the judgment of the court. The doctrine of consent is also extended to defendants who attend and litigate actions without challenging the court&#x27;s personal jurisdiction. Consent may also derive from a pre-litigation agreement by the parties, such as a forum selection clause in a contract (not to be confused with a choice of law clause). Doctrines such as claim preclusion prevent re-litigation of failed complaints in alternative forums. Claim preclusion does not, however, prevent the refiling of a claim that was filed in a court that did not have personal jurisdiction over the defendant.

====Power====
In cases where a defendant challenges personal jurisdiction, a court may still exercise personal jurisdiction if it has independent power to do so. This power is founded in the inherent nature of the State: sovereignty over secular affairs within its territory.

====Notice====
The Fifth and Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution preserve the right of the individual to &quot;due process&quot;. Due process requires that notice be given in a manner &quot;reasonably calculated&quot; to inform a party of the action affecting him. Originally, &quot;Notice&quot; (and the power of the State) was often exercised more forcefully, the defendant in a civil case sometimes being seized and brought before the court under a writ of &quot;capias ad respondendum&quot;. Notice in such a case is inferred from consent of the defendant to go with the officer. Nowadays, when exercising power over an individual without consent, notice is usually given by formal delivery of suitable papers to the defendant (service of process).

===Historical background: territorial jurisdiction===
Originally, jurisdiction over parties in the United States was determined by strict interpretation of the geographic boundaries of each state&#x27;s sovereign power. In &quot;Pennoyer v. Neff&quot;, the Supreme Court discussed that though each state ceded certain powers (e.g. foreign relations) to the Federal Government or to no entity at all (e.g. the powers that are eliminated by the protections of the bill of rights), the states retained all the other powers of sovereignty, including the exclusive power to regulate the affairs of individuals and property within its territory. Necessarily following from this, one state&#x27;s exercise of power could not infringe upon the sovereignty of another state. Thus, Constitutional limitations applied to the validity of state court judgments.

Three types of jurisdiction developed, collectively termed territorial jurisdiction because of their reliance upon territorial control: &quot;in personam&quot; jurisdiction, &quot;in rem&quot; jurisdiction, and &quot;quasi in rem&quot; jurisdiction. Some sources refer to all three types of territorial jurisdiction as personal jurisdiction, since most actions against property (in rem jurisdiction) bear, in the end, upon the rights and obligations of persons. Others continue to recognize the traditional distinction between personal jurisdiction and jurisdiction over property, even after &quot;Shaffer v. Heitner&quot; (discussed below).

In personam jurisdiction referred to jurisdiction over a particular person (or entity, such as a company). &quot;In personam&quot; jurisdiction, if held by a state court, permitted that court to rule upon any case over which it otherwise held jurisdiction. Under territorial jurisdiction, pure &quot;in personam&quot; jurisdiction could only be established by serving notice upon the individual while that individual was within the territory of the state.

In rem jurisdiction referred to jurisdiction over a particular piece of property, most commonly real estate or land. Certain cases, notably government suits for unpaid property taxes, proceed not against an individual but against their property directly. Under territorial jurisdiction, &quot;in rem&quot; jurisdiction could be exercised by the courts of a state by seizing the property in question. Since an actual tract of land could not literally be brought into a courtroom as a person could, this was effected by giving notice upon the real property itself. &quot;In rem&quot; jurisdiction was thus supported by the assumption that the owner of that property, having a concrete economic interest in the property, had a duty to look after the affairs of their property, and would be notified of the pending case by such seizure. &quot;In rem&quot; jurisdiction was limited to deciding issues regarding the specific property in question.

Quasi in rem jurisdiction involved the seizure of property held by the individual against whom the suit was brought, and attachment of that property to the case in question. This form of territorial jurisdiction developed from the rationale of &quot;in rem&quot; jurisdiction, namely that seizure of the property was reasonably calculated to inform an individual of the proceedings against them.

Once a valid judgment was obtained against an individual, however, the plaintiff could pursue recovery against the assets of the defendant regardless of their location, as other states were obligated by the Full Faith and Credit Clause of the Constitution to recognize such a judgment (i.e. had ceded their power to refuse comity to fellow states of the Union). Violations by a rogue state could be checked via collateral attack: when a plaintiff sought recovery against a defendant&#x27;s assets in another state, that state could refuse judgment on the grounds that the original judgment was invalid.

====Difficulties in applying &quot;Pennoyer&quot; territorial jurisdiction====
Following &quot;Pennoyer&quot;, extreme applications of territorial jurisdiction revealed imperfections in the doctrine, and societal changes began to present new problems as the United States&#x27; national economy became more integrated by increasingly efficient multi-state transportation technology and business practices.

While determining the physical location of an individual for the purposes of &quot;in personam&quot; jurisdiction was easy enough, applying the same principle to non-physical entities became difficult. Courts were presented with the question of where a company was present and amenable to service for the purpose of &quot;in personam&quot; jurisdiction over the company.

Extension of &quot;quasi in rem&quot; jurisdiction led to extreme results that threatened the justification for the jurisdiction. Bearing in mind that territorial jurisdiction existed in a pre-industrial society where transportation across the country was difficult, long, and potentially treacherous, and consider the hypothetical wherein Alice owes Bob money, and Bob owes Carmel, a resident of New York, money. Carmel seeks to recover on Bob&#x27;s debt to Carmel, however cannot do so because Bob avoids Carmel by traveling to California. Alice, however, happens to travel through New York. Carmel serves notice upon Alice, and attaches Alice&#x27;s debt to Bob (considered to be property within the state) to the proceeding. Alice can no more certainly provide notice to Bob in California than Carmel could provide, and the transient and involuntary exposure of Bob to being hauled into court in New York by this attachment seems to erode the original rationale of &quot;quasi in rem&quot; jurisdiction.

The US Supreme Court largely abolished the exercise of jurisdiction on the basis of &quot;quasi in rem&quot; in &quot;Shaffer v. Heitner&quot;, except in exceptional circumstances, which sometimes would arise while dealing with real property such as land, and when the owner of the land cannot be found.

===Modern Constitutional doctrine: &quot;International Shoe&quot; doctrine===
In the modern era, the reach of personal jurisdiction has been expanded by judicial re-interpretation and legislative enactments. Under the new and current doctrine, a state court may only exert personal jurisdiction over an individual or entity with &quot;sufficient minimal contacts&quot; with the forum state such that the particular suit &quot;does not offend &#x27;traditional notions of fair play and justice.&#x27;&quot; The &quot;minimum contacts&quot; must be purposefully directed towards the state by the defendant. This jurisdiction was initially limited to the particulars of the &quot;International Shoe Co. v. Washington&quot; holding, that is to jurisdictional inquiries regarding companies, but was soon extended to apply to all questions of personal jurisdiction. When an individual or entity has no &quot;minimum contacts&quot; with a forum State, the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment prohibits that State from acting against that individual, or entity. The lack of &quot;minimum contacts&quot; with the owner of property also constitutionally prohibits action against that property (in rem jurisdiction) even when the property is located within the forum state.

What constitutes sufficient &quot;minimum contacts&quot; has been delineated in numerous cases which followed the &quot;International Shoe&quot; decision. For example, in &quot;Hanson v. Denckla&quot;, the Court proclaimed the &quot;unilateral activity of those who claim some relationship with a nonresident cannot satisfy the requirement of contact with the forum State. The application of that rule will vary with the nature and quality of the defendant&#x27;s activity, but it is essential in each case that there be some act by which the defendant purposefully avails itself of the privilege of conducting activities within the forum State, thus invoking the benefits and protection of its laws.&quot;

The additional requirement of &quot;&#x27;purposeful availment&#x27; ensures that a defendant will not be hauled into a jurisdiction solely as a result of &#x27;random,&#x27; &#x27;fortuitous,&#x27; or &#x27;attenuated&#x27; contacts, or of the unilateral activity of another party or a third person&quot;. Jurisdiction may, however, be exercised, under some circumstances, even though the defendant never physically entered the forum state.

In addition, the claim must arise from those contacts that the defendant had with the forum state. In addition to the minimum contacts test asserted in &quot;International Shoe&quot;, the assertion of specific personal jurisdiction must be reasonable. The Court in &quot;World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson&quot; asserted a five-part test for determining if the assertion of personal jurisdiction in a forum state was reasonable. This test considers: the burden on the defendant from litigating in the forum state; the interest of the forum state in having the case adjudicated there; the interests of the plaintiff in adjudicating in the forum state; the interests of the inter-state judiciary—that is, that a court&#x27;s assertion of personal jurisdiction over an out-of state defendant would not overreach and preempt the interests and judicial sovereignty of another state; and the interests in preserving the judicial integrity of the several states—that is, ensuring one court&#x27;s assertion of personal jurisdiction over an out of state defendant does not violate the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.

In the 2011 case of &quot;Goodyear Dunlop Tires Operations, S. A. v. Brown&quot;, Justice Ginsburg held that for the exercise of general jurisdiction in personam, the defendant must be &quot;essentially at home.&quot; This applies when the defendant has contacts with the forum state, but the claim that arises is not related to those contacts. For example, if Harrods (a British store) sets up an office in California to export and sell goods there, and because of that someone gets injured, it would be amenable to suit in California for that injury. On the other hand, if someone is injured in Harrods in London and for some reason finds that California law is more favorable and decides to sue in California, the suit would not be maintainable under general jurisdiction since the contacts that Harrods has are not continuous and systematic, and they are not &quot;essentially at home&quot; in California. However, there would be personal jurisdiction. By selling shoes in California, Harrod&#x27;s purposefully availed itself of the benefits of California law and the lawsuit arose out of that contact.

This holding was reaffirmed in 2014 by the Supreme Court in &quot;Daimler AG v. Bauman&quot;.

===Statutory authorization===
While the &quot;Pennoyer&quot; and later &quot;Shoe&quot; doctrines limit the maximum power of a sovereign state, courts must also have authorization to exercise the state&#x27;s power; an individual state may choose to not grant its courts the full power that the state is Constitutionally permitted to exercise. Similarly, the jurisdiction of Federal courts (other than the Supreme Court) are statutorily-defined. Thus, a particular exercise of personal jurisdiction must not only be permitted by Constitutional doctrine, but be statutorily authorized as well. Under &quot;Pennoyer&quot;, personal jurisdiction was authorized by statutes authorizing service of process, but these methods of service often lacked because they required such service to be effected by officers of the state, such as sheriffs – an untenable method for defendants located outside of the state but still subject to jurisdiction due to their contacts with the state. Subsequent to the development of the &quot;Shoe&quot; Doctrine, states have enacted so-called long-arm statutes, by which courts in a state can serve process and thus exercise jurisdiction over a party located outside the state. The doctrine of International Shoe applies only in cases where there is no presence in the forum state. If the defendant is present and served within the state, then tag jurisdiction applies. 

===Tag jurisdiction===
In Burnham v. Superior Court of California, the Supreme Court case addressing whether a state court may, consistent with the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, exercise personal jurisdiction over a non-resident of the state who is served with process while temporarily visiting the state. 

For example, if A committed a tort in State X. He is sued by B and B serves him with process just before he leaves State X before the flight took off, the service would be valid and State X would have jurisdiction over A. If A did not comply with the final judgement passed by the courts of State X, B could enforce that judgement in the state where A resides under the full faith and credit clause of the US Constitution. There was one case where a defendant was served while the airplane was in the air over the forum State, and the federal district court held that this was valid service, since at law the territory of a state includes the airspace above the State. 

===Relationship to venue===
Venue and personal jurisdiction are closely related for practical purposes. A lawyer should usually perform joint analysis of personal jurisdiction and venue issues. Personal jurisdiction is largely a constitutional requirement, though also shaped by state long-arm statutes and Rule 4 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, while venue is purely statutory.

It is possible for either venue or personal jurisdiction to preclude a court from hearing a case. Consider these examples:

* &quot;Personal jurisdiction is the limiting factor&quot;. In &quot;World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson&quot;, the plaintiffs sued, in an Oklahoma state court, an automobile dealership based in New York for damages from an explosion that occurred on June 11, 1977, as the plaintiffs drove the car through Oklahoma. Had the plaintiffs sued in U.S. federal court sited in Oklahoma, personal jurisdiction against the dealership would have been unavailable, as the dealership did not have minimum contacts with the forum state. Venue, however, would have been proper under , the general federal venue statute, because Oklahoma was a state &quot;in which a substantial part of the events or omissions giving rise to the claim occurred&quot;. However, the United States Supreme Court found that the defendants (World-Wide Volkswagen Corp.) did not have the minimum contacts with Oklahoma necessary to create personal jurisdiction there. [World-Wide Volkswagen was one of the &quot;defendants&quot;; the case cited is WWV Corp (original defendant) v. Woodson (the Oklahoma state judge) ]
* &quot;Venue is the limiting factor&quot;. Suppose Dale resides in California. Peter from Nevada wants to sue Dale for battery which Dale committed against Peter in California. Peter knows Dale is going to a week-long conference in South Carolina. Peter realizes that Dale would settle a suit that would take place in South Carolina, because it would be too expensive to defend. So, during Dale&#x27;s trip, Peter serves Dale with process for an action filed in South Carolina federal court. The federal court has personal jurisdiction, based on Dale&#x27;s presence in South Carolina at the time process was served (transient service of process). However, venue is improper under § 1391.

==See also==
*Long-arm jurisdiction
*Personal jurisdiction over international defendants in the United States
*Prerogative
*&quot;Sui iuris&quot;

==References==
==External links==
* [ Official Website of the Supreme Court of the United States]</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7170598" start="0" end="21" title="Personal jurisdiction" label="Personal jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911328" start="174" end="201" title="subject-matter jurisdiction" label="subject-matter jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114769" start="396" end="402" title="comity" label="comity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982983" start="723" end="747" title="territorial jurisdiction" label="territorial jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q683979" start="953" end="961" title="standing (law)" label="standing"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="1505" end="1513" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="1722" end="1733" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="1751" end="1768" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25855" start="2711" end="2733" title="international waterway" label="international waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q117672" start="2737" end="2758" title="territorial principle" label="territorial principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="2902" end="2908" title="treaty" label="treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q928801" start="2941" end="2963" title="universal jurisdiction" label="universal jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="3118" end="3127" title="war crime" label="war crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="3133" end="3156" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733207" start="3400" end="3416" title="conflict of laws" label="conflict of laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q367926" start="3453" end="3466" title="choice of law" label="choice of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q181648" start="3556" end="3570" title="foreign policy" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422267" start="3741" end="3770" title="extraterritorial jurisdiction" label="extraterritorial jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q621334" start="3857" end="3878" title="long-arm jurisdiction" label="long-arm jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q700855" start="4027" end="4066" title="Vienna Convention on Consular Relations" label="Vienna Convention on Consular Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q753022" start="4331" end="4350" title="diplomatic immunity" label="diplomatic immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q659717" start="4382" end="4423" title="Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations" label="Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q931855" start="4547" end="4573" title="status of forces agreement" label="status of forces agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936318" start="4577" end="4602" title="Visiting Forces Agreement" label="Visiting Forces Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q210603" start="4779" end="4790" title="extradition" label="extradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="5113" end="5123" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q25855" start="5142" end="5162" title="international waters" label="international waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q272730" start="5179" end="5201" title="international airspace" label="international airspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="5210" end="5220" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591841" start="5312" end="5322" title="flag state" label="flag state"/>
<link wikidata="Q382113" start="5364" end="5377" title="admiralty law" label="admiralty law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="6536" end="6550" title="U.S. Constitution" label="Constitutional"/>
<link wikidata="Q980036" start="6792" end="6811" title="federalism in the United States" label="American federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="6874" end="6884" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801315" start="7324" end="7342" title="adversarial system" label="adversarial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473147" start="8076" end="8098" title="forum selection clause" label="forum selection clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104041" start="8140" end="8160" title="choice of law clause" label="choice of law clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062245" start="8181" end="8197" title="res judicata" label="claim preclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062245" start="8264" end="8280" title="res judicata" label="Claim preclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="8640" end="8651" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q240340" start="8715" end="8720" title="Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="8725" end="8779" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035339" start="9181" end="9203" title="capias ad respondendum" label="capias ad respondendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q230981" start="9447" end="9465" title="service of process" label="service of process"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163485" start="9698" end="9714" title="Pennoyer v. Neff" label="Pennoyer v. Neff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982983" start="10378" end="10402" title="territorial jurisdiction" label="territorial jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847000" start="10461" end="10472" title="in personam" label="in personam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16849084" start="10499" end="10505" title="in rem" label="in rem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269485" start="10536" end="10548" title="quasi in rem" label="quasi in rem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508034" start="12965" end="13013" title="Full Faith and Credit Clause" label="Full Faith and Credit Clause of the Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114769" start="13081" end="13087" title="comity" label="comity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062245" start="13169" end="13186" title="collateral attack" label="collateral attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7461016" start="15269" end="15287" title="Shaffer v. Heitner" label="Shaffer v. Heitner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053193" start="16133" end="16169" title="International Shoe Co. v. Washington" label="International Shoe Co. v. Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312127" start="16405" end="16423" title="Due Process Clause" label="Due Process Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q5651238" start="16908" end="16925" title="Hanson v. Denckla" label="Hanson v. Denckla"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035280" start="18153" end="18191" title="World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson" label="World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583750" start="19038" end="19086" title="Goodyear Dunlop Tires Operations, S. A. v. Brown" label="Goodyear Dunlop Tires Operations, S. A. v. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q332474" start="19373" end="19380" title="Harrods" label="Harrods"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148317" start="20187" end="20207" title="Daimler AG v. Bauman" label="Daimler AG v. Bauman"/>
<link wikidata="Q621334" start="21285" end="21301" title="long-arm statute" label="long-arm statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999762" start="21640" end="21679" title="Burnham v. Superior Court of California" label="Burnham v. Superior Court of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920475" start="22640" end="22645" title="Venue (law)" label="Venue"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="22718" end="22724" title="lawyer" label="lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035280" start="23194" end="23232" title="World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson" label="World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="23267" end="23275" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="23323" end="23331" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q179057" start="23352" end="23361" title="explosion" label="explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="23422" end="23425" title="car" label="car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="24301" end="24307" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="24443" end="24457" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q621334" start="24915" end="24936" title="Long-arm jurisdiction" label="Long-arm jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170599" start="24938" end="25010" title="Personal jurisdiction over international defendants in the United States" label="Personal jurisdiction over international defendants in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758424" start="25012" end="25023" title="Prerogative" label="Prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q685333" start="25031" end="25040" title="Sui iuris" label="Sui iuris"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24877" wikidata="Q853067" url="?curid=24877" title="Pell's equation">
<text>Pell&#x27;s equation, also called the Pell–Fermat equation, is any Diophantine equation of the form formula_1 where &quot;n&quot; is a given positive nonsquare integer, and integer solutions are sought for &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot;. In Cartesian coordinates, the equation is represented by a hyperbola; solutions occur wherever the curve passes through a point whose &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; coordinates are both integers, such as the trivial solution with &quot;x&quot; = 1 and &quot;y&quot; = 0. Joseph Louis Lagrange proved that, as long as &quot;n&quot; is not a perfect square, Pell&#x27;s equation has infinitely many distinct integer solutions. These solutions may be used to accurately approximate the square root of &quot;n&quot; by rational numbers of the form &quot;x&quot;/&quot;y&quot;.

This equation was first studied extensively in India starting with Brahmagupta, who found an integer solution to formula_2 in his &quot;Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta&quot; circa 628. Bhaskara II in the 12th century and Narayana Pandit in the 14th century both found general solutions to Pell&#x27;s equation and other quadratic indeterminate equations. Bhaskara II is generally credited with developing the &quot;chakravala&quot; method, building on the work of Jayadeva and Brahmagupta. Solutions to specific examples of Pell&#x27;s equation, such as the Pell numbers arising from the equation with &quot;n&quot; = 2, had been known for much longer, since the time of Pythagoras in Greece and a similar date in India. William Brouncker was the first European to solve Pell&#x27;s equation. The name of Pell&#x27;s equation arose from Leonhard Euler mistakenly attributing Brouncker&#x27;s solution of the equation to John Pell.

==History==
As early as 400 BC in India and Greece, mathematicians studied the numbers arising from the &quot;n&quot; = 2 case of Pell&#x27;s equation,
formula_3
and from the closely related equation
formula_4
because of the connection of these equations to the square root of 2. Indeed, if &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; are positive integers satisfying this equation, then &quot;x&quot;/&quot;y&quot; is an approximation of . The numbers &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; appearing in these approximations, called side and diameter numbers, were known to the Pythagoreans, and Proclus observed that in the opposite direction these numbers obeyed one of these two equations. Similarly, Baudhayana discovered that &quot;x&quot; = 17, &quot;y&quot; = 12 and &quot;x&quot; = 577, &quot;y&quot; = 408 are two solutions to the Pell equation, and that 17/12 and 577/408 are very close approximations to the square root of 2.

Later, Archimedes approximated the square root of 3 by the rational number 1351/780. Although he did not explain his methods, this approximation may be obtained in the same way, as a solution to Pell&#x27;s equation.
Likewise, Archimedes&#x27;s cattle problem — an ancient word problem about finding the number of cattle belonging to the sun god Helios — can be solved by reformulating it as a Pell&#x27;s equation. The manuscript containing the problem states that it was devised by Archimedes and recorded in a letter to Eratosthenes, and the attribution to Archimedes is generally accepted today.

Around AD 250, Diophantus considered the equation
formula_5
where &quot;a&quot; and &quot;c&quot; are fixed numbers, and &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; are the variables to be solved for.
This equation is different in form from Pell&#x27;s equation but equivalent to it.
Diophantus solved the equation for (&quot;a&quot;, &quot;c&quot;) equal to (1, 1), (1, −1), (1, 12), and (3, 9). Al-Karaji, a 10th-century Persian mathematician, worked on similar problems to Diophantus.

In Indian mathematics, Brahmagupta discovered that
formula_6
a form of what is now known as Brahmagupta&#x27;s identity. Using this, he was able to &quot;compose&quot; triples formula_7 and formula_8 that were solutions of formula_9, to generate the new triples
: formula_10 and formula_11
Not only did this give a way to generate infinitely many solutions to formula_12 starting with one solution, but also, by dividing such a composition by formula_13, integer or &quot;nearly integer&quot; solutions could often be obtained. For instance, for formula_14, Brahmagupta composed the triple (10, 1, 8) (since formula_15) with itself to get the new triple (192, 20, 64). Dividing throughout by 64 (&quot;8&quot; for formula_16 and formula_17) gave the triple (24, 5/2, 1), which when composed with itself gave the desired integer solution (1151, 120, 1). Brahmagupta solved many Pell&#x27;s equations with this method, proving that it gives solutions starting from an integer solution of formula_9 for &quot;k&quot; = ±1, ±2, or ±4.

The first general method for solving the Pell&#x27;s equation (for all &quot;N&quot;) was given by Bhāskara II in 1150, extending the methods of Brahmagupta. Called the chakravala (cyclic) method, it starts by choosing two relatively prime integers formula_19 and formula_20, then composing the triple formula_21 (that is, one which satisfies formula_22) with the trivial triple formula_23 to get the triple formula_24, which can be scaled down to
formula_25

When formula_26 is chosen so that formula_27 is an integer, so are the other two numbers in the triple. Among such formula_26, the method chooses one that minimizes formula_29 and repeats the process. This method always terminates with a solution. Bhaskara used it to give the solution &quot;x&quot; = , &quot;y&quot; =  to the &quot;N&quot; = 61 case.

Several European mathematicians rediscovered how to solve Pell&#x27;s equation in the 17th century. Pierre de Fermat found how to solve the equation and in a 1657 letter issued it as a challenge to English mathematicians. In a letter to Kenelm Digby, Bernard Frénicle de Bessy said that Fermat found the smallest solution for &quot;N&quot; up to 150 and challenged John Wallis to solve the cases &quot;N&quot; = 151 or 313. Both Wallis and William Brouncker gave solutions to these problems, though Wallis suggests in a letter that the solution was due to Brouncker.

John Pell&#x27;s connection with the equation is that he revised Thomas Branker&#x27;s translation of Johann Rahn&#x27;s 1659 book &quot;Teutsche Algebra&quot; into English, with a discussion of Brouncker&#x27;s solution of the equation. Leonhard Euler mistakenly thought that this solution was due to Pell, as a result of which he named the equation after Pell.

The general theory of Pell&#x27;s equation, based on continued fractions and algebraic manipulations with numbers of the form formula_30 was developed by Lagrange in 1766–1769. In particular, Lagrange gave a proof that the Brouncker–Wallis algorithm always terminates.

==Solutions==
===Fundamental solution via continued fractions===

Let formula_31 denote the unique sequence of convergents of the regular continued fraction for formula_32. Then the pair of positive integers formula_33 solving Pell&#x27;s equation and minimizing &quot;x&quot; satisfies &quot;x&quot;1 = &quot;hi&quot; and &quot;y&quot;1 = &quot;ki&quot; for some &quot;i&quot;. This pair is called the &quot;fundamental solution&quot;. The sequence of integers formula_34 in the regular continued fraction of formula_32 is always eventually periodic. It can be written in the form formula_36, where formula_37 denotes integer floor, and the sequence formula_38 repeats infinitely. Moreover, the tuple formula_39 is palindromic, the same left-to-right or right-to-left. 

The fundamental solution is
formula_40

The computation time for finding the fundamental solution using the continued fraction method, with the aid of the Schönhage–Strassen algorithm for fast integer multiplication, is within a logarithmic factor of the solution size, the number of digits in the pair formula_33. However, this is not a polynomial-time algorithm because the number of digits in the solution may be as large as , far larger than a polynomial in the number of digits in the input value &quot;n&quot;.

===Additional solutions from the fundamental solution===
Once the fundamental solution is found, all remaining solutions may be calculated algebraically from
formula_42
expanding the right side, equating coefficients of formula_32 on both sides, and equating the other terms on both sides. This yields the recurrence relations
formula_44
formula_45

===Concise representation and faster algorithms===
Although writing out the fundamental solution (&quot;x&quot;1, &quot;y&quot;1) as a pair of binary numbers may require a large number of bits, it may in many cases be represented more compactly in the form
formula_46
using much smaller integers &quot;a&quot;&quot;i&quot;, &quot;b&quot;&quot;i&quot;, and &quot;c&quot;&quot;i&quot;.

For instance, Archimedes&#x27; cattle problem is equivalent to the Pell equation formula_47, the fundamental solution of which has digits if written out explicitly. However, the solution is also equal to
formula_48
where
formula_49 
and formula_50 and formula_51 only have 45 and 41 decimal digits respectively.

Methods related to the quadratic sieve approach for integer factorization may be used to collect relations between prime numbers in the number field generated by and to combine these relations to find a product representation of this type. The resulting algorithm for solving Pell&#x27;s equation is more efficient than the continued fraction method, though it still takes more than polynomial time. Under the assumption of the generalized Riemann hypothesis, it can be shown to take time
formula_52
where &quot;N&quot; = log &quot;n&quot; is the input size, similarly to the quadratic sieve.

===Quantum algorithms===
Hallgren showed that a quantum computer can find a product representation, as described above, for the solution to Pell&#x27;s equation in polynomial time. Hallgren&#x27;s algorithm, which can be interpreted as an algorithm for finding the group of units of a real quadratic number field, was extended to more general fields by Schmidt and Völlmer.

==Example==
As an example, consider the instance of Pell&#x27;s equation for &quot;n&quot; = 7; that is,
formula_53
The continued fraction of formula_54 has the form formula_55. Since the period has length formula_56, which is an even number, the convergent producing the fundamental solution is obtained by truncating the continued fraction right before the end of the first occurrence of the period: formula_57.

The sequence of convergents for the square root of seven are


Applying the recurrence formula to this solution generates the infinite sequence of solutions

:(1, 0); (8, 3); (127, 48); (2024, 765); (32257, 12192); (514088, 194307); (8193151, 3096720); (130576328, 49353213); ... (sequence (&quot;x&quot;) and (&quot;y&quot;) in OEIS)

For the Pell&#x27;s equation
formula_58
the continued fraction formula_59 has a period of odd length. For this the fundamental solution is obtained by truncating the continued fraction right before the second occurrence of the period formula_60. Thus, the fundamental solution is formula_61.

The smallest solution can be very large. For example, the smallest solution to formula_62 is (, ), and this is the equation which Frenicle challenged Wallis to solve. Values of &quot;n&quot; such that the smallest solution of formula_63 is greater than the smallest solution for any smaller value of &quot;n&quot; are
: 1, 2, 5, 10, 13, 29, 46, 53, 61, 109, 181, 277, 397, 409, 421, 541, 661, 1021, 1069, 1381, 1549, 1621, 2389, 3061, 3469, 4621, 4789, 4909, 5581, 6301, 6829, 8269, 8941, 9949, ... .
(For these records, see for &quot;x&quot; and for &quot;y&quot;.)

==List of fundamental solutions of Pell&#x27;s equations==
The following is a list of the fundamental solution to formula_64 with &quot;n&quot; ≤ 128. When &quot;n&quot; is an integer square, there is no solution except for the trivial solution (1, 0). The values of &quot;x&quot; are sequence and those of &quot;y&quot; are sequence in OEIS.



==Connections==
Pell&#x27;s equation has connections to several other important subjects in mathematics.

===Algebraic number theory===
Pell&#x27;s equation is closely related to the theory of algebraic numbers, as the formula
formula_65
is the norm for the ring formula_66 and for the closely related quadratic field formula_67. Thus, a pair of integers formula_68 solves Pell&#x27;s equation if and only if formula_69 is a unit with norm 1 in formula_66. Dirichlet&#x27;s unit theorem, that all units of formula_66 can be expressed as powers of a single fundamental unit (and multiplication by a sign), is an algebraic restatement of the fact that all solutions to the Pell&#x27;s equation can be generated from the fundamental solution. The fundamental unit can in general be found by solving a Pell-like equation but it does not always correspond directly to the fundamental solution of Pell&#x27;s equation itself, because the fundamental unit may have norm −1 rather than 1 and its coefficients may be half integers rather than integers.

===Chebyshev polynomials===
Demeyer mentions a connection between Pell&#x27;s equation and the Chebyshev polynomials:
If formula_72 and formula_73 are the Chebyshev polynomials of the first and second kind respectively, then these polynomials satisfy a form of Pell&#x27;s equation in any polynomial ring formula_74, with formula_75:
formula_76
Thus, these polynomials can be generated by the standard technique for Pell&#x27;s equations of taking powers of a fundamental solution:
formula_77
It may further be observed that if formula_78 are the solutions to any integer Pell&#x27;s equation, then formula_79 and formula_80.

===Continued fractions===
A general development of solutions of Pell&#x27;s equation formula_64 in terms of continued fractions of formula_32 can be presented, as the solutions &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; are approximates to the square root of &quot;n&quot; and thus are a special case of continued fraction approximations for quadratic irrationals.

The relationship to the continued fractions implies that the solutions to Pell&#x27;s equation form a semigroup subset of the modular group. Thus, for example, if &quot;p&quot; and &quot;q&quot; satisfy Pell&#x27;s equation, then
formula_83
is a matrix of unit determinant. Products of such matrices take exactly the same form, and thus all such products yield solutions to Pell&#x27;s equation. This can be understood in part to arise from the fact that successive convergents of a continued fraction share the same property: If &quot;p&quot;&quot;k&quot;−1/&quot;q&quot;&quot;k&quot;−1 and &quot;p&quot;&quot;k&quot;/&quot;q&quot;&quot;k&quot; are two successive convergents of a continued fraction, then the matrix
formula_84
has determinant (−1)&quot;k&quot;.

===Smooth numbers===
Størmer&#x27;s theorem applies Pell equations to find pairs of consecutive smooth numbers, positive integers whose prime factors are all smaller than a given value. As part of this theory, Størmer also investigated divisibility relations among solutions to Pell&#x27;s equation; in particular, he showed that each solution other than the fundamental solution has a prime factor that does not divide &quot;n&quot;.

==The negative Pell&#x27;s equation==
The negative Pell&#x27;s equation is given by
formula_85
and has also been extensively studied. It can be solved by the same method of continued fractions and has solutions if and only if the period of the continued fraction has odd length. A necessary (but not sufficient) condition for solvability is that &quot;n&quot; is not divisible by 4 or by a prime of form 4&quot;k&quot; + 3. Thus, for example, &quot;x&quot;2 − 3 &quot;y&quot;2 = −1 is never solvable, but &quot;x&quot;2 − 5 &quot;y&quot;2 = −1 may be.

The first few numbers &quot;n&quot; for which &quot;x&quot;2 − &quot;n y&quot;2 = −1 is solvable are 1 (with only one trivial solution) and
:2, 5, 10, 13, 17, 26, 29, 37, 41, 50, 53, 58, 61, 65, 73, 74, 82, 85, 89, 97, ... 
with infinitely many solutions. The solutions of the negative Pell&#x27;s equation for formula_86 are:

Let formula_87. The proportion of square-free &quot;n&quot; divisible by &quot;k&quot; primes of the form 4&quot;m&quot; + 1 for which the negative Pell&#x27;s equation is solvable is at least &quot;α&quot;. When the number of prime divisors is not fixed, the proportion is given by 1 − &quot;α.&quot;

If the negative Pell&#x27;s equation does have a solution for a particular &quot;n&quot;, its fundamental solution leads to the fundamental one for the positive case by squaring both sides of the defining equation:
formula_88
implies
formula_89

As stated above, if the negative Pell&#x27;s equation is solvable, a solution can be found using the method of continued fractions as in the positive Pell&#x27;s equation. The recursion relation works slightly differently however. Since formula_90, the next solution is determined in terms of formula_91 whenever there is a match, that is, when formula_92 is odd. The resulting recursion relation is (modulo a minus sign, which is immaterial due to the quadratic nature of the equation)
formula_93
formula_94
which gives an infinite tower of solutions to the negative Pell&#x27;s equation (except for formula_95).

== Generalized Pell&#x27;s equation ==
The equation
formula_96
is called the generalized (or general) Pell&#x27;s equation. The equation formula_97 is the corresponding Pell&#x27;s resolvent. A recursive algorithm was given by Lagrange in 1768 for solving the equation, reducing the problem to the case formula_98. Such solutions can be derived using the continued-fractions method as outlined above.

If formula_99 is a solution to formula_100 and formula_101 is a solution to formula_102 then formula_103 such that formula_104 is a solution to formula_105, a principle named the &quot;multiplicative principle&quot;. The solution formula_103 is called a &quot;Pell multiple&quot; of the solution formula_99.

There exists a finite set of solutions to formula_105 such that every solution is a Pell multiple of a solution from that set. In particular, if formula_109 is the fundamental solution to formula_97, then each solution to the equation is a Pell multiple of a solution formula_68 with formula_112 and formula_113, where formula_114.

If &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; are positive integer solutions to the Pell&#x27;s equation with formula_115, then formula_116 is a convergent to the continued fraction of formula_117.

Solutions to the generalized Pell&#x27;s equation are used for solving certain Diophantine equations and units of certain rings, and they arise in the study of SIC-POVMs in quantum information theory.

The equation
formula_118
is similar to the resolvent formula_64 in that if a minimal solution to formula_120 can be found, then all solutions of the equation can be generated in a similar manner to the case formula_121. For certain formula_122, solutions to formula_64 can be generated from those with formula_120, in that if formula_125 then every third solution to formula_120 has formula_127 even, generating a solution to formula_64.

== Notes ==
==References==
==Further reading==
*
* 

==External links==
* 
* Pell equation solver (&quot;n&quot; has no upper limit)
* Pell equation solver (&quot;n&quot; &lt; 1010, can also return the solution to &quot;x&quot;2 − &quot;ny&quot;2 = ±1, ±2, ±3, and ±4)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q853067" start="0" end="20" title="Pell&amp;#x27;s equation" label="Pell&amp;#x27;s equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q853067" start="38" end="58" title="Pell&amp;#x27;s equation" label="Pell–Fermat equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q905896" start="67" end="87" title="Diophantine equation" label="Diophantine equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q50705" start="150" end="159" title="Square number" label="nonsquare"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="160" end="167" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="242" end="263" title="Cartesian coordinates" label="Cartesian coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q165301" start="298" end="307" title="hyperbola" label="hyperbola"/>
<link wikidata="Q945127" start="448" end="464" title="Triviality (mathematics)" label="trivial solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q80222" start="511" end="532" title="Joseph Louis Lagrange" label="Joseph Louis Lagrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q50705" start="580" end="594" title="square number" label="perfect square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227061" start="707" end="718" title="Diophantine approximation" label="approximate"/>
<link wikidata="Q134237" start="723" end="734" title="square root" label="square root"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="755" end="770" title="rational number" label="rational number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279571" start="858" end="866" title="Indian mathematics" label="in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q202943" start="881" end="892" title="Brahmagupta" label="Brahmagupta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290001" start="950" end="971" title="Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta" label="Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta"/>
<link wikidata="Q213385" start="989" end="1000" title="Bhāskara II" label="Bhaskara II"/>
<link wikidata="Q606014" start="1025" end="1040" title="Narayana Pandit" label="Narayana Pandit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099784" start="1213" end="1242" title="chakravala method" label="&amp;quot;chakravala&amp;quot; method"/>
<link wikidata="Q724751" start="1268" end="1276" title="Jayadeva (mathematician)" label="Jayadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386491" start="1362" end="1373" title="Pell number" label="Pell number"/>
<link wikidata="Q10261" start="1475" end="1485" title="Pythagoras" label="Pythagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q58413" start="1489" end="1495" title="Greek mathematics" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q451693" start="1525" end="1542" title="William Brouncker, 2nd Viscount Brouncker" label="William Brouncker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="1641" end="1655" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q471794" start="1724" end="1733" title="John Pell (mathematician)" label="John Pell"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1770" end="1775" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="1780" end="1786" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q389813" start="1998" end="2014" title="square root of 2" label="square root of 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="2063" end="2080" title="Natural number" label="positive integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386491" start="2251" end="2276" title="Pell number" label="side and diameter numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q191359" start="2296" end="2308" title="Pythagoreanism" label="Pythagoreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q271809" start="2314" end="2321" title="Proclus" label="Proclus"/>
<link wikidata="Q118414942" start="2422" end="2432" title="Baudhayana" label="Baudhayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8739" start="2663" end="2673" title="Archimedes" label="Archimedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150815" start="2691" end="2707" title="square root of 3" label="square root of 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030594" start="2883" end="2915" title="Archimedes&amp;#x27;s cattle problem" label="Archimedes&amp;#x27;s cattle problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q255912" start="2929" end="2941" title="Word problem (mathematics education)" label="word problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="3002" end="3008" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q43182" start="3179" end="3191" title="Eratosthenes" label="Eratosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q178217" start="3272" end="3282" title="Diophantus" label="Diophantus"/>
<link wikidata="Q461062" start="3642" end="3651" title="Al-Karaji" label="Al-Karaji"/>
<link wikidata="Q202943" start="3757" end="3768" title="Brahmagupta" label="Brahmagupta"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005467" start="3826" end="3853" title="Brahmagupta&amp;#x27;s identity" label="Brahmagupta&amp;#x27;s identity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4865" end="4876" title="Bhāskara II" label="Bhāskara II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099784" start="4935" end="4961" title="chakravala method" label="chakravala (cyclic) method"/>
<link wikidata="Q75655" start="5680" end="5696" title="Pierre de Fermat" label="Pierre de Fermat"/>
<link wikidata="Q45838" start="5817" end="5829" title="Kenelm Digby" label="Kenelm Digby"/>
<link wikidata="Q822441" start="5831" end="5856" title="Bernard Frénicle de Bessy" label="Bernard Frénicle de Bessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q208359" start="5945" end="5956" title="John Wallis" label="John Wallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q451693" start="6020" end="6037" title="William Brouncker, 2nd Viscount Brouncker" label="William Brouncker"/>
<link wikidata="Q471794" start="6148" end="6157" title="John Pell (mathematician)" label="John Pell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787842" start="6213" end="6227" title="Thomas Branker" label="Thomas Branker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180572" start="6250" end="6261" title="Johann Rahn" label="Johann Rahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="6386" end="6400" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115724" start="6565" end="6583" title="continued fraction" label="continued fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q206816" start="6893" end="6904" title="Convergent (continued fraction)" label="convergents"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115724" start="6912" end="6938" title="continued fraction" label="regular continued fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12321" start="7498" end="7509" title="palindrome" label="palindromic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938391" start="7709" end="7737" title="Schönhage–Strassen algorithm" label="Schönhage–Strassen algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393193" start="7892" end="7917" title="polynomial-time algorithm" label="polynomial-time algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778269" start="8267" end="8288" title="equating coefficients" label="equating coefficients"/>
<link wikidata="Q740970" start="8378" end="8397" title="recurrence relation" label="recurrence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030594" start="8821" end="8852" title="Archimedes&amp;#x27; cattle problem" label="Archimedes&amp;#x27; cattle problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151850" start="9143" end="9158" title="quadratic sieve" label="quadratic sieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846249" start="9172" end="9193" title="integer factorization" label="integer factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q685140" start="9548" end="9578" title="generalized Riemann hypothesis" label="generalized Riemann hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17995793" start="9762" end="9778" title="quantum computer" label="quantum computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q625519" start="10004" end="10026" title="quadratic number field" label="quadratic number field"/>
<link wikidata="Q728415" start="10833" end="10837" title="OEIS" label="OEIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q728415" start="12038" end="12042" title="OEIS" label="OEIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q168817" start="12240" end="12256" title="algebraic number" label="algebraic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999258" start="12292" end="12296" title="Field norm" label="norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="12305" end="12309" title="Ring (mathematics)" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q625519" start="12349" end="12364" title="quadratic field" label="quadratic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q118084" start="12472" end="12476" title="Unit (ring theory)" label="unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227702" start="12504" end="12533" title="Dirichlet&amp;#x27;s unit theorem" label="Dirichlet&amp;#x27;s unit theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508977" start="12603" end="12619" title="Fundamental unit (number theory)" label="fundamental unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q619511" start="13187" end="13208" title="Chebyshev polynomials" label="Chebyshev polynomials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455652" start="13381" end="13396" title="polynomial ring" label="polynomial ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115724" start="13827" end="13845" title="continued fraction" label="continued fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006396" start="14050" end="14070" title="quadratic irrational" label="quadratic irrational"/>
<link wikidata="Q207348" start="14176" end="14185" title="semigroup" label="semigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834342" start="14200" end="14213" title="modular group" label="modular group"/>
<link wikidata="Q178546" start="14335" end="14346" title="determinant" label="determinant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7630144" start="14860" end="14882" title="Størmer&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Størmer&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529876" start="14935" end="14948" title="smooth number" label="smooth number"/>
<link wikidata="Q858532" start="15049" end="15056" title="Carl Størmer" label="Størmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="15225" end="15237" title="prime factor" label="prime factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q905896" start="18631" end="18651" title="Diophantine equation" label="Diophantine equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q118084" start="18657" end="18662" title="unit (ring theory)" label="units"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="18674" end="18678" title="ring (mathematics)" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390277" start="18712" end="18720" title="SIC-POVM" label="SIC-POVM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122243" start="18725" end="18751" title="quantum information theory" label="quantum information theory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24879" wikidata="Q1122035" url="?curid=24879" title="Telephone card">
<text>A telephone card, calling card or phone card for short, is a credit card-size plastic or paper card used to pay for telephone services (often international or long-distance calling). It is not necessary to have the physical card except with a stored-value system; knowledge of the access telephone number to dial and the PIN is sufficient. Standard cards which can be purchased and used without any sort of account facility give a fixed amount of credit and are discarded when used up; rechargeable cards can be topped up, or collect payment in arrears. The system for payment and the way in which the card is used to place a telephone call vary from card to card.

Calling cards usually come equipped with PIN for user protection and security. Most companies require user to enter the PIN before granting access to the calling card&#x27;s funds. PINs often are printed on a piece of paper found inside the calling card&#x27;s packaging. Once the users makes their first call, some companies offer the option of eliminating the PIN altogether to speed up the calling process. Companies that sell virtual calling cards online typically send the PIN via email.

==Stored-value phone cards==

A stored-value phone card stores the available credit balance in an analog or digital memory physically embedded in the card. This balance can be read by a public payphone when the card is inserted into the card reader. This is superficially similar to a bank automated teller machine, but a stored-value card is more closely analogous to a change purse. While ATMs (as well as the remote memory systems discussed below) use the card merely to identify the associated account and record changes in a central database, stored-value systems make a physical alteration to the card, or write data to an embedded chip or magnetic stripe to reflect the new balance after a call. Some magnetic cards also show the remaining value.

Used primarily for payphones, stored-value systems avoid the time lag and expense of communication with a central database, which would have been technically complex before the 1990s. 

There are several ways in which the value can be encoded on the card:

The earliest system used a magnetic stripe as information carrier, similar to the technology of ATMs and key cards. The first magnetic strip phonecard, manufactured by SIDA, was issued in 1976 in Italy.
The next technology used optical storage. Optical phonecards get their name from optical structure embossed inside the cards. This optical structure is heated and destroyed after use of the units. Visible marks are left on the top of the cards, so that the user can see the balance of remaining units. Optical cards were produced by Landis+Gyr and Sodeco from Switzerland and were popular early phonecards in many countries with first optical phonecards successfully introduced in 1977 in Belgium. Such technology was very secure and not easily hackable but chip cards phased out the optical phone cards around the world and the last Landis+Gyr factory closed in May 2006 when optical phonecards were still in use in few countries like Austria, Israel and Egypt.

The third system of stored-value phone cards are smart cards and use an embedded microchip. These were first launched on a large scale in 1986 in Germany by Deutsche Bundespost after three years of testing, and in France by France Télécom. Many other countries followed suit, including Ireland in 1990 and the UK circa 1994–1995, which phased out the old green Landis+Gyr cards in favor of the chip (smart) cards. The initial microchips were easy to hack, typically by scratching off the programming-voltage contact on the card, which rendered the phone unable to reduce the card&#x27;s value after a call. But by the mid-to-late 1990s, highly secure technology aided the spread of chip phonecards worldwide.

==Remote memory systems==

Making a remote memory prepaid or calling card call requires the user to make two calls. It is necessary to dial an access telephone number to connect to the calling card system. There are several methods. One is via a toll-free number, with larger companies offering this internationally. Access through a local number has become increasingly popular in recent years. Toll-free calls are paid for by the recipient (the calling card company), which passes on the cost through higher call charges; total cost of a call to the user is often lower using a local number. When travelling through several local areas a toll-free service may be preferable.

Once connected to the access number, the account is identified by keying in a PIN (the most popular method) or by swiping a card with embedded chip or magnetic stripe. After validation the balance remaining on the card may be announced, and the desired number may be keyed in. The available minutes may be announced, and the call is connected. Many cards make a verbal announcement if credit is running out.

Prepaid or calling cards are usually much cheaper than other telephone services, particularly for travelers who do not have easy access to other services. Hotel telephones can be very expensive, particularly for long-distance calls. Cellular services are flexible, but may attract high roaming charges away from the home area.

===Telephone accounts symbolized by a card===
The second main technology of phonecards is remote memory, which uses a toll or toll-free access number to reach the database and check for balance on product.

The first public prepaid remote memory phonecard was issued in the United States in December 1980 by Phone Line. As telecom industries around the world became deregulated, remote memory cards were issued in various countries. Remote memory phonecards can be used from any tone-mode phone and do not require special card readers. Since remote memory cards are more accessible and have lower costs, remote memory phone cards have proliferated. However, the utility of these cards is reduced by the large number of digits that need to be entered during usage. To call a long-distance number, the user first dials the local access number, then keys in the secret code, followed by the actual long-distance number. Based on the long-distance number entered, the time remaining on the card is announced, and the call is finally processed through.

Remote memory phonecards are in essence text; requiring an access number, a unique PIN and instructions. Therefore, the instructions can be printed on virtually anything, or can be delivered via e-mail or the Internet. Currently many websites post phone card details through e-mail.

Phone cards are available in most countries in retail stores, retail chains and commonly post offices or corner stores. In general, remote memory phonecards can be issued by any company and come in countless varieties. They can focus on calling to certain countries or regions and have specific features such as rechargeability, pinless dial, speed dial and more. Phone cards may have connection fees, taxes and maintenance fees, all influencing the rates.

===Accounts without a card (Virtual phonecards)===
Since the early 2000s calling card service providers have introduced calling accounts not associated with a physical card. Calling accounts can be purchased over the Internet using credit cards and are instantly delivered to the customer via e-mail. This e-mail contains the PIN and instructions for using the service. The service may be prepaid, or may take payment from a credit card or by direct debit. Some prepaid card companies allow accounts to be recharged online manually or automatically via a method called auto-top-up.

Some virtual cards offer PINless Dialing, either by dialling a number unique to the customer, or by recognising the telephone number which originated the call by Caller ID and relating it to the appropriate account. Some virtual phone cards allow customers to view their call detail reports (CDRs) online by logging into their account.

The virtual phonecard has become a multi-billion US dollar industry as of 2009, with a number of large corporations and smaller dot com companies. While long-distance inland calls have been offered by calling cards, by the mid-2000s conventional carriers reduced their rates to be competitive; however in many countries calling-card type indirect services can be much cheaper than normal calls.

==Phonecard as an artifact or collectible==
Telecom companies have placed advertising on phonecards, or featured celebrity portraits, artwork, or attractive photography. As the supply of any one design is limited, this has led some people to collect disposable phonecards. Due to the large number of phonecards, collectors prefer to specialize and collect cards in a certain way. Some collect phonecards that have only one specific chip type or were issued in the same country, while others prefer to get one of everything. Online clubs and catalogs provide collectors with detailed information on phonecards. In addition, these clubs include forums to assist with discussions between collectors.

==Support in telephones==
Most modern telephones, both mobile and fixed, have memory locations in which telephone numbers can be stored. Some telephones have facilities to make calls through a calling card service whose access details and PIN are also stored in the telephone&#x27;s memory. This may be implemented in different ways, often by pressing one button before making a call; some telephones support &quot;chain dialing&quot;, allowing additional numbers to be dialed when on a call (e.g., dial a PIN and a second number after connecting to an access number). So long as long enough sequences can be stored it is possible to store an access number, pause, PIN, and ultimate telephone number in a single normal phone memory location. Software applications which add calling card support are available for a small charge or free for some smartphones.

==See also==
* Telephone token
* Prepaid mobile phone
* SIM card

==Notes and references==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1122035" start="2" end="16" title="Telephone card" label="telephone card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122035" start="18" end="30" title="Telephone card" label="calling card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122035" start="34" end="44" title="Telephone card" label="phone card"/>
<link wikidata="Q161380" start="61" end="72" title="credit card" label="credit card"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="116" end="125" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302404" start="486" end="504" title="Rechargeable calling card" label="rechargeable cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406150" start="545" end="552" title="arrears" label="arrears"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296401" start="626" end="640" title="telephone call" label="telephone call"/>
<link wikidata="Q674050" start="707" end="710" title="Personal identification number" label="PIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q900977" start="1353" end="1361" title="payphone" label="payphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q81235" start="1450" end="1474" title="automated teller machine" label="automated teller machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907797" start="2199" end="2214" title="magnetic stripe" label="magnetic stripe"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2368" end="2373" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q663679" start="2708" end="2718" title="Landis+Gyr" label="Landis+Gyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="2864" end="2871" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q663679" start="3009" end="3019" title="Landis+Gyr" label="Landis+Gyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="3111" end="3118" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="3120" end="3126" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="3131" end="3136" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q41349" start="3188" end="3199" title="smart card" label="smart cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="3285" end="3292" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q181653" start="3296" end="3315" title="Deutsche Bundespost" label="Deutsche Bundespost"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3353" end="3359" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431486" start="3363" end="3377" title="Orange S.A." label="France Télécom"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3449" end="3451" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140950" start="3899" end="3906" title="Prepaid telephone calls" label="prepaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q680016" start="5222" end="5229" title="roaming" label="roaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q941685" start="5743" end="5752" title="Dual-tone multi-frequency signaling" label="tone-mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q770814" start="7498" end="7510" title="direct debit" label="direct debit"/>
<link wikidata="Q674050" start="7663" end="7666" title="Personal identification number" label="PIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q747865" start="7800" end="7809" title="Caller ID" label="Caller ID"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="8445" end="8456" title="advertising" label="advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q211236" start="8484" end="8493" title="celebrity" label="celebrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208165" start="8613" end="8620" title="collecting" label="collect"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="9914" end="9924" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q582648" start="9943" end="9958" title="Telephone token" label="Telephone token"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858140" start="9961" end="9981" title="Prepaid mobile phone" label="Prepaid mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q230110" start="9984" end="9992" title="SIM card" label="SIM card"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24883" wikidata="Q1023103" url="?curid=24883" title="CD-i">
<text>The Compact Disc-Interactive (CD-I, later CD-i) is a digital optical disc data storage format as well as a hardware platform, co-developed and marketed by Dutch company Philips and Japanese company Sony. It was created as an extension of CDDA and CD-ROM and specified in the &quot;Green Book&quot; specifications, co-developed by Philips and Sony, to combine audio, text and graphics. The two companies initially expected to impact the education/training, point of sale, and home entertainment industries, but the CD-i is largely remembered today for its video games.

CD-i media physically have the same dimensions as CD, but with up to of digital data storage, including up to 72 minutes of full motion video. CD-i players were usually standalone boxes that connect to a standard television; some less common setups included integrated CD-i television sets and expansion modules for personal computers. Most players were created by Philips; the format was licensed by Philips and Microware for use by other manufacturers, notably Sony who released professional CD-i players under the &quot;Intelligent Discman&quot; brand. Unlike CD-ROM drives, CD-i players are complete computer systems centered around dedicated Motorola 68000-based microprocessors and its own operating system called CD-RTOS, which is an acronym for &quot;Compact Disc – Real Time Operating System&quot;.

Media released on the format included video games and &quot;edutainment&quot; and multimedia reference titles, such as interactive encyclopedias and museum tours – which were popular before public Internet access was widespread – as well as business software. Philips&#x27;s CD-i system also implemented Internet features, including subscriptions, web browsing, downloading, e-mail, and online play. Philips&#x27;s aim with its players was to introduce interactive multimedia content for the general public by combining features of a CD player and game console, but at a lower price than a personal computer with a CD-ROM drive.

Authoring kits for the format were released first in 1988, and the first player aimed for home consumers, Philips&#x27;s CDI 910/205, was released in late 1991. It was initially priced around , and was capable of playing interactive CD-i discs, Audio CDs, CD+G (CD+Graphics), Photo CDs and Video CDs (VCDs), though the latter required an optional &quot;Digital Video Card&quot; to provide MPEG-1 decoding. Initially marketed to consumers as &quot;home entertainment systems&quot;, and in later years as a &quot;gaming platform&quot;, CD-i did not manage to find enough success in the market, and was mostly abandoned by Philips in 1996. The format continued to be supported for licensees for a few more years after.

==Specifications==
Development of the &quot;Compact Disc-Interactive&quot; format began in 1984 (two years after the launch of the Compact Disc) and it was first publicly announced by Philips and Sony – two of the largest electronics companies of the time – at Microsoft&#x27;s CD-ROM Conference in Seattle in March 1986. Microsoft&#x27;s CEO Bill Gates had no idea beforehand that the format was under development. The &quot;Green Book&quot;, formally known as the &quot;CD-i Full Functional Specification&quot;, defined the format for interactive, multimedia compact discs designed for CD-i players. The &quot;Green Book&quot; specification also defines a whole hardware set built around the Motorola 68000 microprocessor family, and an operating system called CD-RTOS based on OS-9, a product of Microware. The standard was originally not freely available and had to be licensed from Philips. However, the 1994 version of the standard was eventually made available free by Philips.

CD-i discs conform to the &quot;Red Book&quot; specification of audio CDs (CD-DA). Tracks on a CD-i&#x27;s program area can be CD-DA tracks or CD-i tracks, but the first track must always be a CD-i track, and all CD-i tracks must be grouped together at the beginning of the area. CD-i tracks are structured according to the CD-ROM XA specification (using either Mode 2 Form 1 or Mode 2 Form 2 modes), and have different classes depending on their contents (&quot;data&quot;, &quot;video&quot;, &quot;audio&quot;, &quot;empty&quot; and &quot;message&quot;). &quot;Message&quot; sectors contain audio data to warn users of CD players that the track they are trying to listen to is a CD-i track and not a CD-DA track. The CD-i specification also specifies a file system similar to (but not compatible with) ISO 9660 to be used on CD-i tracks, as well as certain specific files that are required to be present in a CD-i compatible disc. Compared to the &quot;Yellow Book&quot; (specification for CD-ROM), the &quot;Green Book&quot; CD-i standard solves synchronisation problems by interleaving audio and video information on a single track.

The format quickly gained interest from large manufacturers, and received backing from many particularly Matsushita. Although a joint effort, Philips eventually took over the majority of CD-i development at the expense of Sony. Philips invested many millions in developing titles and players based on the CD-i specification. Initially branded &quot;CD-I&quot;, the name was changed in 1991 to &quot;CD-i&quot; with a lowercase i.

The CD-i Ready format is a type of bridge format, also designed by Philips, that defines discs compatible with CD Digital audio players and CD-i players. This format puts CD-i software and data into the pregap of Track 1.

The CD-i Bridge format, defined in Philips&#x27; White Book, is a transitional format allowing bridge discs to be played both on CD-ROM drives and on CD-i players.

The CD-i Digital Video format was launched in 1993 containing movies that could be played on CD-i players with a Digital Video Cartridge add-on. The format was incompatible with Video CD (VCD), although a CD-i unit with the DVC could play both formats. Only about 20 movies were released on the format and it was stopped in 1995 in favor of VCD.

==Commercial software==
Applications were developed using authoring software produced by OptImage. This included OptImage&#x27;s Balboa Runtime Libraries and MediaMogul. The second company that produced authoring software was Script Systems; they produced ABCD-I. Much of the CD-i software were promoted and/or published by American Interactive Media (AIM), a joint venture between Philips and its subsidiary PolyGram formed in Los Angeles in 1986, before its public debut, to publish CD-i based consumer software. Similarly in Europe, Philips Interactive Media was launched.

Philips at first marketed CD-i as a family entertainment product, and avoided mentioning video games to not compete against game consoles. Early software releases focused heavily on educational, music, and self-improvement titles, with only a few games, many of them adaptations of board games such as &quot;Connect Four&quot;. However, the system was handily beaten in the market for multimedia devices by cheap low-end PCs, and the games were the best-selling software. By 1993 Philips encouraged MS-DOS and console developers to create games, introduced a $250 peripheral with more memory and support for full-motion video, and added to new consoles a second controller port for multiplayer games.

The attempts to develop a foothold in the games market were unsuccessful, as the system was designed strictly as a multimedia player and thus was under-powered compared to other game platforms on the market in most respects. Earlier CD-i games included entries in popular Nintendo franchises, although those games were not developed by Nintendo. Specifically, a &quot;Mario&quot; game (titled &quot;Hotel Mario&quot;), and three &quot;Legend of Zelda&quot; games that are now infamous were released: &quot;&quot;, &quot;&quot; and &quot;Zelda&#x27;s Adventure&quot;. Nintendo and Philips had established an agreement to co-develop a CD-ROM enhancement for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System due to licensing disagreements with Nintendo&#x27;s previous partner Sony (an agreement that produced a prototype console called the SNES-CD). While Philips and Nintendo never released such a CD-ROM add-on, Philips was still contractually allowed to use Nintendo characters.

As announced at CES 1992, a large number of full motion video titles such as &quot;Dragon&#x27;s Lair&quot; and &quot;Mad Dog McCree&quot; appeared on the system. One of these, &quot;&quot;, is considered one of the stronger CD-i titles and was later ported to PC. The February 1994 issue of &quot;Electronic Gaming Monthly&quot; remarked that the CD-i&#x27;s full motion video capabilities were its strongest point, and that nearly all of its best software required the MPEG upgrade card.

Philips also released several versions of popular TV game shows for the CD-i, including versions of &quot;Jeopardy!&quot; (hosted by Alex Trebek), &quot;Name That Tune&quot; (hosted by Bob Goen), and two versions of &quot;The Joker&#x27;s Wild&quot; (one for adults hosted by Wink Martindale and one for kids hosted by Marc Summers). All CD-i games in North America (with the exception of &quot;Name That Tune&quot;) had Charlie O&#x27;Donnell as announcer. The Netherlands also released its version of &quot;Lingo&quot; on the CD-i in 1994.

In 1993, American musician Todd Rundgren created the first music-only fully interactive CD, &quot;No World Order&quot;, for the CD-i. This application allows the user to completely arrange the whole album in their own personal way with over 15,000 points of customization. Dutch Eurodance duo 2 Unlimited released a CD-i compilation album in 1994 called &quot;Beyond Limits&quot; which contains standard CD tracks as well as CD-i-exclusive media on the disc.

CD-i had a series of learning games (&quot;edutainment&quot;) targeted at children from infancy to adolescence. Those intended for a younger audience included &quot;Busytown&quot;, &quot;The Berenstain Bears&quot; and various others which usually had vivid cartoon-like settings accompanied by music and logic puzzles.

By mid-1996 the U.S. market for CD-i software had dried up and Philips had given up on releasing titles there, but continued to publish CD-i games in Europe, where the system still held some popularity from a video games perspective. With the home market exhausted, Philips tried with some success to position the technology as a solution for kiosk applications and industrial multimedia.

Some homebrew developers have released video games on the CD-i format in later years, such as &quot;Frog Feast&quot; (2005), &quot;Super Quartet&quot; (2018), and &quot;Nobelia&quot; (2022).

==Player models==
CD-i compatible models were released (as of April 1995) in the U.S., Canada, Benelux, France, Germany, the UK, Japan, Singapore, Hong Kong and former European Eastern Bloc. It was reported to be released further in Brazil, India and Australia in the &quot;coming months&quot;, with plans to also introduce it in China, South Africa, Indonesia and the Philippines.

===Philips models===

In addition to consumer models, professional and development players were sold by Philips Interactive Media Systems and their VARs. The first CD-i system was produced by Philips in collaboration with Kyocera in 1988 – the Philips 180/181/182 modular system. Philips marketed several CD-i player models as shown below.

*The CD-i player 100 series, which consisted of the three-unit 180/181/182 professional system, first demonstrated at the CD-ROM Conference in March 1988.
*The CD-i player 200 series, which includes the 205, 210, and 220 models. Models in the 200 series were designed for general consumption, and were available at major home electronics outlets around the world. The Philips CDI 910 is the American version of the CDI 205, the most basic model in the series and the first Philips CD-i model, released in December 1991. Originally priced about , within a year&#x27;s time the price dropped to .
*The CD-i player 300 series, which includes the 310, 350, 360, and 370 models. The 300 series consists of portable players designed for the professional market and not marketed to home consumers. A popular use was multimedia sales presentations such as those used by pharmaceutical companies to provide product information to physicians, as the devices could be easily transported by sales representatives.
*The CD-i player 400 series, which includes the 450, 470, 490 models. The 400 models are slimmed-down units aimed at console and educational markets. The CDI 450 player, for instance, is a budget model designed to compete with game consoles. In this version, an infrared remote controller is not standard but optional, as this model is more gaming-oriented. This series was introduced at CES Chicago in June 1994 and the 450 player retailed at in the Netherlands.
*The CD-i player 500 series, which includes the 550 model, which was essentially the same as the 450 with an installed digital video cartridge. It was introduced at CES Chicago in June 1994.
*The CD-i player 600 series, which includes the 601, 602, 604, 605, 615, 660, and 670 models. The 600 series is designed for professional applications and software development. Units in this line generally include support for floppy disk drives, keyboards and other computer peripherals. Some models can also be connected to an emulator and have software testing and debugging features.
*The CD-I player 700 series, which consists of the 740 model, the most advanced player and featuring an RS-232 port. It was only released in limited quantities.

There also exist a number of hard-to-categorize models, such as the FW380i, an integrated mini-stereo and CD-i player; the 21TCDi30, a television with a built-in CD-i device; the CD-i/PC 2.0, a CD-i module with an ISA interface for IBM-compatible 486 PCs.

===Other manufacturers===

In addition to Philips, several manufacturers produced CD-i players some of which were still on sale years after Philips itself abandoned the format. Manufacturers included:
*Magnavox (a Philips subsidiary) made rebranded players for the American market. 
*GoldStar / LG Electronics, the LG GDI-700 (c. 1997) was a professional player with a Motorola 68341 processor, faster than the Philips model. GoldStar had a portable player, including another small one without an LCD screen.
*Digital Video Systems
*Memorex
*Grundig
*Kyocera made the portable Pro 1000S model
*Maspro Denkoh released a GPS car navigation system with a built-in CD-i player, released in Japan in 1992.
*Saab Electric
*Sony produced two models branded Intelligent Discman, a hybrid home/portable CD-i player released in 1990-1991 for professional use only.
*NBS
*International Interactive Media (I2m) released in 1995 a CD-i PCI expansion card for 486 PCs, Pentium PCs, 68k-based Macintosh and PowerPC-based Macintosh computers
*Vobis Highscreen
*Manna Space branded CD-i models (based on Magnavox&#x27;s or GoldStar&#x27;s version of Philips CDI 450) were made for a Japanese travel agency with the same name in 1995.
*Bang &amp; Olufsen, who produced a high-end television with a built-in CD-i device (Beocenter AV5) on the market from 1997 to 2001.

Before the actual commercial debut of the CD-i format, some other companies had interest in building players and some made prototypes, but were never released – this includes Panasonic (who were originally a major backer of the format), Pioneer, JVC, Toshiba, Epson, Ricoh, Fujitsu, Samsung and Yamaha. In addition, Sanyo showed a prototype portable CD-i player in 1992.

===Hardware specifications===





==TeleCD-i and CD-MATICS==
Recognizing the growing need among marketers for networked multimedia, Philips partnered in 1992 with Amsterdam-based CDMATICS to develop TeleCD-i (also TeleCD). In this concept, the CD-i player is connected to a network such as PSTN or Internet, enabling data-communication and rich media presentation. Dutch grocery chain Albert Heijn and mail-order company Neckermann were early adopters and introduced award-winning TeleCD-i applications for their home-shopping and home-delivery services. CDMATICS also developed the special Philips TeleCD-i Assistant and a set of software tools to help the worldwide multimedia industry to develop and implement TeleCD-i. TeleCD-i is the world&#x27;s first networked multimedia application at the time of its introduction. In 1996, Philips acquired source code rights from CDMATICS.

==CD-Online==

Internet services on the CD-i devices were facilitated by the use of an additional hardware modem and &quot;CD-Online&quot; disc (renamed Web-i in the US), which Philips initially released in Britain in 1995 for $150 US. This service provided the CD-i with full internet access (with a 14.4k modem), including online shopping, email, and support for networked multiplayer gaming on select CD-i games. The service required a CD-i player with DV cartridge, and an &quot;Internet Starter Kit&quot; which initially retailed for £99.99. It was advertised as bringing &quot;full Internet access to the living room on TV screens&quot;. Andy Stout, a writer for the official CD-i magazine, explained CD-Online: The CD-Online service went live in the UK on October 25, 1995 and in March 1996 in the Netherlands (for 399 guilders), and also released in Belgium. The system was reportedly scheduled to launch in the US as &quot;Web-i&quot; in August 1996. The domain cd-online.co.uk, which was used for the British CD-Online service, went offline in 2000. The Dutch domain cd-online.nl stopped updating too but remained online until 2007.

Only one game was released that supported CD-Online, the first-person shooter game &quot;RAM Raid&quot;. Players from any country in the world could compete against each other as long as they had a copy of the game.

==Reception and market performance==
Philips had invested heavily in the CD-i format and system, and it was often compared with the Commodore CDTV as a single combination of computer, CD, and television. The product was touted as a single machine for home entertainment connected to a standard TV and controlled by a regular remote control – although the format was noted to have various non-entertainment business opportunities too, such as travel and tourism or the military. In 1990, Peugeot used CD-i for its point of sale application promoting its then-new 605 automobile, and it was also at the time used by fellow car manufacturer Renault for staff training programmes, and in Japan by the Ministry of Trade and Industry for an exhibition there. A Philips executive, Gaston Bastiaens, quoted in 1990 &quot;CD-I will be &#x27;the medium&#x27; for entertainment, education and information in the 90&#x27;s.&quot;. Sony introduced its three portable CD-i players in June 1990, pitching them as &quot;picture books with sound&quot;.

The ambitious CD-i format had initially created much interest after its 1986 announcement, both in the west and in Japan, buoyed by the success of the CD. However, after repeated delays (hardware was first intended to be ready and shipped by Christmas 1987) interest was slowly lost. Electronic Arts for instance was enthusiastic about CD-i and formed a division for the development of video game titles on the format, but it was eventually halted with the intention of resuming when CD-i players would reach the market. The company eventually never resumed CD-i software development when it was released. The delay also gave more attention to the hyped Digital Video Interactive (DVI) in 1987, which demonstrated full screen, full motion video (FMV) using a compression chip on an IBM PC/AT computer. Amid the attention around its potential rival DVI, Philips and Sony decided to find a way to add full screen FMV abilities to the CD-i standard, causing further delay. Meanwhile, the Microsoft-backed CD-ROM standard was improving and solved certain video playback issues that were present on the CD-i – CD-ROM format products were already on the market by 1987. At the end, CD-ROM standard benefited from the CD-i and DVI mishaps, and by the time CD-i players for consumers were released in 1991, CD-ROM had already become known and established. Ron Gilbert commented in early 1990 &quot;The CD-I specifications look great, but where are the machines? If they&#x27;d come out four years ago, they&#x27;d have been hot, but now they&#x27;re behind the times.&quot; Another reason that led to fading interest pre-launch was the fact CD-i players would not launch with FMV but instead receive it later through a purchasable add-on cartridge (it was originally expected to come built-in) – as well as the obsolete Motorola processor, OS-9 software, and a launch price considered high.

Although Philips had aggressively promoted their CD-i products in the U.S., by August 1993 &quot;Computer Gaming World&quot; reported that &quot;skepticism persists about its long-term prospects&quot; compared to other platforms like IBM PC compatibles, Apple Macintosh, and Sega Genesis. The magazine stated in January 1994 that despite Philips&#x27; new emphasis on games &quot;CD-i is still not the answer for hardcore gamers&quot;, but the console &quot;may yet surprise us all in the future&quot;. It recommended the CD-i with video cartridge for those needing to buy a new console as &quot;The price is right and there is more software to support it&quot;, but 3DO Interactive Multiplayer was probably better for those who could wait a few months. The &quot;Electronic Entertainment&quot; August 1994 issue noted that the CD-i, along with the Atari Jaguar, neither have an &quot;effective, let alone innovative&quot; game library to compete against the then newly released Sega CD.

After being outsold in the market by cheaper multimedia PCs, in 1994 Philips attempted to emphasize CD-i as a game playing machine, but this did not help the situation. An early 1995 review of the system in &quot;GamePro&quot; stated that &quot;inconsistent game quality puts the CD-i at a disadvantage against other high-powered game producers.&quot; A late 1995 review in &quot;Next Generation&quot; criticized both Philips&#x27;s approach to marketing the CD-i and the hardware itself (&quot;The unit excels at practically nothing except FMV, and then only with the addition of a $200 digital video cartridge&quot;). The magazine noted that while Philips had not yet officially discontinued the CD-i, it was dead for all intents and purposes, citing as evidence the fact that though Philips had a large booth at the 1995 Electronic Entertainment Expo, there was no CD-i hardware or software on display. &quot;Next Generation&quot; scored the console one out of five stars. Another trouble for Philips in 1995 was the formation of HDCD, which promised better quality video compared to Video CD&#x27;s (VCD) MPEG-1 compression method – Philips had heavily promoted the CD-i&#x27;s VCD playing capabilities. Philips Media consolidated its CD-i activities from its Los Angeles office in March 1996. It was reported in October 1996 that Philips was ready to &quot;call it quits&quot; in the American market.

===Sales===
In October 1994, Philips claimed an installed base of one million units for the CD-i worldwide. In 1996, &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; reported that total US sales amounted to 400,000 units. In the Netherlands, about 60,000 CD-i players were sold by the end of December 1994.

===Legacy===

Although extensively marketed by Philips, notably via infomercial, consumer interest in CD-i titles remained low. By 1994, sales of CD-i systems had begun to slow, and in 1998 the product line was dropped. Plans for a second generation CD-i system were certainly present and Argonaut Software was even designated to design chip sets for the successor to the CD-i. However, company president Cor Boonstra saw no interest in the media area for Philips and so Philips sold everything, including the media subsidiary Polygram.

The Dutch half of Philips Media was sold to Softmachine, which released &quot;The Lost Ride&quot; on the CD-i as the last product for the CD-i. The French side of the company, who had purchased German publishers Bomico Entertainment Software and Laguna Video Games the year prior, was sold to French publisher Infogrames in June 1997 along with the entire CD-i library as well as German publishers. A CD-ROM add-on for the Super NES, which was announced for development with Nintendo in 1991, was never made. The last CD-i game was &quot;Solar Crusade&quot;, made by Infogrames and released in 1999.

After its discontinuation, the CD-i was overwhelmingly panned by critics who blasted its graphics, games, and controls. Microsoft CEO Bill Gates admitted that initially he &quot;was worried&quot; about the CD-i due to Philips&#x27; heavy support for the device and its two-pronged attack on both the games console and PC markets, but that in retrospect, &quot;It was a device that kind of basically got caught in the middle. It was a terrible game machine, and it was a terrible PC.&quot; The CD-i&#x27;s various controllers were ranked the fifth worst video game controller by IGN editor Craig Harris. &quot;PC World&quot; ranked it as fourth on their list of &quot;The 10 Worst Video Game Systems of All Time&quot;. Gamepro.com listed it as number four on their list of &quot;The 10 Worst-Selling Consoles of All Time.&quot; In 2008, CNET listed the system on its list of the worst game console(s) ever. In 2007, GameTrailers ranked the Philips CD-i as the fourth worst console of all time in its Top 10 Worst Console lineup.

In later retrospective years, the CD-i has become (infamously) best known for its video games, particularly those from the Nintendo-licensed &quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot; series, considered by many to be of poor taste. Games that were most heavily criticized include &quot;Hotel Mario&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;&quot;, and &quot;Zelda&#x27;s Adventure&quot;. EGM&#x27;s Seanbaby rated &quot;The Wand of Gamelon&quot; as one of the worst video games of all time. However, &quot;&quot; was positively received by critics and has often been held up as the standout title for the CD-i.

==See also==

*CD-i Ready
*High Sierra Format
*3DO Interactive Multiplayer
*MiniDisc
*CD-ROM
*Video CD
*Super NES CD-ROM
*Digital Video Interactive
*Commodore CDTV
*Pioneer LaserActive
*Sega CD
*FM Towns
*Tandy Video Information System
*NEC TurboDuo
==References==
==External links==

*Official Philips CD-I FAQ
*CD-i history 
*CD-i hardware </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1023103" start="4" end="28" title="CD-i" label="Compact Disc-Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023103" start="30" end="34" title="CD-i" label="CD-I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023103" start="42" end="46" title="CD-i" label="CD-i"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076968" start="53" end="60" title="Digital media" label="digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q234870" start="61" end="73" title="optical disc" label="optical disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q57515336" start="74" end="86" title="data storage device" label="data storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="169" end="176" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="198" end="202" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121020" start="238" end="242" title="Compact Disc Digital Audio" label="CDDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="247" end="253" title="CD-ROM" label="CD-ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q282549" start="281" end="291" title="Rainbow Books" label="Green Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="342" end="346" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q386147" start="456" end="469" title="point of sale" label="point of sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="555" end="565" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473699" start="693" end="710" title="full motion video" label="full motion video"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="885" end="903" title="personal computers" label="personal computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q125149" start="982" end="991" title="Microware" label="Microware"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734531" start="1104" end="1111" title="Discman" label="Discman"/>
<link wikidata="Q667808" start="1216" end="1230" title="Motorola 68000" label="Motorola 68000"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="1328" end="1340" title="Compact Disc" label="Compact Disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q213666" start="1343" end="1369" title="Real Time Operating System" label="Real Time Operating System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153173" start="1438" end="1449" title="edutainment" label="edutainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="1575" end="1583" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094073" start="1682" end="1699" title="Online console gaming" label="Internet features"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023100" start="1912" end="1921" title="CD player" label="CD player"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076" start="1926" end="1938" title="game console" label="game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463207" start="2008" end="2017" title="Authoring system" label="Authoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121020" start="2253" end="2261" title="Audio CD" label="Audio CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q607440" start="2264" end="2268" title="CD+G" label="CD+G"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413478" start="2284" end="2292" title="Photo CD" label="Photo CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q321259" start="2298" end="2306" title="Video CD" label="Video CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q336284" start="2397" end="2403" title="MPEG-1" label="MPEG-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="2856" end="2868" title="Compact Disc" label="Compact Disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="2909" end="2916" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="2921" end="2925" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="2986" end="2995" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="3003" end="3009" title="CD-ROM" label="CD-ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="3024" end="3031" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284" start="3068" end="3078" title="Bill Gates" label="Bill Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q667808" start="3419" end="3433" title="Motorola 68000" label="Motorola 68000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008085" start="3505" end="3509" title="OS-9" label="OS-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q125149" start="3524" end="3533" title="Microware" label="Microware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121020" start="3743" end="3751" title="Compact Disc Digital Audio" label="Red Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="4035" end="4044" title="CD-ROM XA" label="CD-ROM XA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023100" start="4332" end="4341" title="CD player" label="CD player"/>
<link wikidata="Q174989" start="4466" end="4477" title="file system" label="file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q815645" start="4515" end="4523" title="ISO 9660" label="ISO 9660"/>
<link wikidata="Q53247" start="4954" end="4964" title="Matsushita Corporation" label="Matsushita"/>
<link wikidata="Q9893" start="5276" end="5277" title="i" label="i"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009773" start="5284" end="5294" title="CD-i Ready" label="CD-i Ready"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023100" start="5391" end="5415" title="CD player" label="CD Digital audio players"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5483" end="5489" title="Pregap#Computer data in pregap" label="pregap"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019519" start="5507" end="5518" title="CD-i Bridge" label="CD-i Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="5632" end="5638" title="CD-ROM" label="CD-ROM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5672" end="5690" title="CD-i Digital Video" label="CD-i Digital Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q321259" start="5846" end="5854" title="Video CD" label="Video CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463207" start="6073" end="6091" title="authoring system" label="authoring software"/>
<link wikidata="Q700359" start="6424" end="6432" title="PolyGram" label="PolyGram"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="6443" end="6454" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="6681" end="6691" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q131436" start="6874" end="6884" title="board game" label="board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q17254" start="6900" end="6912" title="Connect Four" label="Connect Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="7013" end="7015" title="Personal computer" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="7091" end="7097" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="7566" end="7574" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803535" start="7662" end="7667" title="Mario (franchise)" label="Mario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368183" start="7693" end="7704" title="Hotel Mario" label="Hotel Mario"/>
<link wikidata="Q12393" start="7729" end="7744" title="The Legend of Zelda" label="Legend of Zelda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521652" start="7831" end="7853" title="Zelda&amp;#x27;s Adventure" label="Zelda&amp;#x27;s Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="7954" end="7989" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Super Nintendo Entertainment System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391836" start="8123" end="8130" title="SNES-CD" label="SNES-CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q646089" start="8282" end="8285" title="Consumer Electronics Show" label="CES"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473699" start="8310" end="8327" title="full motion video" label="full motion video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255182" start="8349" end="8367" title="Dragon&amp;#x27;s Lair (1983 video game)" label="Dragon&amp;#x27;s Lair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747251" start="8384" end="8398" title="Mad Dog McCree" label="Mad Dog McCree"/>
<link wikidata="Q793981" start="8564" end="8589" title="Electronic Gaming Monthly" label="Electronic Gaming Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q846662" start="8810" end="8819" title="game show" label="game show"/>
<link wikidata="Q499767" start="8863" end="8872" title="Jeopardy!" label="Jeopardy!"/>
<link wikidata="Q929985" start="8890" end="8901" title="Alex Trebek" label="Alex Trebek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784016" start="8910" end="8924" title="Name That Tune" label="Name That Tune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907676" start="8942" end="8950" title="Bob Goen" label="Bob Goen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743453" start="8979" end="9000" title="The Joker&amp;#x27;s Wild" label="The Joker&amp;#x27;s Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387831" start="9033" end="9048" title="Wink Martindale" label="Wink Martindale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418143" start="9076" end="9088" title="Marc Summers" label="Marc Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085323" start="9178" end="9200" title="Charlie O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="Charlie O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052392" start="9266" end="9271" title="Lingo (Dutch game show)" label="Lingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q364875" start="9327" end="9340" title="Todd Rundgren" label="Todd Rundgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q766978" start="9398" end="9412" title="No World Order" label="No World Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q222900" start="9593" end="9604" title="2 Unlimited" label="2 Unlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153173" start="9803" end="9814" title="edutainment" label="edutainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q432056" start="9925" end="9933" title="Busytown" label="Busytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338915" start="9947" end="9967" title="The Berenstain Bears" label="The Berenstain Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q598205" start="10475" end="10483" title="homebrew (video games)" label="homebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="10749" end="10755" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q13116" start="10757" end="10764" title="Benelux" label="Benelux"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="10839" end="10851" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552900" start="11193" end="11196" title="Value-added reseller" label="VAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q745099" start="11267" end="11274" title="Kyocera" label="Kyocera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="12780" end="12787" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="13269" end="13280" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q250" start="13289" end="13298" title="computer keyboard" label="keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q191895" start="13534" end="13540" title="RS-232" label="RS-232"/>
<link wikidata="Q273326" start="13806" end="13809" title="Industry Standard Architecture" label="ISA"/>
<link wikidata="Q630670" start="14051" end="14059" title="Magnavox" label="Magnavox"/>
<link wikidata="Q494683" start="14133" end="14141" title="GoldStar" label="GoldStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q162345" start="14144" end="14158" title="LG Electronics" label="LG Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q25907" start="14382" end="14389" title="Memorex" label="Memorex"/>
<link wikidata="Q680019" start="14391" end="14398" title="Grundig" label="Grundig"/>
<link wikidata="Q745099" start="14400" end="14407" title="Kyocera" label="Kyocera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783917" start="14443" end="14456" title="Maspro Denkoh" label="Maspro Denkoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="14566" end="14570" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q909032" start="14705" end="14708" title="Nippon Broadcasting System" label="NBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q191012" start="14772" end="14775" title="Conventional PCI" label="PCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q214314" start="14804" end="14811" title="Pentium" label="Pentium"/>
<link wikidata="Q937498" start="14817" end="14820" title="68k" label="68k"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="14827" end="14836" title="Macintosh" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q209860" start="14841" end="14848" title="PowerPC" label="PowerPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602741" start="14876" end="14892" title="Vobis" label="Vobis Highscreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q790020" start="15067" end="15085" title="Bang &amp;amp; Olufsen" label="Bang &amp;amp; Olufsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q53247" start="15375" end="15384" title="Panasonic" label="Panasonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q156034" start="15437" end="15444" title="Pioneer Corporation" label="Pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q215901" start="15446" end="15449" title="JVC" label="JVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q49125" start="15451" end="15458" title="Toshiba" label="Toshiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q159614" start="15460" end="15465" title="Epson" label="Epson"/>
<link wikidata="Q178778" start="15467" end="15472" title="Ricoh" label="Ricoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q186394" start="15474" end="15481" title="Fujitsu" label="Fujitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718" start="15483" end="15490" title="Samsung Electronics" label="Samsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q188454" start="15495" end="15501" title="Yamaha Corporation" label="Yamaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q49203" start="15516" end="15521" title="Sanyo" label="Sanyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q243961" start="15863" end="15867" title="Public switched telephone network" label="PSTN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653985" start="15958" end="15970" title="Albert Heijn" label="Albert Heijn"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15994" end="16004" title=":de:Neckermann (Versandhandel)" label="Neckermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="16765" end="16770" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q203607" start="17284" end="17292" title="guilders" label="guilders"/>
<link wikidata="Q955368" start="17951" end="17965" title="Commodore CDTV" label="Commodore CDTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742" start="18306" end="18313" title="Peugeot" label="Peugeot"/>
<link wikidata="Q386147" start="18332" end="18345" title="point of sale" label="point of sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q825790" start="18381" end="18384" title="Peugeot 605" label="605"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="18457" end="18464" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="19007" end="19009" title="CD" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q173941" start="19140" end="19155" title="Electronic Arts" label="Electronic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037356" start="19510" end="19535" title="Digital Video Interactive" label="Digital Video Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473699" start="19583" end="19600" title="full motion video" label="full motion video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141670" start="19638" end="19647" title="IBM PC/AT" label="IBM PC/AT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="19841" end="19850" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q365052" start="20204" end="20215" title="Ron Gilbert" label="Ron Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="20668" end="20676" title="Motorola" label="Motorola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008085" start="20688" end="20692" title="OS-9" label="OS-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q707182" start="20837" end="20858" title="Computer Gaming World" label="Computer Gaming World"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="20974" end="20991" title="IBM PC compatible" label="IBM PC compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="20994" end="21009" title="Apple Macintosh" label="Apple Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="21015" end="21027" title="Sega Genesis" label="Sega Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q229429" start="21407" end="21434" title="3DO Interactive Multiplayer" label="3DO Interactive Multiplayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q650601" start="21589" end="21601" title="Atari Jaguar" label="Atari Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047516" start="21719" end="21726" title="Sega CD" label="Sega CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q315718" start="21942" end="21949" title="GamePro" label="GamePro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021002" start="22109" end="22124" title="Next Generation (magazine)" label="Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473699" start="22270" end="22273" title="Full motion video" label="FMV"/>
<link wikidata="Q336168" start="22553" end="22582" title="Electronic Entertainment Expo" label="Electronic Entertainment Expo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063273" start="22762" end="22766" title="DVD-Video" label="HDCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q321259" start="22816" end="22824" title="Video CD" label="Video CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q336284" start="22838" end="22844" title="MPEG-1" label="MPEG-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6038653" start="23184" end="23198" title="installed base" label="installed base"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="23259" end="23282" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662452" start="23499" end="23510" title="infomercial" label="infomercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q256907" start="23720" end="23737" title="Argonaut Software" label="Argonaut Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696831" start="23836" end="23848" title="Cor Boonstra" label="Cor Boonstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q700359" start="23958" end="23966" title="PolyGram" label="Polygram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457327" start="24013" end="24024" title="LBi" label="Softmachine"/>
<link wikidata="Q753684" start="24279" end="24289" title="Infogrames" label="Infogrames"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="24392" end="24401" title="Super NES" label="Super NES"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="24444" end="24452" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7555868" start="24507" end="24520" title="Solar Crusade" label="Solar Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="24690" end="24699" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284" start="24704" end="24714" title="Bill Gates" label="Bill Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="25148" end="25151" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q707291" start="25179" end="25187" title="PC World (magazine)" label="PC World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544247" start="25406" end="25410" title="CNET" label="CNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q677385" start="25485" end="25497" title="GameTrailers" label="GameTrailers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12393" start="25746" end="25765" title="The Legend of Zelda" label="The Legend of Zelda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368183" start="25874" end="25885" title="Hotel Mario" label="Hotel Mario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521652" start="25931" end="25953" title="Zelda&amp;#x27;s Adventure" label="Zelda&amp;#x27;s Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441560" start="25972" end="25980" title="Seanbaby" label="Seanbaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644674" start="26033" end="26062" title="List of video games notable for negative reception" label="worst video games of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009773" start="26200" end="26210" title="CD-i Ready" label="CD-i Ready"/>
<link wikidata="Q815645" start="26212" end="26230" title="High Sierra Format" label="High Sierra Format"/>
<link wikidata="Q229429" start="26232" end="26259" title="3DO Interactive Multiplayer" label="3DO Interactive Multiplayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q275079" start="26261" end="26269" title="MiniDisc" label="MiniDisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="26271" end="26277" title="CD-ROM" label="CD-ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q321259" start="26279" end="26287" title="Video CD" label="Video CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391836" start="26289" end="26305" title="Super NES CD-ROM" label="Super NES CD-ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037356" start="26307" end="26332" title="Digital Video Interactive" label="Digital Video Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q955368" start="26334" end="26348" title="Commodore CDTV" label="Commodore CDTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276319" start="26350" end="26369" title="Pioneer LaserActive" label="Pioneer LaserActive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047516" start="26371" end="26378" title="Sega CD" label="Sega CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q531896" start="26380" end="26388" title="FM Towns" label="FM Towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682528" start="26390" end="26420" title="Tandy Video Information System" label="Tandy Video Information System"/>
<link wikidata="Q841252" start="26422" end="26434" title="TurboDuo" label="NEC TurboDuo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24884" wikidata="Q865651" url="?curid=24884" title="Peppered moth">
<text>The peppered moth (Biston betularia) is a temperate species of night-flying moth. It is mostly found in the northern hemisphere in places like Asia, Europe and North America. Peppered moth evolution is an example of population genetics and natural selection.

The caterpillars of the peppered moth not only mimic the form but also the colour of a twig. Recent research indicates that the caterpillars can sense the twig&#x27;s colour with their skin and match their body colour to the background to protect themselves from predators.
== Description ==
The wingspan ranges from 45 mm to 62 mm (median 55 mm). It is relatively stout-bodied, with forewings relatively narrow-elongate. The wings are white, &quot;peppered&quot; with black, and with more-or-less distinct cross lines, also black. These transverse wing lines and &quot;peppered&quot; maculation (spotting) can also, in rare instances, be gray or brown; the spotting pattern, in particularly very rare cases, is sometimes a combination of brown and black/gray. The black speckling varies in amount, in some examples it is almost absent, whilst in others it is so dense that the wings appear to be black sprinkled with white. The antennae of males are strongly bipectinate. Prout (1912–16) gives an account of the forms and congeners.

== Distribution ==
&quot;Biston betularia&quot; is found in China (Heilongjiang, Jilin, Inner Mongolia, Beijing, Hebei, Shanxi, Shandong, Henan, Shaanxi, Ningxia, Gansu, Qinghai, Xinjiang, Fujian, Sichuan, Yunnan,
Tibet), Russia, Mongolia, Japan, North Korea, South Korea, Nepal, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Turkmenistan, Georgia, Azerbaijan, Armenia, Europe and North America.

== Ecology and life cycle ==

In Great Britain and Ireland, the peppered moth is univoltine (&quot;i.e.&quot;, it has one generation per year), whilst in south-eastern North America it is bivoltine (two generations per year). The lepidopteran life cycle consists of four stages: ova (eggs), several larval instars (caterpillars), pupae, which overwinter in the soil, and imagines (adults). During the day, the moths typically rest on trees, where they are preyed on by birds.

The caterpillar is a twig mimic, varying in colour between green and brown. On a historical note, it was one of the first animals to be identified as being camouflaged with countershading to make it appear flat (shading being the main visual cue that makes things appear solid), in a paper by Edward Bagnall Poulton in 1887. Research indicates that the caterpillars can sense the twig&#x27;s colour with their skin and match their body colour to the background to protect themselves from predators, an ability to camouflage themselves also found in cephalopods, chameleons and some fish, although this colour change is rather slower in the caterpillars.

It goes into the soil late in the season, where it pupates in order to spend the winter. The imagines emerge from the pupae between late May and August, the males slightly before the females (this is common and expected from sexual selection). They emerge late in the day and dry their wings before flying that night.

The males fly every night of their lives in search of females, whereas the females only fly on the first night. Thereafter, the females release pheromones to attract males. Since the pheromone is carried by the wind, males tend to travel up the concentration gradient, i.e., toward the source. During flight, they are subject to predation by bats. The males guard the female from other males until she lays the eggs. The female lays about 2,000 pale-green ovoid eggs about 1 mm in length into crevices in bark with her ovipositor.

=== Resting behaviour ===
A mating pair or a lone individual will spend the day hiding from predators, particularly birds. In the case of the former, the male stays with the female to ensure paternity. Evidence for resting positions is given by data collected by the peppered moth researcher Michael Majerus, and it is given in the accompanying charts. These data were originally published in Howlett and Majerus (1987), and an updated version published in Majerus (1998), who concluded that the moths rest in the upper part of the trees. Majerus notes:

Creationist critics of the peppered moth have often pointed to a statement made by Clarke &quot;et al&quot;. (1985): &quot;... In 25 years we have only found two &quot;betularia&quot; on the tree trunks or walls adjacent to our traps, and none elsewhere&quot;. The reason now seems obvious. Few people spend their time looking for moths up in the trees. That is where peppered moths rest by day.

From their original data, Howlett and Majerus (1987) concluded that peppered moths generally rest in unexposed positions, using three main types of site. Firstly, a few inches below a branch-trunk joint on a tree trunk where the moth is in shadow; secondly, on the underside of branches and thirdly on foliate twigs. The above data would appear to support this.

Further support for these resting positions is given from experiments watching captive moths taking up resting positions in both males (Mikkola, 1979; 1984) and females (Liebert and Brakefield, 1987).

Majerus, &quot;et al.&quot;, (2000) have shown that peppered moths are cryptically camouflaged against their backgrounds when they rest in the boughs of trees. It is clear that in human visible wavelengths, &quot;typica&quot; are camouflaged against lichens and &quot;carbonaria&quot; against plain bark. However, birds are capable of seeing ultraviolet light that humans cannot see. Using an ultraviolet-sensitive video camera, Majerus et al. showed that &quot;typica&quot; reflect ultraviolet light in a speckled fashion and are camouflaged against crustose lichens common on branches, both in ultraviolet and human-visible wavelengths. However, &quot;typica&quot; are not as well camouflaged against foliose lichens common on tree trunks; though they are camouflaged in human wavelengths, in ultraviolet wavelengths, foliose lichens do not reflect ultraviolet light.

During an experiment in Cambridge over the seven years 2001–2007 Majerus noted the natural resting positions of peppered moths, and of the 135 moths examined over half were on tree branches, mostly on the lower half of the branch, 37% were on tree trunks, mostly on the north side, and only 12.6% were resting on or under twigs.

== Polymorphism ==
=== Introduction on forms ===
There are several melanic and non-melanic morphs of the peppered moth. These are controlled genetically. A particular colour morph can be indicated in a standard way by following the species name in the form &quot;morpha &quot;morph name&quot;&quot;. The use of &quot;form&quot; in the method of &quot;Biston betularia&quot; f. &quot;formname&quot; in detailing these variations is also a widespread practice.

These forms are often accidentally elevated to subspecies status when they appear in literature. Not adding the &quot;f.&quot; (forma) or morpha implies that the taxon is a subspecies instead of a form, as in &quot;Biston betularia carbonaria&quot; instead of &quot;Biston betularia&quot; f. &quot;carbonaria&quot;. Rarely, forms have been elevated to species status, as in &quot;Biston carbonaria&quot;. Either of these two circumstances might lead to the erroneous belief that speciation was involved in the observed evolution of the peppered moth. This is not the case; individuals of each morph interbreed and produce fertile offspring with individuals of all other morphs; hence there is only one peppered moth species.

By contrast, different subspecies of the same species can theoretically interbreed with one another and will produce fully fertile and healthy offspring, but in practice do not, as they live in different regions or reproduce in different seasons. Full-fledged species are either unable to produce fertile and healthy offspring, or do not recognize each other&#x27;s courtship signals, or both.

European breeding experiments have shown that in &quot;Biston betularia betularia&quot;, the allele for melanism producing morpha &quot;carbonaria&quot; is controlled by a single locus. The melanic allele is dominant to the non-melanic allele. This situation is, however, somewhat complicated by the presence of three other alleles that produce indistinguishable morphs of morpha &quot;medionigra&quot;. These are of intermediate dominance, but this is not complete (Majerus, 1998).

=== Form names ===
In continental Europe, there are three morphs: the white morph typica (syn. morpha/f. &quot;betularia&quot;), the dark melanistic morph carbonaria (syn. &quot;doubledayaria&quot;), and an intermediate form medionigra.

In Britain, the typical white morph is known as typica, the melanic morph is carbonaria, and the intermediate phenotype is named insularia.

In North America, the melanic black morph is morpha swettaria. In &quot;Biston betularia cognataria&quot;, the melanic allele (producing morpha &quot;swettaria&quot;) is similarly dominant to the non-melanic allele. There are also some intermediate morphs. In Japan, no melanic morphs have been recorded; they are all morpha &quot;typica&quot;.

== Evolution ==

The evolution of the peppered moth over the last two hundred years has been studied in detail.
At the start of this period, the vast majority of peppered moths had light coloured wing patterns which effectively camouflaged them against the light-coloured trees and lichens upon which they rested. However, due to widespread pollution during the Industrial Revolution in England, many of the lichens died out, and the trees which peppered moths rested on became blackened by soot, causing most of the light-coloured moths, or &quot;typica&quot;, to die off due to predation. At the same time, the dark-coloured, or melanic, moths, &quot;carbonaria&quot;, flourished because they could hide on the darkened trees.

Since then, with improved environmental standards, light-coloured peppered moths have again become common, and the dramatic change in the peppered moth&#x27;s population has remained a subject of much interest and study. This has led to the coining of the term &quot;industrial melanism&quot; to refer to the genetic darkening of species in response to pollutants. As a result of the relatively simple and easy-to-understand circumstances of the adaptation, the peppered moth has become a common example used in explaining or demonstrating natural selection to laypeople and classroom students through simulations.

The first &quot;carbonaria&quot; morph was recorded by Edleston in Manchester in 1848, and over the subsequent years it increased in frequency. Predation experiments, particularly by Bernard Kettlewell, established that the agent of selection was birds who preyed on the &quot;carbonaria&quot; morph. Subsequent experiments and observations have supported the initial evolutionary explanation of the phenomenon.

== Genetic basis of melanism==
The evolution of the industrial melanism mutation has been shown to be due to the insertion of a transposable element into the first intron of the &quot;cortex&quot; gene, resulting in an increase in the abundance of the &quot;cortex&quot; transcript, which is expressed in developing wings.

== Gallery ==
==References==
== External links ==
* Bruce Grant has written several papers on melanism in the peppered moth which are listed on his home page.
* Online lecture: &quot;The rise and fall of the melanic Peppered Moth&quot; presented by Laurence Cook.
* The Peppered Moth: Decline of a Darwinian Disciple. This is the transcript of Michael Majerus&#x27; lecture delivered to the British Humanist Association on Darwin Day 2004.
* The Peppered Moth: The Proof of Darwinian Evolution. This is the transcript of Majerus&#x27; lecture given at the European Society for Evolutionary Biology meeting on 23 August 2007. The accompanying Microsoft PowerPoint presentation is also available as a pdf file.
* An interactive game to simulate how evolution works with Biston betularia
* Wing vein patterns; this information is found in iNaturalist.org at Wiki - American Peppered Moths.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q865651" start="4" end="17" title="Peppered moth" label="peppered moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q309179" start="63" end="75" title="Nocturnality" label="night-flying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725788" start="76" end="80" title="moth" label="moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662088" start="175" end="198" title="Peppered moth evolution" label="Peppered moth evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q31151" start="216" end="235" title="population genetics" label="population genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="240" end="257" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1355" end="1360" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="1517" end="1523" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="1525" end="1533" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1535" end="1540" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="1542" end="1553" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="1555" end="1566" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="1568" end="1573" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="1575" end="1585" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="1587" end="1597" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="1599" end="1611" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="1613" end="1620" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="1622" end="1632" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="1634" end="1641" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1643" end="1649" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1654" end="1667" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1703" end="1716" title="United Kingdom" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="1721" end="1728" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q946680" start="1751" end="1761" title="voltinism" label="univoltine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1838" end="1851" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319" start="1900" end="1911" title="lepidoptera" label="lepidoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q513359" start="1913" end="1923" title="biological life cycle" label="life cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="1969" end="1974" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179631" start="1976" end="1982" title="instar" label="instar"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="1985" end="1996" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="2000" end="2004" title="pupa" label="pupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q207254" start="2041" end="2049" title="imago" label="imagines"/>
<link wikidata="Q192627" start="2173" end="2178" title="Mimicry" label="mimic"/>
<link wikidata="Q196113" start="2303" end="2313" title="camouflage" label="camouflage"/>
<link wikidata="Q196139" start="2320" end="2334" title="countershading" label="countershading"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135978" start="2440" end="2462" title="Edward Bagnall Poulton" label="Edward Bagnall Poulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q206913" start="3027" end="3043" title="sexual selection" label="sexual selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q167377" start="3265" end="3274" title="pheromone" label="pheromone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104113" start="3366" end="3388" title="Molecular diffusion" label="concentration gradient"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="3463" end="3466" title="bat" label="bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q868460" start="3640" end="3650" title="ovipositor" label="ovipositor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832454" start="3945" end="3960" title="Michael Majerus" label="Michael Majerus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130352" start="4208" end="4219" title="Creationism" label="Creationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="5364" end="5374" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q43142" start="5420" end="5426" title="lichen" label="lichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q184453" start="5469" end="5473" title="Bark (botany)" label="bark"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="5512" end="5523" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349381" start="5721" end="5736" title="crustose lichen" label="crustose lichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12368449" start="5873" end="5887" title="foliose lichen" label="foliose lichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="6065" end="6074" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q725450" start="6438" end="6445" title="melanism" label="melanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q485680" start="6462" end="6468" title="Polymorphism (biology)" label="morphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q39350" start="7310" end="7320" title="speciation" label="speciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q80726" start="8045" end="8051" title="allele" label="allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q106227" start="8131" end="8136" title="locus (genetics)" label="locus"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="8784" end="8793" title="phenotype" label="phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="9075" end="9080" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q196113" start="9389" end="9399" title="camouflage" label="camouflage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="9523" end="9544" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q13174856" start="9652" end="9656" title="soot" label="soot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11777028" start="10158" end="10177" title="industrial melanism" label="industrial melanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="10431" end="10448" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q822510" start="10690" end="10708" title="Bernard Kettlewell" label="Bernard Kettlewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q108403330" start="11296" end="11307" title="Bruce Grant (biologist)" label="Bruce Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832454" start="11588" end="11603" title="Michael Majerus" label="Michael Majerus"/>
<link wikidata="Q656542" start="11635" end="11663" title="Humanists UK" label="British Humanist Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166876" start="11667" end="11677" title="Darwin Day" label="Darwin Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413183" start="11800" end="11841" title="European Society for Evolutionary Biology" label="European Society for Evolutionary Biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11266" start="11886" end="11906" title="Microsoft PowerPoint" label="Microsoft PowerPoint"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24886" wikidata="Q621322" url="?curid=24886" title="Power Macintosh">
<text>The Power Macintosh, later Power Mac, is a family of personal computers designed, manufactured, and sold by Apple Computer, Inc as the core of the Macintosh brand from March 1994 until August 2006.

Described by &quot;Macworld&quot; as &quot;the most important technical evolution of the Macintosh since the Mac II debuted in 1987&quot;, it is the first computer with the PowerPC CPU architecture, the flagship product of the AIM alliance. Existing software for the Motorola 68k processors of previous Macintoshes do not run on it natively, so a Mac 68k emulator is in System 7.1.2. It provides good compatibility, at about two-thirds of the speed of contemporary Macintosh Quadra machines.

The Power Macintosh replaced the Quadra and was initially sold in the same enclosures. Over the next twelve years, it evolved through a succession of enclosure designs, a rename to &quot;Power Mac&quot;, five major generations of PowerPC chips, and a great deal of press coverage, design accolades, and controversy about performance claims. It was discontinued as part of the Mac transition to Intel processors announced in 2005, making way for its replacement, the Mac Pro.

== History ==

=== RISC exploration (1988–1990) ===
The first Power Macintosh models were released in March 1994, but the development of Power Macintosh technology dates back to mid-1988.

Jean-Louis Gassée, president of Apple&#x27;s product division, started the &quot;Jaguar&quot; project to create a computer that would be the fastest desktop computer on the market, capable of voice commands. This was originally envisioned to be a new computer line altogether, not a Macintosh, and the Jaguar team was initially kept independent of the Macintosh team. This separation included operating system development, with the newly conceived &quot;Pink&quot; operating system considered for the new computer. Jaguar was also not intended to be a high-volume, mainstream system. Gassée&#x27;s preference, as it was with the upcoming Macintosh IIfx, was to create a product that would compete in the high-end workstation market, previously not an area of strength for Apple. The decision to use RISC architecture was representative of a shift in the computer industry in 1987 and 1988, where RISC-based systems from Sun Microsystems, Hewlett-Packard, and IBM were significantly outpacing the performance offered by systems based on Motorola&#x27;s 68020 and 68030 processors and Intel&#x27;s 80386 and 80486 CPUs. Initially, Apple invested considerable time and effort in an attempt to create their own RISC CPU in a project code-named &quot;Aquarius&quot;, even to the point where a Cray-1 supercomputer was purchased to assist with designing the chip. The company lacked the financial and manufacturing resources to produce a working product and the project was cancelled in 1989.

By early 1990, Apple was in contact with a number of RISC vendors to find a suitable hardware partner. The team that had created the IIfx independently started experimenting with creating a new Macintosh product that would combine a Motorola 68030 processor with an AMD Am29000 (29k) RISC chip. Apple had already released a product built on the 29k, the Macintosh Display Card 8•24 GC, a so-called &quot;Macintosh Toolbox accelerator&quot; NuBus card that provides significantly faster drawing routines than those included on the Macintosh ROM. The team&#x27;s experiments resulted in a 68020 emulator implemented in RISC, but the 29k project was dropped in mid-1990 due to financial infeasibility.

Apple evaluated CPU architectures including MIPS, SPARC, i860, and ARMof which the last would, much later, be used across many Apple product families. Negotiations with Sun included the condition that Sun would use the Macintosh interface for its SPARC workstation computers in exchange for Apple using Sun&#x27;s SPARC processors in Macintosh workstations; the deal was canceled due to Apple&#x27;s concern that Sun could not produce enough processors. Negotiations with MIPS to use the R4000 processor also included the condition that the Macintosh interface would be available as an alternative to the Advanced Computing Environment. This deal was canceled due to Microsoft being a major partner in the ACE Consortium, as well as concerns about manufacturing capability. The Intel i860 was eliminated from consideration due to its high complexity. Apple did not consider IBM&#x27;s POWER1 processor as an option, believing that IBM would not be willing to license it to third parties.
In mid-1990, Apple chose the Motorola 88110, an as-yet unfinished chip that combined the 88100 CPU and 88200 FPU into a single package. For the rest of the year, Apple&#x27;s engineers developed a 68k emulator that would work with this future chip. This project became known as &quot;RLC&quot;, short form &quot;RISC LC&quot;, a play on the name of Apple&#x27;s upcoming Macintosh LC computer. By January 1991, the engineering team had produced a prototype of a Macintosh LC with its 68020 CPU being swapped out for an 88100 and a 68020 emulator. This prototype was able to use an unmodified Macintosh Toolbox ROM and could boot into System 7. A few months later, a second prototype was created, utilizing a Macintosh IIsi case with the now-completed Motorola 88100 chip.

Jaguar wasn&#x27;t initially intended to be a high-volume mainstream system. Instead, mass-market RISC systems would follow sometime later. After Gassée left Apple in early 1990, the goal of the Jaguar project was refocused to be a mainstream Macintosh system instead of a new platform. The Jaguar project was folded into the Macintosh team in early 1991. While the Jaguar project itself never came to fruition, and Taligent never resulted in a functional operating system, many of the elements originally developed by the Jaguar hardware and software teams were brought to market in mid-1993 with the Centris 660AV and Quadra 840AV, including the Apple Adjustable Keyboard, Apple AudioVision 14 Display, GeoPort, and PlainTalk. The new case designs introduced with the Centris 610 and Quadra 800 had also originated in the Jaguar team.

=== Development and partnership with IBM (1991–1993) ===
By mid-1991, there was internal concern at Apple that the 88100 may not be the correct processor to move forward with as no other computer manufacturers had committed to using the processor. Using IBM&#x27;s POWER was again considered, but it was a seven-chip design at the time, which was not desirable from a cost perspective. Engineers from Apple and IBM&#x27;s Advanced Workstations and Systems Division met in Austin, Texas to discuss creating a single-chip version of IBM&#x27;s POWER1 RISC architecture. Motorola was also present at Apple&#x27;s request. IBM had already been working on such a chip, called the RISC Single Chip (RSC), to reduce the production cost of their entry-level RS/6000 workstation systems. In these meetings, a number of changes were proposed to RSC that would facilitate lower costs, lower power usage, and higher yield production suitable for both the Macintosh and future RS/6000 products.

In early July, executives at the three companies reached an agreement which was formally announced to the public in October. In addition to the new RISC architecture, which was given the name PowerPC, this &quot;AIM alliance&quot; had several goals, including creating an operating system based on Pink, an object-oriented scripting language called ScriptX, and a cross-platform media player called the Kaleida Media Player. Of the alliance, John Sculley said, &quot;The Macintosh strategy paid off very well for us in the 1980s, but we didn&#x27;t think we could establish the next generation of computing by using that model in the 1990s. Working with IBM, and making it available to everyone, we can have a much wider impact with these technologies than we did with the Macintosh.&quot;

Development of the PowerPC 601 chip started in October 1991 and was completed in 21 months, with volume production starting in July 1993. The first computers to ship with a PowerPC chip were a line of IBM RS/6000 workstations in September 1993. Many Macintosh application developers used these machines for the development of the initial PowerPC ports of their products, as Macintosh-based PowerPC development tools were not ready. The PowerPC 603 (which focused on lowering power usage) and 604 (which focused on high performance) projects were also underway at the same time.

In July 1992, the decision was made to scale back the ambition of the initial system software release; instead of attempting to create a completely new kernel, Apple focused on producing a version of System 7 where portions of the existing Macintosh Toolbox ROM were rewritten to use native PowerPC code instead of emulating a 680x0. This provided a significant performance boost for certain highly utilized parts of the operating system, particularly QuickDraw.

The first public demonstration of the new Power Macintosh — specifically, a prototype of what would become the Power Macintosh 6100 – was at an Apple Pacific sales meeting in Hawaii in October 1992. The demo was a success, and in the following months, the product plan expanded to include three models: the entry-level 6100, a mid-range 7100 housed in the Macintosh IIvx&#x27;s desktop case, and a high-end 8100 based on the Quadra 800&#x27;s mini-tower case. A fourth project, the Macintosh Processor Upgrade Card, was started in July 1993 to provide a straightforward upgrade path to owners of Centris- and Quadra-based Macintosh computers. The importance of this was especially significant for the Quadra 700, 900, and 950, which were not going to receive full logic board replacements. Computers upgraded in this fashion received new names such as &quot;Power Macintosh Q650&quot; and &quot;Power Macintosh 900&quot;.

=== Release and reception (1994–1995) ===

The original plan was to release the first Power Macintosh machine on January 24, 1994, exactly ten years after the release of the first Macintosh. Ian Diery, who was EVP and general manager of the Personal Computer Division at the time, moved the release date back to March 14 in order to give manufacturing enough time to build enough machines to fill the sales channels and to ensure that the Macintosh Processor Upgrade Card would be available at the same time. This was a departure from prior practice at Apple; they had typically released upgrade packages months after the introduction of new Macintoshes.

The Power Macintosh was formally introduced at the Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts in Manhattan on March 14. Pre-orders for the new Power Macintosh models were brisk, with an announced 150,000 machines already having been sold by that date. MacWorld&#x27;s review of the 6100/60 noted that &quot;Not only has Apple finally regained the performance lead it lost about eight years ago when PCs appeared using Intel&#x27;s 80386 CPU, but it has pushed far ahead.&quot; The performance of 680x0 software is slower due to the emulation layer, but MacWorld&#x27;s benchmarks showed noticeably faster CPU, disk, video, and floating-point performance than the Quadra 610 it replaced. By January 1995, Apple had sold 1 million Power Macintosh systems.

Speed-bumped versions of the Power Macintosh line were introduced at the beginning of 1995, followed in April by the first PowerPC 603 models: an all-in-one model called the Power Macintosh 5200 LC and a replacement for the Quadra 630 called the Power Macintosh 6200. Performa variants of these machines were sold as well, continuing the practice of re-branding other Macintosh models for sale in department stores and big-box electronics retailers. While the 5200 LC was well received by critics for its design, performance, and cost, both it and the 6200 suffered from stability issues (and in the case of the 5200, display issues as well) that could only be solved by bringing the machine to an Apple dealer for replacement parts.

By mid-1995, the burgeoning Power Macintosh line had all but completely supplanted every prior Macintosh line, with only the high-end Quadra 950 and two low-cost education models (the all-in-one Macintosh LC 580 and desktop LC 630) remaining in production. The competitive marketplace for &quot;accelerator cards&quot; that had existed for earlier Macintosh systems largely disappeared due to the comparatively low price of Apple&#x27;s Macintosh Processor Upgrade Card (US$600). DayStar Digital sold upgrade cards for the IIci and various Quadra models, and full motherboard replacements were available from Apple as well. Macintosh clones from companies like DayStar Digital and Power Computing were also coming to the market at this time, undercutting Apple&#x27;s prices.

=== Transition to standardized hardware (1995–1999) ===

When the Power Macintosh was introduced, it included the same internal and external expansion connections as other Macintosh models, all of which (save for audio input and output) were either wholly proprietary to, or largely exclusive to Apple computers. Over the next five years, Apple replaced all these ports with industry-standard connectors.

The first generation of Power Macintoshes had shipped with NuBus, but by the end of 1993, it was becoming clear that Intel&#x27;s PCI bus was going to be the widely adopted future of internal expansion. Apple&#x27;s position as a relatively small player in the larger personal computer market meant that few device manufacturers invested in creating both NuBus- and PCI-compatible versions of their cards. The first PCI-based system was the range-topping Power Macintosh 9500, introduced in May 1995. This was followed shortly afterwards by the introduction of the &quot;Power Surge&quot; line of second-generation Power Macintosh systems – the Power Macintosh 7200, 7500 and 8500. The 8500 and 9500 were built around the new PowerPC 604, offering speeds starting at 120 MHz. InfoWorld&#x27;s review of the 8500 showed a speed improvement in their &quot;business applications suite&quot; benchmark from 10 minutes with the 8100/100, to 7:37 for the 8500/120. They also noted that the 8500 runs an average of 24 to 44 percent faster than a similarly clocked Intel Pentium chip, increasing to double on graphics and publishing tasks.

The transition to PCI continued into 1996, with the introduction of the all-in-one 5400, desktop 6300/160 (usually sold as a Performa 6360), and mini-tower 6400 models. The success of the Macintosh clone market also prompted Apple to produce its own inexpensive machine using parts and production techniques that were common in both the clone market and the Wintel desktop market at the time. The Power Macintosh 4400 (sold as a 7220 in Asia and Australia) employed bent sheet metal instead of plastic for its case internals, and included a standard ATX power supply.

Alongside the transition to PCI, Apple began a gradual transition away from SCSI hard disks to IDE as a cost-saving measure, both for themselves and for users who wanted to upgrade their hard drives. The low-end 5200 and 6200 were the first to adopt IDE internal drives, though Apple&#x27;s proprietary 25-pin external SCSI connector remained. The beige Power Macintosh G3 models being the last to include SCSI drives as standard, and it was the last Macintosh to include the external SCSI connector. When the Power Macintosh G3 (Blue and White) was introduced in early 1999, the port was replaced by two FireWire 400 ports. The Blue and White G3 was also the last Macintosh to include Apple Desktop Bus ports, a proprietary technology created by Steve Wozniak to connect keyboards, mice and software protection dongles such as those from Avid Technology. Two USB ports were also included, making this the only Power Macintosh to include both ADB and USB.

Another port that was retired during this time is the Apple Attachment Unit Interface. This was a proprietary version of the industry-standard Attachment Unit Interface connector for 10BASE5 Ethernet that Apple had created to avoid confusion with the 15-pin connector that Apple used for connecting external displays. The AAUI port required a costly external transceiver to connect to a network. By the early 1990s, the networking industry was coalescing around the 10BASE-T connector, leading Apple to include this port alongside AAUI in mid-1995, starting with the Power Macintosh 9500. The Power Macintosh G3 excluded the AAUI port.

The Power Mac G4 (AGP Graphics) was released in the second half of 1999; it was the first Power Macintosh to include only industry-standard internal and external expansion. For some years afterwards, a number of third parties created dongles that provided backwards compatibility to users of newer Power Mac systems with old hardware. This included companies like Griffin Technology, MacAlly Peripherals, Rose Electronics and many others. In some cases, these companies produced adapters that matched the aesthetic design of the Power Mac.

=== Industrial design and the Megahertz Myth (1999–2002) ===

Shortly after Steve Jobs&#x27; return to Apple in 1997, Jony Ive was appointed senior vice president of industrial design. Building on the critical and commercial success of the iMac, Ive and his team created an entirely new case design for the Power Macintosh G3, combining many of the aesthetic principles of the iMac (curves, translucent plastics, use of color) with the ease-of-access characteristics of the company&#x27;s popular &quot;Outrigger&quot; Macintosh models from previous years. The result was the Power Macintosh G3 (Blue and White), a machine that received considerable plaudits from reviewers, including &quot;PC Magazine&quot;&#x27;s Technical Excellence Award for 1999. &quot;The Power Mac provides the fastest access to the insides of a computer we&#x27;ve ever seen,&quot; they wrote. &quot;Just lift a handle and a hinged door reveals everything inside.&quot; This case design, code-named &quot;El Capitan&quot;, was retained through the entire lifetime of the Power Mac G4. The introduction of the Blue and White G3 mini-tower also marked the end of the desktop and all-in-one Power Macintosh case designs, the latter being replaced by the iMac.

A second model called the Power Mac G4 Cube was introduced in 2000, which fitted the specifications of a mid-range Power Mac G4 into a cube less than 9&quot; in each axis. This model was on sale for about a year before being discontinued, and was not considered a sales success (150,000 units were sold, about one-third of Apple&#x27;s projections), but the distinctive design of both the computer and its accompanying Harman Kardon speakers prompted the Museum of Modern Art in New York City to retain them in their collection.

The PowerPC chips in the G3 and G4 became a central part of Apple&#x27;s branding and marketing for the Power Macintosh. For example, the Blue and White G3 features the letters &quot;G3&quot; on the side that are fully one-third the height of the entire case, a significant departure from the small labels typically used on prior Macintosh computers. And when the Power Mac G4 was introduced, print ads included pictures of the G4 chip and mentioned its AltiVec instruction set by its own marketing name, &quot;Velocity Engine&quot;. A related element of Apple&#x27;s marketing strategy, especially after mid-2001, was to highlight what they described as the &quot;Megahertz myth&quot;, challenging the belief that a processor&#x27;s clock speed is directly correlated with performance. This had become important with the introduction of Intel&#x27;s Pentium 4, which featured significantly higher clock speeds than competing chips from Sun, IBM, and AMD, but without a corresponding performance benefit.

The company&#x27;s public presentations – Stevenotes in particular – often featured lengthy segments pitting a high-powered Compaq or Dell computer against the Power Macintosh in a series of benchmarks and scripted tasks, usually in Adobe Photoshop. These presentations often showed the Power Macintosh besting Intel&#x27;s Pentium chips by margins significantly exceeding 50%, but independent benchmarks did not bear this out. InfoWorld reviewer Jennifer Plonka reported that the 400 MHz G3 was 11% slower than a comparably-specced Pentium II-450 in an Office applications suite test, while Photoshop 5.0 was faster by 26%. And in 2003, Maximum PC ran a variety of gaming, Photoshop and LightWave 3D benchmarks, and reported that the Dual 1.25 GHz G4 system was about half the speed of a dual-processor Intel Xeon Prestonia 2.8 GHz system. A related criticism leveled at Power Mac systems from this time, particularly the G4 Mirrored Drive Doors, was the increased fan noise level compared to older systems.

=== The Power Mac G5 and the end of Power (2003–2006) ===
By the time the Power Mac G5 was unveiled at Apple&#x27;s Worldwide Developers Conference in July 2003, Apple&#x27;s desktop range had fallen significantly behind competing computers in performance. The G5 closed much of this gap by moving to the PowerPC 970 processor with clock speeds up to 2.0 GHz, and a full 64-bit architecture. It also introduced a significantly revised enclosure design, replacing the use of plastics with anodized aluminum alloy.

Reviews were generally positive. InfoWorld described the G5 as &quot;Apple&#x27;s best work yet&quot;, and said it &quot;delivers on the present need for rapid computing, deep multitasking, and responsive user interfaces — as well as the future need for mainstream computers that rapidly process and analyze massive data sets.&quot; PC Magazine again awarded the Power Mac G5 with its Award for Technical Excellence for 2003. However, the G5&#x27;s heavy weight (10 pounds more than the previous year&#x27;s Quicksilver Power Mac G4), limited internal expansion options, issues with ground loop, and noise in the single-processor models&#x27; power supply units resulted in significant criticism of the product. Apple also continued to make unsubstantiated performance claims about the new Power Mac. This resulted in the Advertising Standards Authority for the United Kingdom banning Apple from using the phrase &quot;the world&#x27;s fastest, most powerful personal computer&quot; to describe the Power Mac G5 after independent tests carried out by the Broadcast Advertising Clearance Centre determined the claim to be false. Another claim made by Steve Jobs at the 2003 Worldwide Developers Conference was that the company would be selling a 3 GHz G5 by mid-2004; this never happened.

Three generations of Power Mac G5 were released before it was discontinued during the Mac transition to Intel processors. The announcement of the transition came in mid-2005, but the third generation of G5 systems was introduced towards the end of 2005. Most notably in this generation was the introduction of a Quad-core 2.5 GHz system. Not only was this the first Apple computer with four processing cores, it was the first to incorporate PCI Express instead of PCI-X for internal expansion. It also required an IEC 60320 C19 power connector that was more common on rackmounted server hardware, instead of the industry-standard C13 connector used with personal computers.

The official end to the Power Macintosh line came at the 2006 Worldwide Developers Conference, where Phil Schiller introduced its replacement, the Mac Pro. The G5&#x27;s enclosure design was retained for the Mac Pro and continued to be used for seven more years, making it among the longest-lived designs in Apple&#x27;s history.

== Models ==
The Power Macintosh models can be broadly classified into two categories, depending on whether they were released before or after Apple introduced its &quot;four quadrant&quot; product strategy in 1998. Before the introduction of the Power Macintosh G3 (Blue and White) in 1999, Apple had shipped Power Macintosh-labelled machines in nine different form factors, some of which were carry-overs from pre-PowerPC product lines, such as the Quadra/Centris 610 and the IIvx. This was reduced to one model in the new product strategy, with the exception of the Power Mac G4 Cube in 2000 and 2001.

=== 1994–1997 ===
Apple named Power Macintosh models from this period after the first pre-PowerPC model of Macintosh to use a particular form factor, followed by a slash and the speed of the CPU. For example, the Power Macintosh 6300/120 uses the Quadra 630&#x27;s form factor and has a CPU.

Machines with &quot;AV&quot; in their name denote variants that include extended audio-video capabilities.

Machines with &quot;PC Compatible&quot; or &quot;DOS Compatible&quot; in their name include a separate card with an x86-compatible CPU, typically a 486 or Pentium; these models are therefore capable of running MS-DOS and Microsoft Windows applications, typically Windows 3.1 (for earlier PC Compatible machines pre-1995) or Windows 95 (for later PC Compatible machines since 1995).

Machines with &quot;MP&quot; in their name denote machines that include two CPUs.

These early models had two distinct generations. The first generation uses the PowerPC 601 and 603 processors and used the old NuBus/PDS expansion slots, while the second generation uses the faster 603e, 604 and 604e chips as well as industry-standard PCI expansion slots. The second generation also makes use of Open Firmware, allowing them to more easily boot alternate operating systems (including OS X via XPostFacto), though use of various hacks was still necessary.

==== Power Macintosh 4400 ====

The Power Macintosh 4400 is a desktop case with a height of , suitable for horizontal placement with a monitor on top.
* Power Macintosh 4400/160, 200, 200 (PC Compatible) (Marketed as the Power Macintosh 7220 in some regions)

==== Power Macintosh 5200 ====
The Power Macintosh 5200 is an all-in-one form factor with specifications and internal designs similar to the Quadra 630. Collectively these machines are sometimes referred to as the &quot;Power Macintosh/Performa 5000 series&quot;.
* Power Macintosh 5200/75 LC
* Power Macintosh 5260/100, 120
* Power Macintosh 5300/100 LC
* Power Macintosh 5400/120, 180, 200
* Power Macintosh 5500/225, 250

==== Centris 610 ====

The Centris 610 form factor is a low-profile &quot;pizza-box&quot; design with a height of , intended to be placed on a desktop with a monitor on top.
* Power Macintosh 6100/60, 60AV, 66, 66AV, 66 (DOS Compatible)

==== Quadra 630 ====
The Quadra 630 form factor is a horizontally-oriented design with a height of , suitable for placing a monitor on top.
* Power Macintosh 6200/75
* Power Macintosh 6300/120, 160

==== Performa 6400 ====
The Performa 6400 form factor is a mini-tower design, suitable for being placed beside a monitor.
* Power Macintosh 6400/180, 200
* Power Macintosh 6500/225, 250, 275, 300

==== Power Macintosh 7100 ====

The IIvx form factor is a horizontally-oriented desktop form factor with a height of , suitable for placing a monitor on top.
* Power Macintosh 7100/66, 66AV, 80, 80AV

==== Power Macintosh 7500 ====
The Power Macintosh 7500 form factor is a horizontally-oriented desktop design with a height of , suitable for placing a monitor on top.
* Power Macintosh 7200/75, 90, 120 (PC), 200 (PC)
* Power Macintosh 7300/166, 180 (PC), 200
* Power Macintosh 7500/100
* Power Macintosh 7600/120, 132, 200

==== Quadra 800 ====
The Quadra 800 form factor is a mini-tower design, with a width of .

* Power Macintosh 8100/80, 80AV, 100, 100AV, 110, 110AV
* Power Macintosh 8115/110
* Power Macintosh 8200/100, 120
* Power Macintosh 8500/120, 132, 150, 180
* Power Macintosh 8515/120

==== Power Macintosh 9600 ====
The Power Macintosh 9600 form factor is a mini-tower design with a width of .
* Power Macintosh 8600/200, 250, 300
* Power Macintosh 9500/120, 132, 150, 180MP, 200
* Power Macintosh 9515/132
* Power Macintosh 9600/200, 200MP, 233, 300, 350

=== 1997–2006 ===

Starting with the Power Macintosh G3, Apple changed its product naming to include the generation of PowerPC CPU, with the name of the form factor or a key feature afterwards in brackets.

The all-in-one models would eventually be spun off into the iMac line, whilst the compact form factor models would be spun off into the Mac Mini.

==== Power Macintosh G3 ====
* Power Macintosh G3 Desktop
* Power Macintosh G3 Mini Tower
* Power Macintosh G3 All-In-One
* Power Macintosh G3 Blue and White

==== Power Mac G4 ====

* Power Mac G4 PCI Graphics
* Power Mac G4 AGP Graphics
* Power Mac G4 Gigabit Ethernet
* Power Mac G4 Digital Audio
* Power Mac G4 Quicksilver
* Power Mac G4 Quicksilver 2002
* Power Mac G4 Mirrored Drive Doors
* Power Mac G4 Mirrored Drive Doors FW800
* Power Mac G4 Mirrored Drive Doors 2003
* Power Mac G4 Cube

==== Power Mac G5 ====

The Power Mac G5&#x27;s name was changed to incorporate the time period in which the model was released.
* Power Mac G5 Mid 2003
* Power Mac G5 Mid 2004
* Power Mac G5 Late 2004
* Power Mac G5 Early 2005
* Power Mac G5 Late 2005

== Naming ==
The Power Mac brand name was used for Apple&#x27;s high-end tower style computers, targeted primarily at businesses and creative professionals, in differentiation to their more compact &quot;iMac&quot; line (intended for home use) and the &quot;eMac&quot; line (for the education markets). They were usually equipped with Apple&#x27;s newest technologies, and commanded the highest prices among Apple desktop models. Some Power Mac G4 and G5 models were offered in dual-processor configurations.

Prior to the &quot;Power Mac&quot; name change, certain &quot;Power Macintosh&quot; models were otherwise identical to their lower-cost re-branded siblings sold as the Macintosh LC and Macintosh Performa, as well as the dedicated Apple Workgroup Server and Macintosh Server G3 &amp; G4 lines. Other past Macintosh lines which used PowerPC processors include the PowerBook 5300 and later models, iMac, iBook and Xserve as well as the Apple Network Server, which was technically not a Macintosh.

== Advertising and marketing ==
Apple positioned the Power Macintosh as a high-end personal computer aimed at businesses and creative professionals with an advertising campaign consisting of several television commercials and print ads. The television commercials used the slogan &quot;The Future Is Better Than You Expected&quot;, featuring the first three Power Macintosh computers to showcase special features such as networking and MS-DOS compatibility.

In 1993 and 1994, a television advertising campaign created by BBDO aired with the slogan &quot;It does more, it costs less, it&#x27;s that simple.&quot;

== Timeline ==
== See also ==
*Mac Pro
*PowerBook
*List of Mac models grouped by CPU type

== References ==
== External links ==

*Apple.com – Support – Specifications – Power Mac
*Everymac.com – Apple Power Macintosh systems
*Lowendmac.com – Power Mac Index</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q621322" start="4" end="19" title="Power Macintosh" label="Power Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q621322" start="27" end="36" title="Power Macintosh" label="Power Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="53" end="70" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="108" end="127" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Computer, Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="147" end="156" title="Mac (computer)" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q631823" start="218" end="226" title="Macworld" label="Macworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753588" start="308" end="314" title="Macintosh II" label="Mac II"/>
<link wikidata="Q209860" start="372" end="379" title="PowerPC" label="PowerPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660973" start="426" end="438" title="AIM alliance" label="AIM alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q674007" start="466" end="478" title="Motorola 68040" label="Motorola 68k"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316985" start="546" end="562" title="Mac 68k emulator" label="Mac 68k emulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882844" start="664" end="680" title="Macintosh Quadra" label="Macintosh Quadra"/>
<link wikidata="Q420949" start="1068" end="1102" title="Mac transition to Intel processors" label="Mac transition to Intel processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q308869" start="1158" end="1165" title="Mac Pro" label="Mac Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254581" start="1357" end="1374" title="Jean-Louis Gassée" label="Jean-Louis Gassée"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390313" start="1811" end="1815" title="Apple Pink" label="Pink"/>
<link wikidata="Q350951" start="1995" end="2009" title="Macintosh IIfx" label="Macintosh IIfx"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="2156" end="2173" title="Reduced instruction set computer" label="RISC architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="2277" end="2293" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun Microsystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="2295" end="2310" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="2316" end="2319" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="2393" end="2401" title="Motorola" label="Motorola"/>
<link wikidata="Q916240" start="2409" end="2414" title="Motorola 68020" label="68020"/>
<link wikidata="Q378761" start="2419" end="2424" title="Motorola 68030" label="68030"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="2440" end="2445" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="2453" end="2458" title="i386" label="80386"/>
<link wikidata="Q213423" start="2463" end="2468" title="i486" label="80486"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="2469" end="2473" title="Central processing unit" label="CPUs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093705" start="2645" end="2651" title="Cray-1" label="Cray-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q378761" start="3078" end="3092" title="Motorola 68030" label="Motorola 68030"/>
<link wikidata="Q294839" start="3111" end="3122" title="AMD Am29000" label="AMD Am29000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423935" start="3249" end="3266" title="Macintosh Toolbox" label="Macintosh Toolbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928621" start="3285" end="3290" title="NuBus" label="NuBus"/>
<link wikidata="Q527464" start="3589" end="3593" title="MIPS architecture" label="MIPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q273190" start="3595" end="3600" title="SPARC" label="SPARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q338518" start="3602" end="3606" title="Intel i860" label="i860"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="3612" end="3615" title="ARM architecture" label="ARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q273190" start="3792" end="3797" title="SPARC" label="SPARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032799" start="4033" end="4038" title="R4000" label="R4000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686164" start="4150" end="4180" title="Advanced Computing Environment" label="Advanced Computing Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="4212" end="4221" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090904" start="4430" end="4436" title="POWER1" label="POWER1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2752847" start="4562" end="4576" title="MC88110" label="Motorola 88110"/>
<link wikidata="Q18752602" start="4904" end="4916" title="Macintosh LC" label="Macintosh LC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423935" start="5125" end="5142" title="Macintosh Toolbox" label="Macintosh Toolbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q420384" start="5167" end="5175" title="System 7" label="System 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430528" start="5241" end="5255" title="Macintosh IIsi" label="Macintosh IIsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274617" start="5908" end="5921" title="Macintosh Quadra 660AV" label="Centris 660AV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274652" start="5926" end="5938" title="Macintosh Quadra 840AV" label="Quadra 840AV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781121" start="5954" end="5979" title="Apple Adjustable Keyboard" label="Apple Adjustable Keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781123" start="5981" end="6009" title="Apple AudioVision 14 Display" label="Apple AudioVision 14 Display"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502767" start="6011" end="6018" title="GeoPort" label="GeoPort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200603" start="6024" end="6033" title="PlainTalk" label="PlainTalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690119" start="6076" end="6087" title="Macintosh Quadra 610" label="Centris 610"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413173" start="6092" end="6102" title="Macintosh Quadra 800" label="Quadra 800"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090904" start="6686" end="6692" title="POWER1" label="POWER1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3928302" start="6819" end="6835" title="RISC Single Chip" label="RISC Single Chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q941021" start="6894" end="6901" title="RS/6000" label="RS/6000"/>
<link wikidata="Q209860" start="7319" end="7326" title="PowerPC" label="PowerPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660973" start="7339" end="7351" title="AIM alliance" label="AIM alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6351949" start="7530" end="7550" title="Kaleida Labs" label="Kaleida Media Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088832" start="7937" end="7948" title="PowerPC 601" label="PowerPC 601"/>
<link wikidata="Q941021" start="8123" end="8130" title="RS/6000" label="RS/6000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088832" start="8354" end="8365" title="PowerPC 603" label="PowerPC 603"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088832" start="8410" end="8413" title="PowerPC 604" label="604"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423935" start="8737" end="8754" title="Macintosh Toolbox" label="Macintosh Toolbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299822" start="8949" end="8958" title="QuickDraw" label="QuickDraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400920" start="9072" end="9092" title="Power Macintosh 6100" label="Power Macintosh 6100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052837" start="9298" end="9302" title="Power Macintosh 7100" label="7100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052862" start="9317" end="9331" title="Macintosh IIvx" label="Macintosh IIvx"/>
<link wikidata="Q753536" start="9368" end="9372" title="Power Macintosh 8100" label="8100"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413173" start="9386" end="9396" title="Macintosh Quadra 800" label="Quadra 800"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042512" start="9443" end="9475" title="Macintosh Processor Upgrade Card" label="Macintosh Processor Upgrade Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137478" start="10058" end="10073" title="Macintosh 128K" label="first Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q581044" start="10591" end="10629" title="Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts" label="Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088832" start="11414" end="11425" title="PowerPC 603" label="PowerPC 603"/>
<link wikidata="Q11888798" start="11465" end="11488" title="Power Macintosh 5200 LC" label="Power Macintosh 5200 LC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084860" start="11515" end="11525" title="Macintosh Quadra 630" label="Quadra 630"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400919" start="11537" end="11557" title="Power Macintosh 6200" label="Power Macintosh 6200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882835" start="11559" end="11567" title="Macintosh Performa" label="Performa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206798" start="12160" end="12170" title="Macintosh Quadra 950" label="Quadra 950"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274630" start="12221" end="12237" title="Macintosh LC 580" label="Macintosh LC 580"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084860" start="12250" end="12256" title="Macintosh LC 630" label="LC 630"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242786" start="12506" end="12521" title="DayStar Digital" label="DayStar Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979571" start="12650" end="12666" title="Macintosh clones" label="Macintosh clones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242786" start="12687" end="12702" title="DayStar Digital" label="DayStar Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236297" start="12707" end="12722" title="Power Computing Corporation" label="Power Computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q191012" start="13339" end="13346" title="Conventional PCI" label="PCI bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052587" start="13664" end="13684" title="Power Macintosh 9500" label="Power Macintosh 9500"/>
<link wikidata="Q753540" start="13854" end="13874" title="Power Macintosh 7200" label="Power Macintosh 7200"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400925" start="13876" end="13880" title="Power Macintosh 7500" label="7500"/>
<link wikidata="Q766005" start="13885" end="13889" title="Power Macintosh 8500" label="8500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088832" start="13935" end="13946" title="PowerPC 604" label="PowerPC 604"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474544" start="13985" end="13994" title="InfoWorld" label="InfoWorld"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353724" start="14266" end="14279" title="P5 (microarchitecture)" label="Intel Pentium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979571" start="14530" end="14545" title="Macintosh clone" label="Macintosh clone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197310" start="14700" end="14706" title="Wintel" label="Wintel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400912" start="14739" end="14759" title="Power Macintosh 4400" label="Power Macintosh 4400"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972" start="14892" end="14908" title="Power supply unit (computer)" label="ATX power supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q220868" start="14987" end="14991" title="SCSI" label="SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q230360" start="15006" end="15009" title="Integrated Drive Electronics" label="IDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389317" start="15230" end="15244" title="SCSI connector" label="SCSI connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107044" start="15421" end="15456" title="Power Macintosh G3 (Blue and White)" label="Power Macintosh G3 (Blue and White)"/>
<link wikidata="Q181693" start="15516" end="15528" title="IEEE 1394" label="FireWire 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q621236" start="15597" end="15614" title="Apple Desktop Bus" label="Apple Desktop Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q483382" start="15658" end="15671" title="Steve Wozniak" label="Steve Wozniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q614239" start="15703" end="15729" title="software protection dongle" label="software protection dongle"/>
<link wikidata="Q385452" start="15750" end="15765" title="Avid (company)" label="Avid Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="15771" end="15774" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781124" start="15922" end="15953" title="Apple Attachment Unit Interface" label="Apple Attachment Unit Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q757852" start="16011" end="16036" title="Attachment Unit Interface" label="Attachment Unit Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q169045" start="16051" end="16058" title="10BASE5" label="10BASE5"/>
<link wikidata="Q102039327" start="16334" end="16342" title="Ethernet over twisted pair" label="10BASE-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052587" start="16435" end="16455" title="Power Macintosh 9500" label="Power Macintosh 9500"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525309" start="16509" end="16521" title="Power Mac G4" label="Power Mac G4"/>
<link wikidata="Q16796509" start="16739" end="16745" title="dongle" label="dongle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19837" start="17122" end="17132" title="Steve Jobs" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q164750" start="17164" end="17172" title="Jonathan Ive" label="Jony Ive"/>
<link wikidata="Q14091" start="17286" end="17290" title="iMac" label="iMac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112916" start="17549" end="17558" title="Outrigger Macintosh" label="Outrigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107044" start="17622" end="17657" title="Power Macintosh G3 (Blue and White)" label="Power Macintosh G3 (Blue and White)"/>
<link wikidata="Q631830" start="17737" end="17748" title="PC Magazine" label="PC Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q14091" start="18273" end="18277" title="iMac" label="iMac"/>
<link wikidata="Q428888" start="18306" end="18323" title="Power Mac G4 Cube" label="Power Mac G4 Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476454" start="18699" end="18712" title="Harman Kardon" label="Harman Kardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="18735" end="18755" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="18759" end="18772" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q441145" start="19264" end="19271" title="AltiVec" label="AltiVec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495304" start="19475" end="19489" title="Megahertz myth" label="Megahertz myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q237757" start="19661" end="19670" title="Pentium 4" label="Pentium 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q911691" start="19708" end="19720" title="Clock rate" label="clock speeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="19761" end="19764" title="Advanced Micro Devices" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484470" start="19858" end="19868" title="Stevenotes" label="Stevenotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q324603" start="19940" end="19946" title="Compaq" label="Compaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q30873" start="19950" end="19954" title="Dell" label="Dell"/>
<link wikidata="Q129793" start="20049" end="20064" title="Adobe Photoshop" label="Adobe Photoshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795863" start="20454" end="20464" title="Maximum PC" label="Maximum PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q857341" start="20504" end="20516" title="LightWave 3D" label="LightWave 3D"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20626" end="20640" title="Xeon#Prestonia" label="Xeon Prestonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512726" start="20900" end="20912" title="Power Mac G5" label="Power Mac G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q824504" start="20942" end="20973" title="Worldwide Developers Conference" label="Worldwide Developers Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752061" start="21131" end="21142" title="PowerPC 970" label="PowerPC 970"/>
<link wikidata="Q567502" start="21314" end="21331" title="Anodizing" label="anodized aluminum"/>
<link wikidata="Q992463" start="21923" end="21934" title="Ground loop (electricity)" label="ground loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972" start="21983" end="22001" title="Power supply unit (computer)" label="power supply units"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686747" start="22162" end="22193" title="Advertising Standards Authority (United Kingdom)" label="Advertising Standards Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972057" start="22395" end="22433" title="Broadcast Advertising Clearance Centre" label="Broadcast Advertising Clearance Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q824504" start="22513" end="22544" title="Worldwide Developers Conference" label="Worldwide Developers Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q420949" start="22715" end="22749" title="Mac transition to Intel processors" label="Mac transition to Intel processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q206924" start="23070" end="23081" title="PCI Express" label="PCI Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q868561" start="23093" end="23098" title="PCI-X" label="PCI-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q134156" start="23143" end="23152" title="IEC 60320" label="IEC 60320"/>
<link wikidata="Q659176" start="23405" end="23418" title="Phil Schiller" label="Phil Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q308869" start="23451" end="23458" title="Mac Pro" label="Mac Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107044" start="23882" end="23917" title="Power Macintosh G3 (Blue and White)" label="Power Macintosh G3 (Blue and White)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690119" start="24086" end="24104" title="Macintosh Quadra 610" label="Quadra/Centris 610"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052862" start="24113" end="24117" title="Macintosh IIvx" label="IIvx"/>
<link wikidata="Q428888" start="24204" end="24221" title="Power Mac G4 Cube" label="Power Mac G4 Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084860" start="24488" end="24498" title="Macintosh Quadra 630" label="Quadra 630"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156151" start="24736" end="24749" title="Compatibility card" label="separate card"/>
<link wikidata="Q213423" start="24790" end="24793" title="i486" label="486"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353724" start="24797" end="24804" title="Pentium (original)" label="Pentium"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="24852" end="24858" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="24863" end="24880" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q495432" start="24905" end="24916" title="Windows 3.1" label="Windows 3.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q83370" start="24966" end="24976" title="Windows 95" label="Windows 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088832" start="25187" end="25198" title="PowerPC 601" label="PowerPC 601"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088832" start="25203" end="25206" title="PowerPC 600" label="603"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928621" start="25235" end="25240" title="NuBus" label="NuBus"/>
<link wikidata="Q541370" start="25241" end="25244" title="Processor Direct Slot" label="PDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q191012" start="25360" end="25363" title="Conventional PCI" label="PCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324054" start="25421" end="25434" title="Open Firmware" label="Open Firmware"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="25509" end="25513" title="MacOS" label="OS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042440" start="25518" end="25528" title="XPostFacto" label="XPostFacto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083204" start="25538" end="25578" title="Old World ROM" label="use of various hacks was still necessary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400912" start="25734" end="25754" title="Power Macintosh 4400" label="Power Macintosh 4400"/>
<link wikidata="Q11888798" start="26107" end="26127" title="Power Macintosh 5200 LC" label="Power Macintosh 5200"/>
<link wikidata="Q507729" start="26136" end="26156" title="Power Macintosh 5260" label="Power Macintosh 5260"/>
<link wikidata="Q11888798" start="26168" end="26188" title="Power Macintosh 5300 LC" label="Power Macintosh 5300"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357874" start="26198" end="26218" title="Power Macintosh 5400" label="Power Macintosh 5400"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085268" start="26235" end="26255" title="Power Macintosh 5500" label="Power Macintosh 5500"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400920" start="26442" end="26462" title="Power Macintosh 6100" label="Power Macintosh 6100"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400919" start="26646" end="26666" title="Power Macintosh 6200" label="Power Macintosh 6200"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400919" start="26672" end="26692" title="Power Macintosh 6300" label="Power Macintosh 6300"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400918" start="26827" end="26847" title="Power Macintosh 6400" label="Power Macintosh 6400"/>
<link wikidata="Q18364754" start="26859" end="26879" title="Power Macintosh 6500" label="Power Macintosh 6500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052862" start="26936" end="26940" title="Macintosh IIvx" label="IIvx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052837" start="27060" end="27080" title="Power Macintosh 7100" label="Power Macintosh 7100"/>
<link wikidata="Q753540" start="27271" end="27291" title="Power Macintosh 7200" label="Power Macintosh 7200"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400923" start="27321" end="27341" title="Power Macintosh 7300" label="Power Macintosh 7300"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400925" start="27363" end="27383" title="Power Macintosh 7500" label="Power Macintosh 7500"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400926" start="27390" end="27410" title="Power Macintosh 7600" label="Power Macintosh 7600"/>
<link wikidata="Q753536" start="27519" end="27539" title="Power Macintosh 8100" label="Power Macintosh 8100"/>
<link wikidata="Q753536" start="27575" end="27595" title="Power Macintosh 8115" label="Power Macintosh 8115"/>
<link wikidata="Q753540" start="27602" end="27622" title="Power Macintosh 8200" label="Power Macintosh 8200"/>
<link wikidata="Q766005" start="27634" end="27654" title="Power Macintosh 8500" label="Power Macintosh 8500"/>
<link wikidata="Q766005" start="27676" end="27696" title="Power Macintosh 8515" label="Power Macintosh 8515"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400930" start="27813" end="27833" title="Power Macintosh 8600" label="Power Macintosh 8600"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052587" start="27850" end="27870" title="Power Macintosh 9500" label="Power Macintosh 9500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052587" start="27899" end="27919" title="Power Macintosh 9515" label="Power Macintosh 9515"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400928" start="27926" end="27946" title="Power Macintosh 9600" label="Power Macintosh 9600"/>
<link wikidata="Q14091" start="28241" end="28245" title="iMac" label="iMac"/>
<link wikidata="Q308871" start="28317" end="28325" title="Mac Mini" label="Mac Mini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107044" start="28359" end="28377" title="Power Macintosh G3" label="Power Macintosh G3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107044" start="28388" end="28406" title="Power Macintosh G3" label="Power Macintosh G3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107044" start="28420" end="28438" title="Power Macintosh G3" label="Power Macintosh G3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107044" start="28452" end="28470" title="Power Macintosh G3" label="Power Macintosh G3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525309" start="28513" end="28525" title="Power Mac G4" label="Power Mac G4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525309" start="28541" end="28553" title="Power Mac G4" label="Power Mac G4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525309" start="28569" end="28581" title="Power Mac G4" label="Power Mac G4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525309" start="28601" end="28613" title="Power Mac G4" label="Power Mac G4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525309" start="28630" end="28642" title="Power Mac G4" label="Power Mac G4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525309" start="28657" end="28669" title="Power Mac G4" label="Power Mac G4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525309" start="28689" end="28701" title="Power Mac G4" label="Power Mac G4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525309" start="28725" end="28737" title="Power Mac G4" label="Power Mac G4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525309" start="28767" end="28779" title="Power Mac G4" label="Power Mac G4"/>
<link wikidata="Q428888" start="28808" end="28825" title="Power Mac G4 Cube" label="Power Mac G4 Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512726" start="28958" end="28970" title="Power Mac G5" label="Power Mac G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512726" start="28982" end="28994" title="Power Mac G5" label="Power Mac G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512726" start="29006" end="29018" title="Power Mac G5" label="Power Mac G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512726" start="29031" end="29043" title="Power Mac G5" label="Power Mac G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512726" start="29057" end="29069" title="Power Mac G5" label="Power Mac G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q115384238" start="29154" end="29159" title="Computer tower" label="tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q846651" start="29559" end="29573" title="Multiprocessing" label="dual-processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18752602" start="29759" end="29771" title="Macintosh LC" label="Macintosh LC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882835" start="29776" end="29794" title="Macintosh Performa" label="Macintosh Performa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413356" start="29821" end="29843" title="Apple Workgroup Server" label="Apple Workgroup Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413356" start="29848" end="29876" title="Apple Workgroup Server" label="Macintosh Server G3 &amp;amp; G4"/>
<link wikidata="Q442654" start="29953" end="29967" title="PowerBook 5300" label="PowerBook 5300"/>
<link wikidata="Q14091" start="29986" end="29990" title="iMac" label="iMac"/>
<link wikidata="Q305889" start="29992" end="29997" title="iBook" label="iBook"/>
<link wikidata="Q621384" start="30002" end="30008" title="Xserve" label="Xserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q119827" start="30024" end="30044" title="Apple Network Server" label="Apple Network Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761818" start="30242" end="30262" title="advertising campaign" label="advertising campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q854995" start="30285" end="30306" title="television commercial" label="television commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="30507" end="30517" title="computer networking" label="networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="30522" end="30528" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q571438" start="30608" end="30612" title="BBDO" label="BBDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q308869" start="30731" end="30738" title="Mac Pro" label="Mac Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q621317" start="30740" end="30749" title="PowerBook" label="PowerBook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637831" start="30751" end="30789" title="List of Mac models grouped by CPU type" label="List of Mac models grouped by CPU type"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24888" wikidata="Q224093" url="?curid=24888" title="Promoter (genetics)">
<text>In genetics, a promoter is a sequence of DNA to which proteins bind to initiate transcription of a single RNA transcript from the DNA downstream of the promoter. The RNA transcript may encode a protein (mRNA), or can have a function in and of itself, such as tRNA or rRNA. Promoters are located near the transcription start sites of genes, upstream on the DNA (towards the 5&#x27; region of the sense strand).
Promoters can be about 100–1000 base pairs long, the sequence of which is highly dependent on the gene and product of transcription, type or class of RNA polymerase recruited to the site, and species of organism.

==Overview==
For transcription to take place, the enzyme that synthesizes RNA, known as RNA polymerase, must attach to the DNA near a gene. Promoters contain specific DNA sequences such as response elements that provide a secure initial binding site for RNA polymerase and for proteins called transcription factors that recruit RNA polymerase. These transcription factors have specific activator or repressor sequences of corresponding nucleotides that attach to specific promoters and regulate gene expression.

;In bacteria: The promoter is recognized by RNA polymerase and an associated sigma factor, which in turn are often brought to the promoter DNA by an activator protein&#x27;s binding to its own DNA binding site nearby.
;In eukaryotes: The process is more complicated, and at least seven different factors are necessary for the binding of an RNA polymerase II to the promoter.
;In archaea: The promoter resembles an eukaryotic one, though much simplified. It contains BRE and TATA elements and are recognized by TFB and TBP.

Promoters represent critical elements that can work in concert with other regulatory regions (enhancers, silencers, boundary elements/insulators) to direct the level of transcription of a given gene.
A promoter is induced in response to changes in abundance or conformation of regulatory proteins in a cell, which enable activating transcription factors to recruit RNA polymerase.

Given the short sequences of most promoter elements, promoters can rapidly evolve from random sequences. For instance, in &quot;E. coli&quot;, ~60% of random sequences can evolve expression levels comparable to the wild-type lac promoter with only one mutation, and that ~10% of random sequences can serve as active promoters even without evolution.

== Identification of relative location ==
As promoters are typically immediately adjacent to the gene in question, positions in the promoter are designated relative to the transcriptional start site, where transcription of DNA begins for a particular gene (i.e., positions upstream are negative numbers counting back from -1, for example -100 is a position 100 base pairs upstream).

== Elements ==
=== Bacterial ===
In bacteria, the promoter contains two short sequence elements approximately 10 (Pribnow Box) and 35 nucleotides &quot;upstream&quot; from the transcription start site.
* The sequence at -10 (the -10 element) has the consensus sequence TATAAT.
* The sequence at -35 (the -35 element) has the consensus sequence TTGACA.
* The above consensus sequences, while conserved on average, are not found intact in most promoters. On average, only 3 to 4 of the 6 base pairs in each consensus sequence are found in any given promoter. Few natural promoters have been identified to date that possess intact consensus sequences at both the -10 and -35; artificial promoters with complete conservation of the -10 and -35 elements have been found to transcribe at lower frequencies than those with a few mismatches with the consensus.
* The optimal spacing between the -35 and -10 sequences is 17 bp. The spacer sequence affects promoter strength by up to 600-fold.
* Some promoters contain one or more upstream promoter element (UP element) subsites (consensus sequence 5&#x27;-AAAAAARNR-3&#x27; when centered in the -42 region; consensus sequence 5&#x27;-AWWWWWTTTTT-3&#x27; when centered in the -52 region; W = A or T; R = A or G; N = any base).
* The transcription start site has the consensus sequence YRY.

The above promoter sequences are recognized only by RNA polymerase holoenzyme containing sigma-70. RNA polymerase holoenzymes containing other sigma factors recognize different core promoter sequences.

 ← upstream downstream →
 5&#x27;-XXXXXXXPPPPPPXXXXXXPPPPPPXXXXGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGXXXX-3&#x27;
 -35 -10 Gene to be transcribed

====Probability of occurrence of each nucleotide====
 for -10 sequence
 T A T A A T
 77% 76% 60% 61% 56% 82%

 for -35 sequence
 T T G A C A
 69% 79% 61% 56% 54% 54%

==== Bidirectional (prokaryotic) ====
Promoters can be very closely located in the DNA. Such &quot;closely spaced promoters&quot; have been observed in the DNAs of all life forms, from humans to prokaryotes and are highly conserved. Therefore, they may provide some (presently unknown) advantages.
These pairs of promoters can be positioned in divergent, tandem, and convergent directions. They can also be regulated by transcription factors and differ in various features, such as the nucleotide distance between them, the two promoter strengths, etc.
The most important aspect of two closely spaced promoters is that they will, most likely, interfere with each other. Several studies have explored this using both analytical and stochastic models. There are also studies that measured gene expression in synthetic genes or from one to a few genes controlled by bidirectional promoters.

More recently, one study measured most genes controlled by tandem promoters in &quot;E. coli&quot;. In that study, two main forms of interference were measured. One is when an RNAP is on the downstream promoter, blocking the movement of RNAPs elongating from the upstream promoter. The other is when the two promoters are so close that when an RNAP sits on one of the promoters, it blocks any other RNAP from reaching the other promoter. These events are possible because the RNAP occupies several nucleotides when bound to the DNA, including in transcription start sites.
Similar events occur when the promoters are in divergent and convergent formations. The possible events also depend on the distance between them.

=== Eukaryotic ===
Gene promoters are typically located upstream of the gene and can have regulatory elements several kilobases away from the transcriptional start site (enhancers). In eukaryotes, the transcriptional complex can cause the DNA to bend back on itself, which allows for placement of regulatory sequences far from the actual site of transcription. Eukaryotic RNA-polymerase-II-dependent promoters can contain a TATA box (consensus sequence TATAAA), which is recognized by the general transcription factor TATA-binding protein (TBP); and a B recognition element (BRE), which is recognized by the general transcription factor TFIIB. The TATA element and BRE typically are located close to the transcriptional start site (typically within 30 to 40 base pairs).

Eukaryotic promoter regulatory sequences typically bind proteins called transcription factors that are involved in the formation of the transcriptional complex. An example is the E-box (sequence CACGTG), which binds transcription factors in the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family (e.g. BMAL1-Clock, cMyc). Some promoters that are targeted by multiple transcription factors might achieve a hyperactive state, leading to increased transcriptional activity.
* Core promoter – the minimal portion of the promoter required to properly initiate transcription
** Includes the transcription start site (TSS) and elements directly upstream
** A binding site for RNA polymerase
*** RNA polymerase I: transcribes genes encoding 18S, 5.8S and 28S ribosomal RNAs
*** RNA polymerase II: transcribes genes encoding messenger RNA and certain small nuclear RNAs and microRNA
*** RNA polymerase III: transcribes genes encoding transfer RNA, 5s ribosomal RNAs and other small RNAs
** General transcription factor binding sites, e.g. TATA box, B recognition element.
** Many other elements/motifs may be present. There is no such thing as a set of &quot;universal elements&quot; found in every core promoter.
* Proximal promoter – the proximal sequence upstream of the gene that tends to contain primary regulatory elements
** Approximately 250 base pairs upstream of the start site
** Specific transcription factor binding sites
* Distal promoter – the distal sequence upstream of the gene that may contain additional regulatory elements, often with a weaker influence than the proximal promoter
** Anything further upstream (but not an enhancer or other regulatory region whose influence is positional/orientation independent)
** Specific transcription factor binding sites

====Mammalian promoters====

Up-regulated expression of genes in mammals is initiated when signals are transmitted to the promoters associated with the genes. Promoter DNA sequences may include different elements such as CpG islands (present in about 70% of promoters), a TATA box (present in about 24% of promoters), initiator (Inr) (present in about 49% of promoters), upstream and downstream TFIIB recognition elements (BREu and BREd) (present in about 22% of promoters), and downstream core promoter element (DPE) (present in about 12% of promoters). The presence of multiple methylated CpG sites in CpG islands of promoters causes stable silencing of genes. However, the presence or absence of the other elements have relatively small effects on gene expression in experiments. Two sequences, the TATA box and Inr, caused small but significant increases in expression (45% and 28% increases, respectively). The BREu and the BREd elements significantly decreased expression by 35% and 20%, respectively, and the DPE element had no detected effect on expression.

Cis-regulatory modules that are localized in DNA regions distant from the promoters of genes can have very large effects on gene expression, with some genes undergoing up to 100-fold increased expression due to such a cis-regulatory module. These cis-regulatory modules include enhancers, silencers, insulators and tethering elements. Among this constellation of elements, enhancers and their associated transcription factors have a leading role in the regulation of gene expression.

Enhancers are regions of the genome that are major gene-regulatory elements. Enhancers control cell-type-specific gene expression programs, most often by looping through long distances to come in physical proximity with the promoters of their target genes. In a study of brain cortical neurons, 24,937 loops were found, bringing enhancers to promoters. Multiple enhancers, each often at tens or hundred of thousands of nucleotides distant from their target genes, loop to their target gene promoters and coordinate with each other to control expression of their common target gene.

The schematic illustration in this section shows an enhancer looping around to come into close physical proximity with the promoter of a target gene. The loop is stabilized by a dimer of a connector protein (e.g. dimer of CTCF or YY1), with one member of the dimer anchored to its binding motif on the enhancer and the other member anchored to its binding motif on the promoter (represented by the red zigzags in the illustration). Several cell function specific transcription factors (there are about 1,600 transcription factors in a human cell) generally bind to specific motifs on an enhancer and a small combination of these enhancer-bound transcription factors, when brought close to a promoter by a DNA loop, govern the level of transcription of the target gene. Mediator (coactivator) (a complex usually consisting of about 26 proteins in an interacting structure) communicates regulatory signals from enhancer DNA-bound transcription factors directly to the RNA polymerase II (pol II) enzyme bound to the promoter.

Enhancers, when active, are generally transcribed from both strands of DNA with RNA polymerases acting in two different directions, producing two eRNAs as illustrated in the Figure. An inactive enhancer may be bound by an inactive transcription factor. Phosphorylation of the transcription factor may activate it and that activated transcription factor may then activate the enhancer to which it is bound (see small red star representing phosphorylation of transcription factor bound to enhancer in the illustration). An activated enhancer begins transcription of its RNA before activating a promoter to initiate transcription of messenger RNA from its target gene.

====Bidirectional (mammalian)====
Bidirectional promoters are short (&lt;1 kbp) intergenic regions of DNA between the 5&#x27; ends of the genes in a bidirectional gene pair. A &quot;bidirectional gene pair&quot; refers to two adjacent genes coded on opposite strands, with their 5&#x27; ends oriented toward one another. The two genes are often functionally related, and modification of their shared promoter region allows them to be co-regulated and thus co-expressed. Bidirectional promoters are a common feature of mammalian genomes. About 11% of human genes are bidirectionally paired.

Bidirectionally paired genes in the Gene Ontology database shared at least one database-assigned functional category with their partners 47% of the time. Microarray analysis has shown bidirectionally paired genes to be co-expressed to a higher degree than random genes or neighboring unidirectional genes. Although co-expression does not necessarily indicate co-regulation, methylation of bidirectional promoter regions has been shown to downregulate both genes, and demethylation to upregulate both genes. There are exceptions to this, however. In some cases (about 11%), only one gene of a bidirectional pair is expressed. In these cases, the promoter is implicated in suppression of the non-expressed gene. The mechanism behind this could be competition for the same polymerases, or chromatin modification. Divergent transcription could shift nucleosomes to upregulate transcription of one gene, or remove bound transcription factors to downregulate transcription of one gene.

Some functional classes of genes are more likely to be bidirectionally paired than others. Genes implicated in DNA repair are five times more likely to be regulated by bidirectional promoters than by unidirectional promoters. Chaperone proteins are three times more likely, and mitochondrial genes are more than twice as likely. Many basic housekeeping and cellular metabolic genes are regulated by bidirectional promoters.
The overrepresentation of bidirectionally paired DNA repair genes associates these promoters with cancer. Forty-five percent of human somatic oncogenes seem to be regulated by bidirectional promoters – significantly more than non-cancer causing genes. Hypermethylation of the promoters between gene pairs WNT9A/CD558500, CTDSPL/BC040563, and KCNK15/BF195580 has been associated with tumors.

Certain sequence characteristics have been observed in bidirectional promoters, including a lack of TATA boxes, an abundance of CpG islands, and a symmetry around the midpoint of dominant Cs and As on one side and Gs and Ts on the other. A motif with the consensus sequence of TCTCGCGAGA, also called the CGCG element, was recently shown to drive PolII-driven bidirectional transcription in CpG islands. CCAAT boxes are common, as they are in many promoters that lack TATA boxes. In addition, the motifs NRF-1, GABPA, YY1, and ACTACAnnTCCC are represented in bidirectional promoters at significantly higher rates than in unidirectional promoters. The absence of TATA boxes in bidirectional promoters suggests that TATA boxes play a role in determining the directionality of promoters, but counterexamples of bidirectional promoters do possess TATA boxes and unidirectional promoters without them indicates that they cannot be the only factor.

Although the term &quot;bidirectional promoter&quot; refers specifically to promoter regions of mRNA-encoding genes, luciferase assays have shown that over half of human genes do not have a strong directional bias. Research suggests that non-coding RNAs are frequently associated with the promoter regions of mRNA-encoding genes. It has been hypothesized that the recruitment and initiation of RNA polymerase II usually begins bidirectionally, but divergent transcription is halted at a checkpoint later during elongation. Possible mechanisms behind this regulation include sequences in the promoter region, chromatin modification, and the spatial orientation of the DNA.

=== Archaea ===
The archaeal promoter resembles an eukaryotic one: a TATA box (at -26/-27) and an upstream BRE (at -33/-34) are commonly found, binding to TBP and TFB (homolog of TFIIB). There are also occasionally an initiator element (INR) near the transcription start site [TSS], and a promoter proximal element (PPE) between BRE-TATA and TSS. These two are not necessary, but enhance the strength of a promoter. TFE (homolog of TFIIE) promotes initiation at suboptimal promoter sequences. It binds between -10 and +1, near the Inr.

Strict conservation of these motifs are not necessary, and many archaea with high GC% show &quot;degenerated&quot; TATA boxes. Rather, it&#x27;s the energetic (duplex enthalpy, duplex stability) and structual (intrinsic curvature, bendability) features of the promoter that mainly matter.

== Subgenomic ==
A subgenomic promoter is a promoter added to a virus for a specific heterologous gene, resulting in the formation of mRNA for that gene alone. Many positive-sense RNA viruses produce these subgenomic mRNAs (sgRNA) as one of the common infection techniques used by these viruses and generally transcribe late viral genes. Subgenomic promoters range from 24 nucleotide (Sindbis virus) to over 100 nucleotides (Beet necrotic yellow vein virus) and are usually found upstream of the transcription start.

== Detection ==
A wide variety of algorithms have been developed to facilitate detection of promoters in genomic sequence, and promoter prediction is a common element of many gene prediction methods. Many such tools have been developed. A bacterial promoter region is located before the -35 and -10 Consensus sequences. The closer the promoter region is to the consensus sequences the more often transcription of that gene will take place. There is not a set pattern for promoter regions as there are for consensus sequences.

One approach is to use a biophysical theory of why promoters work. For archaea, a combination of calculated energetic and structual features can detect promoters. For bacteria, a biophysical model that estimates RNAP-sigma70 binding probability can detect and estimate the strengths of promoters.

Another approach is to use a pattern-matching program based on known promoters, from simple hand-crafted regular expressions to advanced machine learning methods such as decision trees, hidden markov models (HMM), and neural networks. YAPP, an 2000s eukaryotic core-promoter prediction program, uses HMM. A 2017 publication predicts bacterial and eukaryotic promoters using a convolutional neural network.

== Binding ==
The initiation of the transcription is a multistep sequential process that involves several mechanisms: promoter location, initial reversible binding of RNA polymerase, conformational changes in RNA polymerase, conformational changes in DNA, binding of nucleoside triphosphate (NTP) to the functional RNA polymerase-promoter complex, and nonproductive and productive initiation of RNA synthesis.

The promoter binding process is crucial in the understanding of the process of gene expression. Tuning synthetic genetic systems relies on precisely engineered synthetic promoters with known levels of transcription rates.

=== Location ===
Although RNA polymerase holoenzyme shows high affinity to non-specific sites of the DNA, this characteristic does not allow us to clarify the process of promoter location. This process of promoter location has been attributed to the structure of the holoenzyme to DNA and sigma 4 to DNA complexes.

== Diseases associated with aberrant function ==

Most diseases are heterogeneous in cause, meaning that one &quot;disease&quot; is often many different diseases at the molecular level, though symptoms exhibited and response to treatment may be identical. How diseases of different molecular origin respond to treatments is partially addressed in the discipline of pharmacogenomics.

Not listed here are the many kinds of cancers involving aberrant transcriptional regulation owing to creation of chimeric genes through pathological chromosomal translocation. Importantly, intervention in the number or structure of promoter-bound proteins is one key to treating a disease without affecting expression of unrelated genes sharing elements with the target gene. Some genes whose change is not desirable are capable of influencing the potential of a cell to become cancerous.

==CpG islands in promoters==
In humans, about 70% of promoters located near the transcription start site of a gene (proximal promoters) contain a CpG island. CpG islands are generally 200 to 2000 base pairs long, have a C:G base pair content &gt;50%, and have regions of DNA where a cytosine nucleotide is followed by a guanine nucleotide and this occurs frequently in the linear sequence of bases along its 5&#x27; → 3&#x27; direction.

Distal promoters also frequently contain CpG islands, such as the promoter of the DNA repair gene &quot;ERCC1&quot;, where the CpG island-containing promoter is located about 5,400 nucleotides upstream of the coding region of the &quot;ERCC1&quot; gene. CpG islands also occur frequently in promoters for functional noncoding RNAs such as microRNAs.

===Methylation of CpG islands stably silences genes===

In humans, DNA methylation occurs at the 5&#x27; position of the pyrimidine ring of the cytosine residues within CpG sites to form 5-methylcytosines. The presence of multiple methylated CpG sites in CpG islands of promoters causes stable silencing of genes. Silencing of a gene may be initiated by other mechanisms, but this is often followed by methylation of CpG sites in the promoter CpG island to cause the stable silencing of the gene.

===Promoter CpG hyper/hypo-methylation in cancer===

Generally, in progression to cancer, hundreds of genes are silenced or activated. Although silencing of some genes in cancers occurs by mutation, a large proportion of carcinogenic gene silencing is a result of altered DNA methylation (see DNA methylation in cancer). DNA methylation causing silencing in cancer typically occurs at multiple CpG sites in the CpG islands that are present in the promoters of protein coding genes.

Altered expressions of microRNAs also silence or activate many genes in progression to cancer (see microRNAs in cancer). Altered microRNA expression occurs through hyper/hypo-methylation of CpG sites in CpG islands in promoters controlling transcription of the microRNAs.

Silencing of DNA repair genes through methylation of CpG islands in their promoters appears to be especially important in progression to cancer (see methylation of DNA repair genes in cancer).

==Canonical sequences and wild-type==
The usage of the term canonical sequence to refer to a promoter is often problematic, and can lead to misunderstandings about promoter sequences. Canonical implies perfect, in some sense.

In the case of a transcription factor binding site, there may be a single sequence that binds the protein most strongly under specified cellular conditions. This might be called canonical.

However, natural selection may favor less energetic binding as a way of regulating transcriptional output. In this case, we may call the most common sequence in a population the wild-type sequence. It may not even be the most advantageous sequence to have under prevailing conditions.

Recent evidence also indicates that several genes (including the proto-oncogene c-myc) have G-quadruplex motifs as potential regulatory signals.

== Synthetic promoter design and engineering ==
Promoters are important gene regulatory elements used in tuning synthetically designed genetic circuits and metabolic networks. For example, to overexpress an important gene in a network, to yield higher production of target protein, synthetic biologists design promoters to upregulate its expression. Automated algorithms can be used to design neutral DNA or insulators that do not trigger gene expression of downstream sequences.

==Diseases that may be associated with variations==
Some cases of many genetic diseases are associated with variations in promoters or transcription factors.

Examples include:
* Asthma
* Beta thalassemia
* Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome

== Constitutive vs regulated ==
Some promoters are called constitutive as they are active in all circumstances in the cell, while others are regulated, becoming active in the cell only in response to specific stimuli.

== Tissue-specific promoter ==
A tissue-specific promoter is a promoter that has activity in only certain cell types.

== Use of the term ==
When referring to a promoter some authors actually mean promoter + operator; i.e., the lac promoter is IPTG inducible, meaning that besides the lac promoter, the lac operon is also present. If the lac operator were not present the IPTG would not have an inducible effect.
Another example is the Tac-Promoter system (Ptac). Notice how tac is written as a tac promoter, while in fact tac is actually both a promoter and an operator.

== See also ==

* Activator (genetics)
* Enhancer (genetics)
* Glossary of gene expression terms
* Operon
* Regulation of gene expression
* Repressor
* Transcription factor
* Promoter bashing
== References ==
== External links ==

* ORegAnno – Open Regulatory Annotation Database
* Identifying a Protein Binding Sites on DNA molecule YouTube tutorial video
* Pleiades Promoter Project – a research project with an aim to generate 160 fully characterized, human DNA promoters of less than 4 kb (MiniPromoters) to drive gene expression in defined brain regions of therapeutic interests.
* ENCODE threads Explorer RNA and chromatin modification patterns around promoters. Nature (journal)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="3" end="11" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q224093" start="15" end="23" title="Promoter (genetics)" label="promoter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="41" end="44" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="54" end="61" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="80" end="93" title="transcription (genetics)" label="transcription"/>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="106" end="109" title="RNA" label="RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="203" end="207" title="mRNA" label="mRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="259" end="263" title="tRNA" label="tRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q215980" start="267" end="271" title="rRNA" label="rRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899329" start="340" end="348" title="Upstream and downstream (DNA)" label="upstream"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="373" end="387" title="Directionality (molecular biology)#5′-end" label="5&amp;#x27; region"/>
<link wikidata="Q6432361" start="395" end="407" title="sense strand" label="sense strand"/>
<link wikidata="Q145911" start="442" end="452" title="base pairs" label="base pairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q272631" start="560" end="574" title="RNA polymerase" label="RNA polymerase"/>
<link wikidata="Q272631" start="712" end="726" title="RNA polymerase" label="RNA polymerase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315962" start="813" end="830" title="response elements" label="response elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q407384" start="917" end="938" title="transcription factors" label="transcription factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q174576" start="1010" end="1019" title="Activator (genetics)" label="activator"/>
<link wikidata="Q425218" start="1023" end="1032" title="repressor" label="repressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="1141" end="1149" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q306436" start="1214" end="1226" title="sigma factor" label="sigma factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205743" start="1330" end="1346" title="DNA binding site" label="DNA binding site"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="1359" end="1369" title="eukaryotes" label="eukaryotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15334993" start="1477" end="1494" title="RNA polymerase II" label="RNA polymerase II"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872" start="1516" end="1523" title="archaea" label="archaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q913367" start="1755" end="1763" title="Enhancer (genetics)" label="enhancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781769" start="1766" end="1775" title="silencer (DNA)" label="silencers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471601" start="1795" end="1805" title="Insulator (genetics)" label="insulators"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="2165" end="2184" title="Escherichia coli" label="&amp;quot;E. coli&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q311359" start="2268" end="2280" title="Lac operon" label="lac promoter"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="2566" end="2592" title="transcription start site" label="transcriptional start site"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="2814" end="2822" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264018" start="2892" end="2903" title="Pribnow box" label="Pribnow Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="2954" end="2978" title="transcription start site" label="transcription start site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295754" start="3028" end="3046" title="consensus sequence" label="consensus sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295754" start="3848" end="3866" title="consensus sequence" label="consensus sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="4176" end="4186" title="holoenzyme" label="holoenzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q306436" start="4198" end="4206" title="sigma-70" label="sigma-70"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413955" start="6674" end="6682" title="TATA box" label="TATA box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295754" start="6684" end="6702" title="consensus sequence" label="consensus sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316030" start="6739" end="6767" title="general transcription factor" label="general transcription factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14878262" start="6768" end="6788" title="TATA-binding protein" label="TATA-binding protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836999" start="6802" end="6823" title="B recognition element" label="B recognition element"/>
<link wikidata="Q425812" start="6887" end="6892" title="TFIIB" label="TFIIB"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825657" start="7201" end="7206" title="E-box" label="E-box"/>
<link wikidata="Q377955" start="7267" end="7289" title="basic helix-loop-helix" label="basic helix-loop-helix"/>
<link wikidata="Q18016440" start="7310" end="7321" title="BMAL1-Clock" label="BMAL1-Clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q420267" start="7323" end="7327" title="cMyc" label="cMyc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502188" start="7696" end="7712" title="RNA polymerase I" label="RNA polymerase I"/>
<link wikidata="Q215980" start="7759" end="7772" title="ribosomal RNA" label="ribosomal RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15334993" start="7778" end="7795" title="RNA polymerase II" label="RNA polymerase II"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="7824" end="7837" title="messenger RNA" label="messenger RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q284578" start="7850" end="7867" title="small nuclear RNA" label="small nuclear RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q310899" start="7873" end="7881" title="microRNA" label="microRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501658" start="7886" end="7904" title="RNA polymerase III" label="RNA polymerase III"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="7933" end="7945" title="transfer RNA" label="transfer RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q10846137" start="7947" end="7964" title="5S ribosomal RNA" label="5s ribosomal RNAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413955" start="8038" end="8046" title="TATA box" label="TATA box"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836999" start="8048" end="8069" title="B recognition element" label="B recognition element"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205743" start="8399" end="8432" title="transcription factor binding site" label="transcription factor binding site"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208832" start="8436" end="8451" title="Distal promoter" label="Distal promoter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138358" start="9002" end="9013" title="CpG site" label="CpG islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413955" start="9053" end="9061" title="TATA box" label="TATA box"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117755" start="9099" end="9114" title="Initiator element" label="initiator (Inr)"/>
<link wikidata="Q874745" start="9361" end="9381" title="DNA methylation" label="methylated CpG sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093165" start="9848" end="9870" title="Cis-regulatory element" label="Cis-regulatory modules"/>
<link wikidata="Q913367" start="10126" end="10135" title="Enhancer (genetics)" label="enhancers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781769" start="10137" end="10146" title="Silencer (genetics)" label="silencers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471601" start="10148" end="10158" title="Insulator (genetics)" label="insulators"/>
<link wikidata="Q407384" start="10252" end="10273" title="transcription factors" label="transcription factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q913367" start="10333" end="10342" title="Enhancer (genetics)" label="Enhancers"/>
<link wikidata="Q21163346" start="11138" end="11142" title="CTCF" label="CTCF"/>
<link wikidata="Q18032405" start="11146" end="11149" title="YY1" label="YY1"/>
<link wikidata="Q14886885" start="11685" end="11707" title="Mediator (coactivator)" label="Mediator (coactivator)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="12709" end="12712" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="12745" end="12750" title="genes" label="genes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="13125" end="13131" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="13135" end="13141" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q135085" start="13234" end="13247" title="Gene Ontology" label="Gene Ontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931516" start="13352" end="13362" title="Microarray" label="Microarray"/>
<link wikidata="Q518328" start="13572" end="13583" title="methylation" label="methylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180951" start="13984" end="13993" title="chromatin" label="chromatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q271794" start="14044" end="14055" title="nucleosomes" label="nucleosomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q422496" start="14405" end="14423" title="Chaperone proteins" label="Chaperone proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="14457" end="14475" title="mitochondrial gene" label="mitochondrial gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q419232" start="14519" end="14531" title="Housekeeping gene" label="housekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="14701" end="14707" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q183001" start="14737" end="14744" title="Somatic (biology)" label="somatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207609" start="14745" end="14754" title="oncogenes" label="oncogenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18032370" start="14908" end="14913" title="WNT9A" label="WNT9A"/>
<link wikidata="Q18035132" start="14924" end="14930" title="CTDSPL" label="CTDSPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q18045437" start="14945" end="14951" title="KCNK15" label="KCNK15"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413955" start="15095" end="15103" title="TATA box" label="TATA box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138358" start="15123" end="15134" title="CpG site" label="CpG islands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15300" end="15312" title="CGCG element" label="CGCG element"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508056" start="15399" end="15408" title="CCAAT box" label="CCAAT box"/>
<link wikidata="Q901612" start="15492" end="15498" title="Sequence motif" label="motifs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18025023" start="15506" end="15511" title="GABPA" label="GABPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q18032405" start="15513" end="15516" title="YY1" label="YY1"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="16035" end="16039" title="mRNA" label="mRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q95385166" start="16056" end="16066" title="luciferase" label="luciferase"/>
<link wikidata="Q427087" start="16177" end="16192" title="non-coding RNAs" label="non-coding RNAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15334993" start="16333" end="16350" title="RNA polymerase II" label="RNA polymerase II"/>
<link wikidata="Q21110793" start="17044" end="17049" title="TFIIE" label="TFIIE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5747302" start="17524" end="17536" title="heterologous" label="heterologous"/>
<link wikidata="Q751911" start="17619" end="17628" title="RNA virus" label="RNA virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q384283" start="17645" end="17660" title="subgenomic mRNA" label="subgenomic mRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302993" start="17824" end="17837" title="Sindbis virus" label="Sindbis virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880168" start="17864" end="17895" title="Beet necrotic yellow vein virus" label="Beet necrotic yellow vein virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248292" start="18132" end="18147" title="gene prediction" label="gene prediction"/>
<link wikidata="Q185612" start="18887" end="18905" title="regular expression" label="regular expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="18919" end="18935" title="machine learning" label="machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q176769" start="18968" end="18987" title="hidden markov model" label="hidden markov model"/>
<link wikidata="Q12811862" start="19000" end="19015" title="neural networks" label="neural networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084460" start="19158" end="19186" title="convolutional neural network" label="convolutional neural network"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="19864" end="19874" title="holoenzyme" label="holoenzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152227" start="20504" end="20520" title="pharmacogenomics" label="pharmacogenomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099361" start="20636" end="20649" title="chimeric gene" label="chimeric gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q916504" start="20672" end="20697" title="chromosomal translocation" label="chromosomal translocation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21159" end="21169" title="CpG site#CpG islands" label="CpG island"/>
<link wikidata="Q145911" start="21237" end="21246" title="base pair" label="base pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="21284" end="21287" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q178425" start="21296" end="21304" title="cytosine" label="cytosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="21305" end="21315" title="nucleotide" label="nucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q169313" start="21333" end="21340" title="guanine" label="guanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q863908" start="21393" end="21401" title="DNA sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q145911" start="21405" end="21409" title="Base pair" label="base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995607" start="21421" end="21448" title="Directionality (molecular biology)" label="5&amp;#x27; → 3&amp;#x27; direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q17917256" start="21555" end="21560" title="ERCC1" label="ERCC1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21756" end="21781" title="Noncoding DNA#Noncoding functional RNA" label="functional noncoding RNAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q310899" start="21790" end="21798" title="microRNA" label="microRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138358" start="21971" end="21979" title="CpG site" label="CpG site"/>
<link wikidata="Q238563" start="21989" end="22005" title="5-methylcytosine" label="5-methylcytosine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22412" end="22433" title="Regulation of transcription in cancer#Transcription silencing/activation in cancers" label="silenced or activated"/>
<link wikidata="Q28209467" start="22593" end="22618" title="DNA methylation in cancer" label="DNA methylation in cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138358" start="22694" end="22702" title="CpG site" label="CpG site"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22711" end="22721" title="CpG site#CpG island" label="CpG island"/>
<link wikidata="Q310899" start="22806" end="22814" title="microRNA" label="microRNA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22882" end="22901" title="MicroRNA#cancer" label="microRNAs in cancer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22947" end="22969" title="Regulation of transcription in cancer#Transcription silencing/activation in cancers" label="hyper/hypo-methylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138358" start="22973" end="22981" title="CpG site" label="CpG site"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22986" end="22996" title="CpG site#CpG island" label="CpG island"/>
<link wikidata="Q310899" start="23044" end="23052" title="microRNA" label="microRNA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23205" end="23246" title="DNA methylation in cancer#Likely role of hypermethylation of DNA repair genes in cancer" label="methylation of DNA repair genes in cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295754" start="23310" end="23328" title="canonical sequence" label="canonical sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q207609" start="24018" end="24032" title="proto-oncogene" label="proto-oncogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q420267" start="24033" end="24038" title="c-myc" label="c-myc"/>
<link wikidata="Q411641" start="24045" end="24057" title="G-quadruplex" label="G-quadruplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q862838" start="24211" end="24233" title="Synthetic biology" label="synthetically designed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263094" start="24255" end="24272" title="metabolic network" label="metabolic network"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="24437" end="24447" title="Transcription (biology)" label="expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="24459" end="24468" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="24759" end="24765" title="Asthma" label="Asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616632" start="24768" end="24784" title="Beta thalassemia" label="Beta thalassemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q666980" start="24787" end="24812" title="Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome" label="Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q411391" start="24955" end="24964" title="Regulation of gene expression" label="regulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q139677" start="25241" end="25249" title="Operator (biology)" label="operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q311359" start="25336" end="25346" title="lac operon" label="lac operon"/>
<link wikidata="Q419229" start="25405" end="25409" title="Isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside" label="IPTG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386709" start="25469" end="25481" title="Tac-Promoter" label="Tac-Promoter"/>
<link wikidata="Q174576" start="25624" end="25644" title="Activator (genetics)" label="Activator (genetics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q913367" start="25647" end="25666" title="Enhancer (genetics)" label="Enhancer (genetics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115829310" start="25669" end="25702" title="Glossary of gene expression terms" label="Glossary of gene expression terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q139677" start="25705" end="25711" title="Operon" label="Operon"/>
<link wikidata="Q411391" start="25714" end="25743" title="Regulation of gene expression" label="Regulation of gene expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q425218" start="25746" end="25755" title="Repressor" label="Repressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q407384" start="25758" end="25778" title="Transcription factor" label="Transcription factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092563" start="25781" end="25797" title="Promoter bashing" label="Promoter bashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="26124" end="26139" title="gene expression" label="gene expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="26275" end="26291" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature (journal)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24893" wikidata="Q129793" url="?curid=24893" title="Adobe Photoshop">
<text>Adobe Photoshop is a raster graphics editor developed and published by Adobe for Windows and macOS. It was created in 1987 by Thomas and John Knoll. It is the most used tool for professional digital art, especially in raster graphics editing, and its name has become genericised as a verb (e.g. &quot;to photoshop an image&quot;, &quot;photoshopping&quot;, and &quot;photoshop contest&quot;) although Adobe disapproves of such use.

Photoshop can edit and compose raster images in multiple layers and supports masks, alpha compositing and several color models. Photoshop uses its own PSD and PSB file formats to support these features. In addition to raster graphics, Photoshop has limited abilities to edit or render text and vector graphics (especially through clipping path for the latter), as well as 3D graphics and video. Its feature set can be expanded by plug-ins; programs developed and distributed independently of Photoshop that run inside it and offer new or enhanced features.

Photoshop&#x27;s naming scheme was initially based on version numbers. However, in October 2002 (following the introduction of Creative Suite branding), each new version of Photoshop was designated with &quot;CS&quot; plus a number; e.g., the eighth major version of Photoshop was Photoshop CS and the ninth was Photoshop CS2. Photoshop CS3 through CS6 were also distributed in two different editions: Standard and Extended. With the introduction of the Creative Cloud branding in June 2013 (and in turn, the change of the &quot;CS&quot; suffix to &quot;CC&quot;), Photoshop&#x27;s licensing scheme was changed to that of software as a service subscription model. Historically, Photoshop was bundled with additional software such as Adobe ImageReady, Adobe Fireworks, Adobe Bridge, Adobe Device Central and Adobe Camera RAW.

Alongside Photoshop, Adobe also develops and publishes Photoshop Elements, Photoshop Lightroom, Photoshop Express, Photoshop Fix, Adobe Illustrator, and Photoshop Mix. As of November 2019, Adobe has also released a full version of Photoshop for the iPad, and while initially limited, Adobe plans to bring more features to Photoshop for iPad. Collectively, they are branded as &quot;The Adobe Photoshop Family&quot;.

== Early history ==

Photoshop was developed in 1987 by two brothers, Thomas and John Knoll, who sold the distribution license to Adobe Systems Incorporated in 1988. Thomas Knoll, a Ph.D. student at the University of Michigan, began writing a program on his Macintosh Plus to display grayscale images on a monochrome display. This program (at that time called Display) caught the attention of his brother John, an Industrial Light &amp; Magic employee, who recommended that Thomas turn it into a full-fledged image editing program. Thomas took a six-month break from his studies in 1988 to collaborate with his brother on the program. Thomas renamed the program ImagePro, but the name was already taken. Later that year, Thomas renamed his program Photoshop and worked out a short-term deal with scanner manufacturer Barneyscan to distribute copies of the program with a slide scanner; a &quot;total of about 200 copies of Photoshop were shipped&quot; this way.

During this time, John traveled to Silicon Valley and gave a demonstration of the program to engineers at Apple Computer and Russell Brown, art director at Adobe. Both showings were successful, and Adobe decided to purchase the license to distribute in September 1988. While John worked on plug-ins in California, Thomas remained in Ann Arbor writing code. &quot;Photoshop&quot; 1.0 was released on February 19, 1990, for Macintosh exclusively. The Barneyscan version included advanced color editing features that were stripped from the first Adobe shipped version. The handling of color slowly improved with each release from Adobe and Photoshop quickly became the industry standard in digital color editing. When Photoshop 1.0 was released, digital retouching on dedicated high-end systems (such as the Scitex) cost around $300 an hour for basic photo retouching. The list price of Photoshop 1.0 for Macintosh in 1990 was $895.

Photoshop was initially only available on Macintosh. In 1993, Adobe chief architect Seetharaman Narayanan ported Photoshop to Microsoft Windows. The Windows port led to Photoshop reaching a wider mass market audience as Microsoft&#x27;s global reach expanded within the next few years. On March 31, 1995, Adobe purchased the rights for Photoshop from Thomas and John Knoll for $34.5 million so Adobe would no longer need to pay a royalty for each copy sold.

== File format ==
Photoshop files have default file extension as .PSD, which stands for &quot;Photoshop Document&quot;. A PSD file stores an image with support for all features of Photoshop; these include layers with masks, transparency, text, alpha channels and spot colors, clipping paths, and duotone settings. This is in contrast to many other file formats (e.g., .JPG or .GIF) that restrict content to provide streamlined, predictable functionality. A PSD file has a maximum height and width of 30,000 pixels, and a size limit of two gigabytes.

From the beginning, Photoshop could save files in other formats, including TIF, JPEG, and GIF. These files are smaller than PSD files because they lack the editable features of a PSD file. These formats are required to use the file in publications or on the web. Adobe&#x27;s discontinued program PageMaker required TIF format.

Photoshop can also create and use files with the extension .PSB, which stands for &quot;Photoshop Big&quot; (also known as &quot;large document format&quot;). A PSB file extends the PSD file format, increasing the maximum height and width to 300,000 pixels and the size limit to around 4 exabytes. PSD and PSB formats are documented.

Because of Photoshop&#x27;s popularity, PSD files are widely used and supported to some extent by most competing software, including GIMP, Affinity Photo, and Clip Studio Paint. The .PSD file format can be exported to and from Adobe&#x27;s other apps, such as Adobe Illustrator, Adobe Premiere Pro, and After Effects.

== Plugins ==
Photoshop functionality can be extended by add-on programs called Photoshop plugins (or plug-ins). Adobe creates some, such as Adobe Camera Raw, but most are developed by third-parties. Some are free and some are commercial software.
Most plugins work with only Photoshop or Photoshop-compatible hosts, but a few can also be run as standalone applications.

There are various types of plugins, such as filter, export, import, selection, color correction, and automation. The most popular plugins are the filter plugins (also known as a 8bf plugins), available under the Filter menu in Photoshop. Filter plugins can either modify the current image or create content. Below are some popular types of plugins, and some well-known companies associated with them:
* Color correction plugins (Alien Skin Software, Nik Software, OnOne Software, Topaz Labs Software, The Plugin Site, etc.)
* Special effects plugins (Alien Skin Software, Auto FX Software, AV Bros., Flaming Pear Software, etc.)
* 3D effects plugins (Andromeda Software, Strata, etc.)

Adobe Camera Raw (also known as ACR and Camera Raw) is a special plugin, supplied free by Adobe, used primarily to read and process raw image files so that the resulting images can be processed by Photoshop. It can also be used from within Adobe Bridge.

== Cultural impact ==
&quot;Photoshop&quot; and derivatives such as &quot;Photoshopped&quot; (or just &quot;Shopped&quot;) have become verbs that are sometimes used to refer to images edited by Photoshop, or any image manipulation program. The same happens not only in English but as the Portuguese Wikipedia entry for image manipulation attests, even in that language, with the trademark being followed by the Portuguese verb termination &quot;-ar,&quot; yielding the word &quot;photoshopar&quot; (to photoshop). Such derivatives are discouraged by Adobe because, in order to maintain validity and protect the trademark from becoming generic, trademarks must be used as proper nouns.

== Version history ==
Photoshop&#x27;s naming scheme was initially based on version numbers, from version 0.63 (codename &quot;Bond&quot;; double-oh-seven), through version 0.87 (codename &quot;Seurat&quot; which was the first commercial version, sold as &quot;Barneyscan XP&quot;), version 1.0 (February 1990) all the way to version 7.0.1. Adobe published 7 major and many minor versions before the October 2003 introduction of version 8.0 which brought with it the Creative Suite branding.

In February 2013 Adobe donated the source code of the 1990 1.0.1 version of Photoshop to the Computer History Museum.

=== Pre-release versions ===
Version 0.63 (October 1988) was the first known copy of Photoshop, though it was never publicly released.

Version 0.87 (March 1989) was the first publicly available version of Photoshop, distributed commercially under the name &quot;Barneyscan XP&quot;.

Notable milestone features would be: Filters, Colour Separation, Virtual Memory (1.0), Paths, CMYK color (2.0), 16-bits-per-channel support, availability on Microsoft Windows (2.5), Layers, tabbed Palettes (3.0), Adjustments, Actions, Freeform Transform, PNG support (4.0), Editable Type, Magnetic Lasso and Pen, Freeform Pen, Multiple Undo, Layer Effects (5.0), Save For Web (5.5), Vector Shapes, revised User Interface (6.0), Vector Text, Healing Brush, Spell Check (7.0), Camera RAW (7.0.1).

=== Version 1 ===
Photoshop 1.0 was released in February 1990.

=== Version 2 ===
Photoshop 2.0 was released in June 1991. It added support for paths and the CMYK color model.

Photoshop 2.5, released in November 1992, was the first version available for Windows.

=== Version 3 ===
Photoshop 3.0 was released in September 1994 for Mac OS 7. The Windows version came out later in November. Notably, this was the first version that brought &quot;Layers&quot;.

=== Version 4 ===
Photoshop 4.0 was released in November 1996.

=== Version 5 ===
Photoshop 5.0 was released in May 1998.

=== Version 6 ===
Photoshop 6.0 was released in September 2000.

=== Version 7 ===
Photoshop 7.0 was released in March 2002.

=== CS (version 8) ===
The first Photoshop CS was commercially released in October 2003 as the eighth major version of Photoshop. Photoshop CS increased user control with a reworked file browser augmenting search versatility, sorting and sharing capabilities and the Histogram Palette which monitors changes in the image as they are made to the document. Match Color was also introduced in CS, which reads color data to achieve a uniform expression throughout a series of pictures.

=== CS2 (version 9) ===
Photoshop CS2, released in May 2005, expanded on its predecessor with a new set of tools and features. It included an upgraded Spot Healing Brush, which is mainly used for handling common photographic problems such as blemishes, red-eye, noise, blurring and lens distortion. One of the most significant inclusions in CS2 was the implementation of Smart Objects, which allows users to scale and transform images and vector illustrations without losing image quality, as well as create linked duplicates of embedded graphics so that a single edit updates across multiple iterations.

Adobe responded to feedback from the professional media industry by implementing non-destructive editing as well as the producing and modifying of 32-Bit High Dynamic Range (HDR) images, which are optimal for 3D rendering and advanced compositing. FireWire Previews could also be viewed on a monitor via a direct export feature.

Photoshop CS2 brought the Vanishing Point and Image Warping tools. Vanishing Point makes tedious graphic and photo retouching endeavors much simpler by letting users clone, paint and transform image objects while maintaining visual perspective. Image Warping makes it easy to digitally distort an image into a shape by choosing on-demand presets or by dragging control points.

The File Browser was upgraded to Adobe Bridge, which functioned as a hub for productivity, imagery and creativity, providing multi-view file browsing and smooth cross-product integration across Adobe Creative Suite 2 software. Adobe Bridge also provided access to Adobe Stock Photos, a new stock photography service that offered users one-stop shopping across five elite stock image providers to deliver high-quality, royalty-free images for layout and design.

Camera Raw version 3.0 was a new addition in CS2, and it allowed settings for multiple raw files to be modified simultaneously. In addition, processing multiple raw files to other formats including JPEG, TIFF, DNG or PSD, could be done in the background without executing Photoshop itself.

Photoshop CS2 brought a streamlined interface, making it easier to access features for specific instances. In CS2 users were also given the ability to create their own custom presets, which was meant to save time and increase productivity.

In January 2013, Photoshop CS2 was released with a published serial number due to a technical glitch in Adobe&#x27;s CS2 activation servers (see Creative Suite 1 and 2).

=== CS3 (version 10) ===
CS3 and CS3 Extended were released in April 2007 to the United States and Canada. They were also made available through Adobe&#x27;s online store and Adobe Authorized Resellers. Both CS3 and CS3 Extended are offered as either a stand-alone application or feature of Adobe Creative Suite. Both products are compatible with Intel-based Macs and PowerPCs, supporting Windows XP and Windows Vista. CS3 is the first release of Photoshop that will run natively on Macs with Intel processors: previous versions can only run through the translation layer Rosetta, and will not run at all on Macs running Mac OS X 10.7 or later.

CS3 improves on features from previous versions of Photoshop and introduces new tools. One of the most significant is the streamlined interface which allows increased performance, speed, and efficiency. There is also improved support for Camera RAW files which allow users to process images with higher speed and conversion quality. CS3 supports over 150 RAW formats as well as JPEG, TIFF and PDF. Enhancements were made to the Black and White Conversion, Brightness and Contrast Adjustment and Vanishing Point Module tools. The Black and White adjustment option improves control over manual grayscale conversions with a dialog box similar to that of Channel Mixer. There is more control over print options and better management with Adobe Bridge. The Clone Source palette is introduced, adding more options to the clone stamp tool. Other features include the nondestructive Smart Filters, optimizing graphics for mobile devices, Fill Light and Dust Busting tools. Compositing is assisted with Photoshop&#x27;s new Quick Selection and Refine Edge tools and improved image stitching technology.

CS3 Extended includes everything in CS3 and additional features. There are tools for 3D graphic file formats, video enhancement and animation, and comprehensive image measurement and analysis tools with DICOM file support. The 3D graphic formats allow 3D content to be incorporated into 2D compositions. As for video editing, CS3 supports layers and video formatting so users can edit video files per frame.

=== CS4 (version 11) ===

CS4 and CS4 Extended were released on October 15, 2008. They were also made available through Adobe&#x27;s online store and Adobe Authorized Resellers. Both CS4 and CS4 Extended are offered as either a stand-alone application or feature of Adobe Creative Suite. Both products are compatible with Intel-based Mac OS X and PowerPCs, supporting Windows XP and Windows Vista.

CS4 features smoother panning and zooming, allowing faster image editing at a high magnification. The interface is more simplified with its tab-based interface making it cleaner to work with. Photoshop CS4 features a new 3D engine allowing the conversion of gradient maps to 3D objects, adding depth to layers and text, and getting print-quality output with the new ray-tracing rendering engine. It supports common 3D formats; the new Adjustment and Mask panels; content-aware scaling (seam carving); fluid canvas rotation and File display options. The content-aware scaling allows users to intelligently size and scale images, and the canvas rotation tool makes it easier to rotate and edit images from any angle.

Adobe released Photoshop CS4 Extended, which has the features of Adobe Photoshop CS4, plus capabilities for scientific imaging, 3D, motion graphics, accurate image analysis and high-end film and video users. The faster 3D engine allows users to paint directly on 3D models, wrap 2D images around 3D shapes and animate 3D objects. As the successor to Photoshop CS3, Photoshop CS4 is the first x64 edition of Photoshop on consumer computers for Windows. The color correction tool has also been improved significantly.

=== CS5 (version 12) ===

Photoshop CS5 was launched on April 12, 2010. In a video posted on its official Facebook page, the development team revealed the new technologies under development, including three-dimensional brushes and warping tools.

In May 2011, Adobe Creative Suite 5.5 (CS5.5) was released, with new versions of some of the applications. Its version of Photoshop, 12.1, is identical to the concurrently released update for Photoshop CS5, version 12.0.4, except for support for the new subscription pricing that was introduced with CS5.5.

CS5 introduces new tools such as the Content-Aware Fill, Refine Edge, Mixer Brush, Bristle Tips and Puppet Warp. The community also had a hand in the additions made to CS5 as 30 new features and improvements were included by request. These include automatic image straightening, the Rule-of-Thirds cropping tool, color pickup, and saving a 16-bit image as a JPEG. Another feature includes the Adobe Mini Bridge, which allows for efficient file browsing and management.

CS5 Extended includes everything in CS5 plus features in 3D and video editing. A new materials library was added, providing more options such as Chrome, Glass, and Cork. The new Shadow Catcher tool can be used to further enhance 3D objects. For motion graphics, the tools can be applied to over more than one frame in a video sequence.

CS5 and CS5 Extended were made available through Adobe&#x27;s online store, Adobe Authorized Resellers and Adobe direct sales. Both CS5 and CS5 Extended are offered as either a stand-alone application or a feature of Adobe Creative Suite 5. Both products are compatible with Intel-based Mac OS X and Windows XP, Windows Vista, and Windows 7.

=== CS6 (version 13) ===

Photoshop CS6, released in May 2012, added new creative design tools and provided a redesigned interface with a focus on enhanced performance. New features have been added to the Content-Aware tool such as the Content-Aware Patch and Content-Aware Move.

Adobe Photoshop CS6 brought a suite of tools for video editing. Color and exposure adjustments, as well as layers, are among a few things that are featured in this new editor. Upon completion of editing, the user is presented with a handful of options of exporting into a few popular formats.

CS6 brings the &quot;straighten&quot; tool to Photoshop, where a user simply draws a line anywhere on an image, and the canvas will reorient itself so that the line drawn becomes horizontal, and adjusts the media accordingly. This was created with the intention that users will draw a line parallel to a plane in the image, and reorient the image to that plane to more easily achieve certain perspectives.

CS6 allows background saving, which means that while another document is compiling and archiving itself, it is possible to simultaneously edit an image. CS6 also features a customizable auto-save feature, preventing any work from being lost.

With version 13.1.3, Adobe dropped support for Windows XP (including Windows XP Professional x64 Edition); thus, the last version that works on Windows XP is 13.0.1. Adobe also announced that CS6 will be the last suite sold with perpetual licenses in favor of the new Creative Cloud subscriptions, though they will continue to provide OS compatibility support as well as bug fixes and security updates as necessary.

Starting January 9, 2017, CS6 is no longer available for purchase, making a Creative Cloud license the only purchase option going forward. No more updates will be available for all CS6 software either.

=== CC (version 14) ===
Photoshop CC (14.0) was launched on June 18, 2013. As the next major version after CS6, it is only available as part of a Creative Cloud subscription. Major features in this version include new Smart Sharpen, Intelligent Upsampling, and Camera Shake Reduction for reducing blur caused by camera shake. Editable Rounded Rectangles and an update to Adobe Camera Raw (8.0) were also included.

Since the initial launch, Adobe has released two additional feature-bearing updates. The first, version 14.1, was launched on September 9, 2013. The major features in this version were Adobe Generator, a Node.js-based platform for creating plug-ins for Photoshop. Photoshop 14.1 shipped with two plug-ins, one to automatically generate image assets based on an extension in the layer name, and another to automatically generate assets for Adobe Edge Reflow.

Version 14.2 was released on January 15, 2014. Major features include Perspective Warp, Linked Smart Objects, and 3D Printing support.

=== CC 2014 (version 15) ===
Photoshop CC 2014 (15.0) was released on June 18, 2014. CC 2014 features improvements to content-aware tools, two new blur tools (spin blur and path blur) and a new focus mask feature that enables the user to select parts of an image based on whether they are in focus or not. Other minor improvements have been made, including speed increases for certain tasks.

=== CC 2015 (version 16 and version 17) ===

Photoshop CC 2015 was released on June 15, 2015. Adobe added various creative features including Adobe Stock, which is a library of custom stock images. It also includes and have the ability to have more than one layer style. For example, in the older versions of Photoshop, only one shadow could be used for a layer but in CC 2015, up to ten are available. Other minor features like Export As, which is a form of the Save For Web in CC 2014 were also added. The updated UI as of November 30, 2015, delivers a cleaner and more consistent look throughout Photoshop, and the user can quickly perform common tasks using a new set of gestures on touch-enabled devices like Microsoft Surface Pro. CC 2015 also marks the 25th anniversary of Photoshop.

=== CC 2017 (version 18) ===
Photoshop CC 2017 was released on November 2, 2016. It introduced a new template selector when creating new documents, the ability to search for tools, panels and help articles for Photoshop, support for SVG OpenType fonts and other small improvements. In December 2016, a minor update was released to include support for the MacBook Pro Touch Bar.

=== CC 2018 (version 19) ===
Photoshop CC 2018 (version 19) was released on October 18, 2017. It featured an overhaul to the brush organization system, allowing for more properties (such as color and opacity) to be saved per-brush and for brushes to be categorized in folders and sub-folders. It also added brush stroke smoothing, and over 1000 brushes created by Kyle T. Webster (following Adobe&#x27;s acquisition of his website, KyleBrush.com). A Curvature Pen tool, similar to the one in Illustrator, was added, allowing for faster creation of Bézier paths. Other additions were Lightroom Photo access, Variable font support, select subject, copy-paste layers, enhanced tooltips, 360 panorama and HEIF support, PNG compression, increased maximum zoom level, symmetry mode, algorithm improvements to Face-aware and selection tools, color and luminance range masking, improved image resizing, and performance improvements to file opening, filters, and brush strokes.

=== CC 2019 (version 20) ===
Photoshop CC 2019 was released on October 15, 2018. Beginning with Photoshop CC 2019 (version 20.0), the 32-bit version of Windows is no longer supported. This version Introduced a new tool called Frame Tool to create placeholder frames for images. It also added multiple undo mode, auto-commitment, and prevented accidental panel moves with lock work-space. Live blend mode previews are added, allowing for faster scrolling over different blend mode options in the layers panel. Other additions were Color Wheel, Transform proportionally without Shift key, Distribute spacing like in Illustrator, ability to see longer layer names, match font with Japanese fonts, flip document view, scale UI to font, reference point hidden by default, new compositing engine, which provides a more modern compositing architecture is added which is easier to optimize on all platforms.

=== 2020 (version 21) ===

Photoshop 2020 was released on November 4, 2019. Version 21 has many new and enhanced features like the new object selection tool for better automate complex selections, new properties panel, enhanced transform warp, new keyboard shortcuts for paint &amp; brush and background image removal option. It added several improvements to the new content-aware fill and to the new document tab. Also added were animated GIF support, improved lens blur performance and one-click zoom to a layer&#x27;s contents. It introduced new swatches, gradients, patterns, shapes and stylistic sets for OpenType fonts. With this version users now can easily convert smart objects to layers and also can adjust 32-bit layers for brightness/contrast and curves. Presets are now more intuitive to use and easier to organize.

With the February 2020 update (version 21.1) Photoshop now can iteratively fill multiple areas of an image without having to leave content-aware fill workspace. This version improved GPU based lens blur quality and provided performance improvements, such as accelerating workflows with smoother panning, zooming and navigation of documents.

Version 21 was the first version where the iPad version was released. With Photoshop on the iPad, combined with the new Cloud PSD file format, a user can save cloud documents and work across Windows, Mac and iPad. Photoshop on the iPad does not have all the features of the desktop Photoshop. Adobe promises to update Photoshop on the iPad at &quot;a much more aggressive pace than it has with its current Creative Cloud apps for the desktop&quot;. Adobe has provided a timeline for enhancing Photoshop on the iPad to have more of the features of desktop Photoshop.

Version 21.2 of the desktop version was released in June 2020. It introduced faster portrait selection, Adobe Camera Raw improvements, auto-activated Adobe Fonts, rotatable patterns, and improved Match Font.

=== 2021 (version 22) ===
Version 22.0.0 was released in October 2020.

Version 22.0.1 was released in November 2020.

Version 22.1.0 was released in December 2020.

Version 22.1.1 was released in January 2021.

Version 22.2 was released in February 2021.

Version 22.3 was released in March 2021. This is the first macOS release to run natively on Apple silicon.

Version 22.3.1 was released in April 2021.

Version 22.4 was released in May 2021.

Version 22.4.1 was released in May 2021.

Version 22.4.2 was released in June 2021.

Version 22.4.3 was released in July 2021.

Version 22.5 was released in August 2021.

Version 22.5.1 was released in September 2021. Final version to include (as Legacy Swatches) a large set of Pantone color books, including Pastels &amp; Neons, and Premium Metallics.

=== 2022 (version 23) ===
Version 23.0 was released in October 2021. First version to include (as Legacy Swatches) a reduced set of Pantone color books - only CMYK, Metallics and Solid colors.

Content Credentials (Beta) was introduced. When enabled, the editing information is captured in a tamper-evident form and resides with the file through successive copy generations. It aligns with the C2PA standard on digital provenance across the internet.

Version 23.0.1 was released in November 2021.

Version 23.0.2 was released in November 2021.

Version 23.1 was released in December 2021.

Version 23.1.1 was released in January 2022.

Version 23.2 was released in February 2022.

Version 23.3 was released in April 2022.

Version 23.4 was released in June 2022.

Version 23.5 was released in August 2022. Final version with built-in support for basic Pantone colors - CMYK, Metallics and Solid (as Legacy Swatches). Future versions require a separate subscription to access Pantone colors.

=== 2023 (version 24) ===
Version 24.0 was released in October 2022. First version without built-in support for Pantone colors. All Pantone colors have been removed as of August 16, 2022. Separate paid subscription now required to access Pantone Connect extension and download color &quot;fandecks&quot;.

Version 24.1 was released in December 2022.

Version 24.4.1 was released on April 20, 2023.

Version 24.7 was released on July 27, 2023.

=== 2024 (version 25) ===
Version 25.0 was released in September 2023. This version added Generative Fill and Generative Expand for commercial use.

== Adobe Photoshop family ==
The Adobe Photoshop family is a group of applications and services made by Adobe for the use of professional image editing. Several features of the Adobe Photoshop family are pixel manipulating, image organizing, photo retouching, and more.

=== Current applications ===
*Bridge is an image organizer and digital asset management app. It features limited integration with other Adobe apps but has no editing capabilities of its own.
*DNG Converter is a tool used to convert DNG files into other file formats.
*Elements Organizer is the digital asset management app for Photoshop Elements and Premiere Elements. It is able to organize photos and video projects in one place.
*Fresco is a mobile drawing and painting app, developed initially for iOS and marketed by Adobe through Creative Cloud. It was later adapted to run on certain Windows devices and Microsoft Surface tablets.
*Photoshop Lightroom is a creative image organization and image manipulation software developed by Adobe Inc. as part of the Creative Cloud subscription family.
*Lightroom Classic is the offline desktop version of the Photoshop Lightroom photo editing and viewing applications offered by subscription through Creative Cloud.
*Photoshop Camera is an image tool that easily captures and shares photos with your camera.
*Photoshop Elements is a graphics editor for photographers, image editors and hobbyists. It contains most of the features of the professional version but with fewer and simpler options. The program allows users to create, edit, organize and share images. Originally introduced alongside Adobe Photoshop version 6, Photoshop Elements targets photography enthusiasts and thus lacks many features that make it useful in a proper print production environment. Photoshop Elements is available for Windows and macOS. It is not available as part of a Creative Cloud subscription, but rather as a single purchase or upgrade purchase.
*Photoshop Express is an image editing and collage making mobile application from Adobe Inc. The app is available on iOS, Android and Windows phones and tablets. It can also be installed on Windows desktop via the Microsoft Store. Photoshop Express Editor has various features which can be used to enhance photos. In November 2016 Collage creation was introduced to Adobe Photoshop Express on iOS. They allow editing pictures in the smartphone or tablet rather than online. It can be used to showcase your latest art, ideas, or products. In the early days of the beta test, the product&#x27;s terms of use raised controversy, in that it claimed to retain an irrevocable license to use certain works submitted by end users in perpetuity. At that time, Adobe held users of Photoshop Express to Adobe.com&#x27;s general Terms of Use, which had not been drafted in contemplation of the sort of user-created content utilized in Photoshop Express. Following user concerns and negative press, Adobe issued new, more specialized Terms of Use for the Photoshop Express product that superseded sections of the General Terms, and clarified many of these issues. Changes included making the license expressly revocable and indicating that Adobe&#x27;s rights to use the content are solely for the operation of Photoshop Express itself.
* Photoshop Fix is a photo retouching app for mobile devices marketed through Creative Cloud. The retouched images can be exported to the desktop version of Photoshop for further work.
* Photoshop Mix is a mobile application designed as a replacement for Photoshop Touch specifically for tablets and touchscreen devices. It includes many of the features of the personal computer version, including layers, selection tools, adjustments, and filters. Edited files could be synced with Creative Cloud.
* Photoshop Sketch is a drawing and painting app for mobile devices marketed through Creative Cloud. Sketches made can be exported to Photoshop. They can also be uploaded directly to the Bēhance social media platform.

=== Discontinued applications ===

* ActiveShare is a discontinued photo-sharing platform distributed by Adobe Systems. The Photoshop Album application replaced ActiveShare in 2003.
* Fireworks is a discontinued raster graphics editor for web designers. It could create interactive contents (e.g. buttons that change shape when the mouse cursor is hovered on) and animations.
* ImageReady is a discontinued raster graphics editor for web designers. It was discontinued on CS2 in favor of Fireworks.
* Photoshop Album is a piece of application software designed to import, organize and edit digital photos, and allows quick and easy searching and sharing of entire photo collections. It was initially released on February 18, 2003. The last version was Photoshop Album 3.2.0. It was discontinued in favor of Photoshop Elements. It has been compared to Apple Inc.&#x27;s iPhoto and Google&#x27;s Picasa.
* Photoshop Limited Edition (LE) was a graphics editor for novice photographers and hobbyists. It contains most of the features of the professional version but with fewer and simpler options. It was instead replaced by Photoshop Elements in September 2000.
* Preview CC is an app for previewing mobile designs.

== See also ==
* Creative Cloud controversy
* Comparison of raster graphics editors
* Image editing

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* (Asks: &quot;How does media authoring software shape the media being created, making some design choices seem natural and easy to execute, while hiding other design possibilities?&quot;)

== External links ==
* PSD files on Adobe Creative Cloud site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q129793" start="0" end="15" title="Adobe Photoshop" label="Adobe Photoshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351962" start="21" end="43" title="raster graphics editor" label="raster graphics editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="71" end="76" title="Adobe Inc." label="Adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="81" end="88" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="93" end="98" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q617053" start="126" end="132" title="Thomas Knoll" label="Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11313" start="137" end="147" title="John Knoll" label="John Knoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q860372" start="191" end="202" title="digital art" label="digital art"/>
<link wikidata="Q182270" start="218" end="233" title="raster graphics" label="raster graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q765270" start="267" end="278" title="Generic trademark" label="genericised"/>
<link wikidata="Q141130" start="336" end="349" title="photoshopping" label="photoshopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176276" start="367" end="384" title="photoshop contest" label="photoshop contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q591605" start="510" end="515" title="Mask (computing)" label="masks"/>
<link wikidata="Q693457" start="517" end="534" title="alpha compositing" label="alpha compositing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294018" start="547" end="558" title="color model" label="color model"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="727" end="742" title="vector graphics" label="vector graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134395" start="763" end="776" title="clipping path" label="clipping path"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="805" end="816" title="3D graphics" label="3D graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q34508" start="821" end="826" title="video" label="video"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187908" start="863" end="870" title="Photoshop plug-in" label="plug-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859422" start="1045" end="1059" title="version number" label="version number"/>
<link wikidata="Q360118" start="1118" end="1132" title="Creative Suite" label="Creative Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q129793" start="1200" end="1202" title="Adobe Photoshop" label="CS"/>
<link wikidata="Q129793" start="1272" end="1284" title="Adobe Photoshop" label="Photoshop CS"/>
<link wikidata="Q129793" start="1303" end="1316" title="Adobe Photoshop" label="Photoshop CS2"/>
<link wikidata="Q14636918" start="1445" end="1459" title="Adobe Creative Cloud" label="Creative Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q129793" start="1520" end="1522" title="Adobe Photoshop" label="CS"/>
<link wikidata="Q129793" start="1545" end="1547" title="Adobe Photoshop" label="CC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254596" start="1613" end="1634" title="software as a service" label="software as a service"/>
<link wikidata="Q360258" start="1724" end="1740" title="Adobe ImageReady" label="Adobe ImageReady"/>
<link wikidata="Q360187" start="1742" end="1757" title="Adobe Fireworks" label="Adobe Fireworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068393" start="1759" end="1771" title="Adobe Bridge" label="Adobe Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q795920" start="1773" end="1793" title="Adobe Device Central" label="Adobe Device Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q360403" start="1892" end="1911" title="Adobe Photoshop Lightroom" label="Photoshop Lightroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q215016" start="1947" end="1964" title="Adobe Illustrator" label="Adobe Illustrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796" start="2066" end="2070" title="iPad" label="iPad"/>
<link wikidata="Q617053" start="2304" end="2310" title="Thomas Knoll" label="Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11313" start="2315" end="2325" title="John Knoll" label="John Knoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="2437" end="2459" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255728" start="2492" end="2506" title="Macintosh Plus" label="Macintosh Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q685727" start="2518" end="2527" title="grayscale" label="grayscale"/>
<link wikidata="Q746676" start="2648" end="2676" title="Industrial Light &amp;amp; Magic" label="Industrial Light &amp;amp; Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82744" start="3105" end="3118" title="Image scanner" label="slide scanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="3232" end="3246" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="3303" end="3317" title="Apple Computer" label="Apple Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="3353" end="3358" title="Adobe Inc." label="Adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q184148" start="3487" end="3495" title="Plug-in (computing)" label="plug-ins"/>
<link wikidata="Q485172" start="3530" end="3539" title="Ann Arbor, Michigan" label="Ann Arbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="3619" end="3628" title="Classic Mac OS" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429652" start="4002" end="4008" title="Scailex Corporation" label="Scitex"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="4234" end="4240" title="ported" label="ported"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="4254" end="4271" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q984966" start="4324" end="4335" title="mass market" label="mass market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="4348" end="4357" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q591605" start="4804" end="4809" title="mask (computing)" label="masks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449569" start="4811" end="4823" title="Transparency (graphic)" label="transparency"/>
<link wikidata="Q693457" start="4831" end="4845" title="alpha compositing" label="alpha channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751288" start="4850" end="4860" title="spot color" label="spot color"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134395" start="4863" end="4876" title="clipping path" label="clipping path"/>
<link wikidata="Q523425" start="4883" end="4890" title="duotone" label="duotone"/>
<link wikidata="Q360355" start="5435" end="5444" title="PageMaker" label="PageMaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="5755" end="5762" title="exabyte" label="exabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038" start="5935" end="5939" title="GIMP" label="GIMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q23302620" start="5941" end="5955" title="Affinity Photo" label="Affinity Photo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15120677" start="5961" end="5978" title="Clip Studio Paint" label="Clip Studio Paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q215016" start="6062" end="6079" title="Adobe Illustrator" label="Adobe Illustrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q360424" start="6081" end="6099" title="Adobe Premiere Pro" label="Adobe Premiere Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q83380" start="6105" end="6118" title="Adobe After Effects" label="After Effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q184148" start="6201" end="6217" title="Plug-in (computing)" label="Photoshop plugin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187908" start="6671" end="6674" title="8bf" label="8bf"/>
<link wikidata="Q654383" start="7311" end="7326" title="Raw image format" label="raw image files"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068393" start="7419" end="7431" title="Adobe Bridge" label="Adobe Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7722" end="7748" title=":pt:Tratamento de imagem#Photoshopar" label="Portuguese Wikipedia entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q765270" start="8069" end="8076" title="Generic trademark" label="generic"/>
<link wikidata="Q147276" start="8105" end="8116" title="proper noun" label="proper noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q360118" start="8587" end="8601" title="Creative Suite" label="Creative Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="8648" end="8659" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q964035" start="8706" end="8729" title="Computer History Museum" label="Computer History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8995" end="9005" title="Barneyscan" label="Barneyscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q166432" start="9671" end="9687" title="CMYK color model" label="CMYK color model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="9768" end="9775" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911860" start="11520" end="11532" title="3D rendering" label="3D rendering"/>
<link wikidata="Q360118" start="12283" end="12301" title="Adobe Stock Photos" label="Adobe Stock Photos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13154" end="13180" title="Adobe Creative Suite#Creative Suite 1 and 2" label="see Creative Suite 1 and 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q209860" start="13552" end="13559" title="PowerPC" label="PowerPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="13573" end="13583" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11230" start="13588" end="13601" title="Windows Vista" label="Windows Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196945" start="13756" end="13763" title="Rosetta (software)" label="Rosetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q476915" start="13805" end="13818" title="Mac OS X Lion" label="Mac OS X 10.7"/>
<link wikidata="Q654383" start="14068" end="14078" title="Raw image format" label="Camera RAW"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195" start="14208" end="14212" title="JPEG" label="JPEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q215106" start="14214" end="14218" title="TIFF" label="TIFF"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="14223" end="14226" title="PDF" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068393" start="14564" end="14576" title="Adobe Bridge" label="Adobe Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364242" start="14896" end="14911" title="image stitching" label="image stitching"/>
<link wikidata="Q81095" start="15128" end="15133" title="DICOM" label="DICOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q209860" start="15681" end="15688" title="PowerPC" label="PowerPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="15702" end="15712" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11230" start="15717" end="15730" title="Windows Vista" label="Windows Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141379" start="16219" end="16231" title="seam carving" label="seam carving"/>
<link wikidata="Q272629" start="16841" end="16844" title="x86-64" label="x64"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="17072" end="17080" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195" start="17879" end="17883" title="JPEG" label="JPEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="18628" end="18638" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11230" start="18640" end="18653" title="Windows Vista" label="Windows Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q11215" start="18659" end="18668" title="Windows 7" label="Windows 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="19943" end="19953" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q245793" start="19965" end="20000" title="Windows XP Professional x64 Edition" label="Windows XP Professional x64 Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="20231" end="20233" title="Operating system" label="OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14636918" start="20662" end="20676" title="Adobe Creative Cloud" label="Creative Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q54861213" start="23454" end="23469" title="Kyle T. Webster" label="Kyle T. Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q215016" start="23582" end="23593" title="Adobe Illustrator" label="Illustrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q214728" start="23638" end="23644" title="Bézier curve" label="Bézier"/>
<link wikidata="Q24907733" start="23791" end="23795" title="High Efficiency Image File Format" label="HEIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192" start="25401" end="25404" title="GIF" label="GIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q260180" start="25571" end="25579" title="OpenType" label="OpenType"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796" start="26176" end="26180" title="iPad" label="iPad"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="27225" end="27230" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q406283" start="27258" end="27271" title="Apple silicon" label="Apple silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="29403" end="29408" title="Adobe Inc." label="Adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q545981" start="29437" end="29450" title="image editing" label="image editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068393" start="29600" end="29606" title="Adobe Bridge" label="Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224694" start="29633" end="29657" title="digital asset management" label="digital asset management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224796" start="29762" end="29775" title="Adobe DNG Converter" label="DNG Converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224694" start="29864" end="29888" title="digital asset management" label="digital asset management"/>
<link wikidata="Q129793" start="29897" end="29915" title="Adobe Photoshop Elements" label="Photoshop Elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q360424" start="29920" end="29937" title="Adobe Premiere Elements" label="Premiere Elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q93184" start="30022" end="30042" title="Drawing" label="drawing and painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="30072" end="30075" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="30092" end="30097" title="Adobe Inc." label="Adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q14636918" start="30106" end="30120" title="Adobe Creative Cloud" label="Creative Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q471806" start="30181" end="30198" title="Microsoft Surface" label="Microsoft Surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q360403" start="30209" end="30228" title="Adobe Lightroom" label="Photoshop Lightroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q860760" start="30243" end="30261" title="Image organizer" label="image organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q545981" start="30266" end="30284" title="image manipulation" label="image manipulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="30307" end="30317" title="Adobe Inc." label="Adobe Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q14636918" start="30333" end="30347" title="Adobe Creative Cloud" label="Creative Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q360403" start="30370" end="30387" title="Adobe Lightroom" label="Lightroom Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q360403" start="30426" end="30445" title="Adobe Lightroom" label="Photoshop Lightroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q14636918" start="30517" end="30531" title="Adobe Creative Cloud" label="Creative Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351962" start="30650" end="30665" title="Raster graphics editor" label="graphics editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q545981" start="31276" end="31289" title="image editing" label="image editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q620615" start="31309" end="31319" title="mobile app" label="mobile app"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="31333" end="31343" title="Adobe Inc." label="Adobe Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="31368" end="31371" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="31373" end="31380" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885200" start="31385" end="31399" title="Windows Phone" label="Windows phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="31441" end="31448" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q135288" start="31465" end="31480" title="Microsoft Store (digital)" label="Microsoft Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="31684" end="31694" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="31698" end="31704" title="tablet computer" label="tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7214489" start="31844" end="31856" title="terms of use" label="terms of use"/>
<link wikidata="Q14636918" start="32653" end="32667" title="Adobe Creative Cloud" label="Creative Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q14636918" start="33058" end="33072" title="Adobe Creative Cloud" label="Creative Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q14636918" start="33159" end="33173" title="Adobe Creative Cloud" label="Creative Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880667" start="33261" end="33268" title="Behance" label="Bēhance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="33398" end="33411" title="Adobe Inc." label="Adobe Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q129793" start="33417" end="33432" title="Adobe Photoshop Album" label="Photoshop Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q360187" start="33477" end="33486" title="Adobe Fireworks" label="Fireworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351962" start="33505" end="33527" title="raster graphics editor" label="raster graphics editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q360258" start="33671" end="33681" title="Adobe ImageReady" label="ImageReady"/>
<link wikidata="Q360118" start="33765" end="33768" title="Adobe Creative Suite" label="CS2"/>
<link wikidata="Q129793" start="33794" end="33809" title="Adobe Photoshop Album" label="Photoshop Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="33824" end="33844" title="application software" label="application software"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="34144" end="34154" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q9553" start="34162" end="34168" title="iPhoto" label="iPhoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="34173" end="34179" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q9349" start="34187" end="34193" title="Picasa" label="Picasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351962" start="34234" end="34249" title="Raster graphics editor" label="graphics editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q129793" start="34414" end="34432" title="Adobe Photoshop Elements" label="Photoshop Elements"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34524" end="34550" title="Adobe Creative Cloud#Criticism" label="Creative Cloud controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438334" start="34553" end="34590" title="Comparison of raster graphics editors" label="Comparison of raster graphics editors"/>
<link wikidata="Q545981" start="34593" end="34606" title="Image editing" label="Image editing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24894" wikidata="Q24614" url="?curid=24894" title="PaintShop Pro">
<text>PaintShop Pro (PSP) is a raster and vector graphics editor for Microsoft Windows. It was originally published by Jasc Software. In October 2004, Corel purchased Jasc Software and the distribution rights to PaintShop Pro. PSP functionality can be extended by Photoshop-compatible plugins.

The X-numbered editions have been sold in two versions: PaintShop Pro, which is the basic editing program, and PaintShop Pro Ultimate, which bundles in other standalone programs, additional artistic tools and/or plugins. The particular bundled programs have varied with each numbered version and have not been sold by Corel as separate products.

From release 8.00 onwards PSP came with an interface for automating tasks with scripts written in Python.

== History ==

Originally called GIF2PCX, the software was a file conversion utility, conceived by Robert Voit, used to move images between the major online platforms of the time, Compuserve and AOL. Each platform had their own file format for images, so the utility allowed users to share images on either platform. When basic image editing was added, the name was changed to Paint Shop. The first version, 1.0, supported image conversions picture converter between BMP, GIF and PCX formats, and basic full-image enhancements like changing brightness and contrast. Paint Shop 1.0 was released by Robert Voit in August 1990. The name was changed to Paint Shop Pro when full painting, such as with variable sized brushes, was added to the product. Paint Shop was originally distributed as shareware and is still available at many download sites (4.12 being a popular version). Most newer versions are only commercially available although some have been distributed in the United Kingdom in computer magazine CDs after they became obsolete.

PaintShop Pro 5 added support for layers as well as CMYK and HSL colour modes, included JASC Animation Shop for creating animations and in fact was marketed as &quot;Paint Shop Pro 5.0 with Animation Shop&quot;. PaintShop Pro X6 was the first to be available as a native 64-bit version (purchase includes both versions). PaintShop Pro X7 includes content-aware features such as &quot;Magic Fill&quot; and &quot;Smart Edge&quot; as well as support for XMP sidecar files that preserve edit settings for raw formats.

From 2006 to 2011 (versions XI to X3), PaintShop Pro was marketed as &quot;Corel Paint Shop Pro Photo&quot;. Having dropped the &quot;Photo&quot; part of the name in version X4, Paintshop Pro X5 was derived from Ulead Photo Explorer after Corel&#x27;s acquisition of Ulead.

On November 28, 2007, Corel announced that the office in Eden Prairie, Minnesota, where Paint Shop Pro was created, would be shut down, with development moving to offices in California and China.

===Version history===

==== JASC Paint Shop releases: 1990?–1993 ====
In the table below, &quot;italicized&quot; dates are approximate, based on the earliest file timestamp on JASC or Corel&#x27;s FTP server. Non-italicized dates are sourced from official press releases or notifications posted on JASC&#x27;s web site.

====JASC Paint Shop Pro releases: 1990–2004====
====Corel Paint Shop Pro releases: 2005====
====Corel Paint Shop Pro Photo releases: 2006–2008====
====Corel PaintShop Photo Pro releases: 2010-2011====
====Corel PaintShop Pro releases: 2011–present====

==Picture tubes==
Picture tubes are graphic images with no background. They are often used as a starting point for complex images; that is, they are combined with other image elements to produce a final work. Tubes can also be regarded as graphic brushes based on a pre-created image; this was their original use. Instead of leaving a trace of color on the canvas, they would leave a trail of images. Popular tube subjects include alphabets, humans (also known as dollz), animal and toy figures, flowers, love messages and seasonal symbols.

The tube system originated with PSP Pro version 5. Native tube files may be in , , , and formats. XnView, IrfanView, and TubeEx are separate graphics programs that can convert tube files () to .

==Ultimate edition==
PaintShop Pro Photo X2 Ultimate was released towards the end of life of PaintShop Pro Photo X2, in September 2008. It included 150 additional picture frames and Picture Tubes, the programs Background Remover, Corel Painter Photo Essentials 4, and Photorecovery, as well as RAW support for 250 cameras and a 2GB flash drive.

Subsequent Ultimate editions were released contemporaneously with the basic version. PaintShop Pro X4 Ultimate included Nik Color Efex Pro 3.0, a voucher for 21 images from Fotolia at high quality, and additional Picture Tubes. X5 Ultimate included Reallusion FaceFilter Studio 2.0, NIK Color Efex Pro 3.0, and &quot;over 100 unique brushes, textures and royalty-free backgrounds&quot;. PaintShop Pro X6 Ultimate includes Athentech Imaging&#x27;s Perfectly Clear and Reallusion&#x27;s FaceFilter3 Standard. PaintShop Pro X7 Ultimate includes those same two items.

The bundled extras cannot be installed unless that version of the PaintShop program is already installed. However, once a bundled extra such as a plugin has been installed, the installed files can be copied to other versions, e.g., a plugin installed under X5 can be copied to X6 and even if X5 is then uninstalled, the plugin will continue to work under X6. Corel releases a new X version roughly annually, so this ability to copy means PSP users do not have to choose between updating or continued use of Ultimate add-ons from previous versions.

== Other related versions and products ==
*Paint Shop Pro Personal is a version of JASC Paint Shop Pro 9 for the Japanese market, published by Sourcenext Corporation.
*Paint Shop Photo Album is a simplified version of Paint Shop Pro designed to enhance, organize, and share digital photos. The Corel version was released as version 5.
*Corel Paint Shop Pro Album Personal is a version of Corel Paint Shop Pro Album 5 Deluxe for Japanese market, published by Sourcenext Corporation.
*Corel Photo Album is the successor of Jasc Paint Shop Photo Album. First release was version 6.
*Corel PaintShop Photo Express is the successor of Corel Photo Album. First release was PaintShop Photo Express 2010.
*Paint Shop Pro Photo Studio is a site launched as part of Corel Paint Shop Pro Photo X2 launch celebration.

==License management software==
Versions X through to X8 install a third-party program named , a Windows service called ProtexisLicensing. Written by Protexis, this runs in the background and collects licensing information. This program communicates with a remote host. Manually disabling the Protexis Licensing service may cause Corel Paint Shop Pro Photo to cease functioning.

==See also==
*Comparison of raster graphics editors

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q24614" start="0" end="13" title="PaintShop Pro" label="PaintShop Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q24614" start="15" end="18" title="PaintShop Pro" label="PSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351962" start="25" end="31" title="raster graphics editor" label="raster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155404" start="36" end="58" title="vector graphics editor" label="vector graphics editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="63" end="80" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683742" start="113" end="126" title="Jasc Software" label="Jasc Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q835702" start="145" end="150" title="Corel" label="Corel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187908" start="258" end="286" title="Photoshop plugins" label="Photoshop-compatible plugins"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="734" end="740" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002199" start="1184" end="1201" title="Image conversion" label="picture converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q192869" start="1210" end="1213" title="BMP file format" label="BMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192" start="1215" end="1218" title="GIF" label="GIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q535473" start="1223" end="1226" title="PCX" label="PCX"/>
<link wikidata="Q185534" start="1531" end="1540" title="shareware" label="shareware"/>
<link wikidata="Q166432" start="1835" end="1839" title="CMYK" label="CMYK"/>
<link wikidata="Q376492" start="1844" end="1847" title="HSL and HSV" label="HSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q252132" start="2054" end="2060" title="64-bit" label="64-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q27153" start="2234" end="2237" title="Extensible Metadata Platform" label="XMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q654383" start="2284" end="2295" title="Raw image format" label="raw formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q985558" start="2630" end="2653" title="Eden Prairie, Minnesota" label="Eden Prairie, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q186885" start="2933" end="2942" title="timestamp" label="timestamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q42283" start="2967" end="2970" title="FTP" label="FTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906292" start="3808" end="3813" title="dollz" label="dollz"/>
<link wikidata="Q650922" start="3984" end="3990" title="XnView" label="XnView"/>
<link wikidata="Q324957" start="3992" end="4001" title="IrfanView" label="IrfanView"/>
<link wikidata="Q654383" start="4376" end="4379" title="raw image format" label="RAW"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="4601" end="4608" title="Fotolia" label="Fotolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370727" start="6446" end="6461" title="Windows service" label="Windows service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438334" start="6743" end="6780" title="Comparison of raster graphics editors" label="Comparison of raster graphics editors"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24897" wikidata="Q1231428" url="?curid=24897" title="Persuasion">
<text>Persuasion or persuasion arts is an umbrella term for influence. Persuasion can influence a person&#x27;s beliefs, attitudes, intentions, motivations, or behaviours.

Persuasion is studied in many disciplines. Rhetoric studies modes of persuasion in speech and writing and is often taught as a classical subject. Psychology looks at persuasion through the lens of individual behaviour and neuroscience studies the brain activity associated with this behaviour. History and political science are interested in the role of propaganda in shaping historical events. In business, persuasion is aimed at influencing a person&#x27;s (or group&#x27;s) attitude or behaviour towards some event, idea, object, or another person (s) by using written, spoken, or visual methods to convey information, feelings, or reasoning, or a combination thereof. Persuasion is also often used to pursue personal gain, such as election campaigning, giving a sales pitch, or in trial advocacy. Persuasion can also be interpreted as using personal or positional resources to change people.

== Forms ==
Propaganda is a form of persuasion used to indoctrinate a population towards an individual or a particular agenda.

Coercion is a form of persuasion that uses aggressive threats and the provocation of fear and/or shame to influence a person&#x27;s behavior.

Systematic persuasion is the process through which attitudes or beliefs are leveraged by appeals to logic and reason.

Heuristic persuasion, on the other hand, is the process through which attitudes or beliefs are leveraged by appeals to habit or emotion.

==History and philosophy==

The academic study of persuasion began with the Greeks, who emphasized rhetoric and elocution as the highest standard for a successful politician. All trials were held in front of the Assembly, and the likelihood of success of the prosecution versus the defense rested on the persuasiveness of the speaker. Rhetoric is the art of effective persuasive speaking, often through the use of figures of speech, metaphors, and other techniques.

The Greek philosopher Aristotle listed four reasons why one should learn the art of persuasion:
# Truth and justice are perfect; thus if a case loses, it is the fault of the speaker.
# It is an excellent tool for teaching.
# A good rhetorician must be able to argue both sides to understand the whole problem, and
# There is no better way to defend one&#x27;s self.

He described three fundamental ways to communicate persuasively:

#Ethos (credibility): refers to the effort to convince your audience of your credibility or character. It is not automatic and can be created through actions, deeds, understanding, or expertise by the speaker.
#Logos (reason): refers to the effort to convince your audience by using logic and reason. This can be formal and non-formal. Formal reasoning uses syllogisms, arguments where two statements validly imply a third statement. Non-formal reasoning uses enthymemes, arguments that have valid reasoning but are informal and assume the audience has prior knowledge.
#Pathos (emotion): refers to the effort to persuade your audience by making an appeal to their feelings.

=== Ethics of persuasion ===

Many philosophers have commented on the morality of persuasion. Socrates argued that rhetoric was based on appearances rather than the essence of a matter. Thomas Hobbes was critical of use rhetoric to create controversy, particularly the use of metaphor. Immanuel Kant was critical of rhetoric, arguing that it could cause people to reach conclusions that are at odds with those that they would have reached if they had applied their full judgment. He draws parallels between the function of rhetoric and the deterministic function of the mind like a machine.

Aristotle was critical of persuasion, though argued that judges would often allow themselves to be persuaded by choosing to apply emotions rather than reason. However, he argued that persuasion could be used to induce an individual to apply reason and judgment.

Writers such as William Keith and Christian O. Lundberg argue that uses of force and threats in trying to influence others does not lead to persuasion, but rather talking to people does, going further to add &quot;While Rhetoric certainly has its dark side that deals in tricks and perceptions... the systematic study of rhetoric generally ignores these techniques, in part because they are &quot;not&quot; very systematic or reliable.&quot; There is also in legal disputes, the matter of the burden of proof when bringing up an argument, where it often falls on the hands of the one presenting a case to prove its validity to another person and where presumptions may be made where of the burden of proof has not been met, an argument may be dropped such as in a more famous example of &quot;Innocent until proven guilty&quot;, although this line of presumption or burden of proof may not always be followed. While Keith and Lundberg do go into detail about the different intricacies of persuasion, they do explain that lapses in logic and or reasoning could lead to persuasive arguments with faults. These faults can come as enthymemes, where more likely than not only certain audiences with specific pieces of knowledge may understand the reasoning being presented with missing logic, or the more egregious example of fallacies where conclusions may be drawn (almost always incorrectly) through invalid argument. In contrast to the reasoning behind enthymemes, the use of examples can help prove a person&#x27;s rhetorical claims through inductive reasoning, which assumes that &quot;if something is true in specific cases, it is true in general&quot;.

Examples can be split into two categories real and hypothetical. Real examples come from personal experience or academic/scientific research which can support the argument you&#x27;re making. Hypothetical examples are made-up. When arguing something, speakers can put forward a hypothetical situation that illustrates the point they are making to connect better with the audience. These examples must be plausible to properly illustrate a persuasive argument.

==Theories==
There are many psychological theories for what influences an individual&#x27;s behaviour in different situations. These theories will have implications about how persuasion works.

=== Attribution theory ===

Humans attempt to explain the actions of others through either dispositional attribution or situational attribution.

Dispositional attribution, also referred to as internal attribution, attempts to point to a person&#x27;s traits, abilities, motives, or dispositions as a cause or explanation for their actions. A citizen criticizing a president by saying the nation is lacking economic progress and health because the president is either lazy or lacking in economic intuition is utilizing a dispositional attribution.

Situational attribution, also referred to as external attribution, attempts to point to the context around the person and factors of his surroundings, particularly things that are completely out of his control. A citizen claiming that a lack of economic progress is not a fault of the president but rather the fact that he inherited a poor economy from the previous president is situational attribution.

A fundamental attribution error occurs when people wrongly attribute either a shortcoming or accomplishment to internal factors while disregarding all external factors. In general, people use dispositional attribution more often than situational attribution when trying to explain or understand the behavior of others. This happens because we focus more on the individual when we lack information about that individual&#x27;s situation and context. When trying to persuade others to like us or another person, we tend to explain positive behaviors and accomplishments with dispositional attribution and negative behaviors and shortcomings with situational attributions.

===Behaviour change theories===
The Theory of Planned Behavior is the foremost theory of behaviour change. It has support from meta-analyses which reveals it can predict around 30% of behaviour. Theories, by nature however, prioritize internal validity, over external validity. They are coherent and therefore make for an easily reappropriated story. On the other hand, they will correspond more poorly with the evidence, and mechanics of reality, than a straightforward itemization of the behaviour change interventions (techniques) by their individual efficacy. 
These behaviour change interventions have been categorized by behavioral scientists. A mutually exclusive, comprehensively exhaustive (MECE) translation of this taxonomy, in decreasing order of effectiveness are:

# positive and negative consequences
# offering/removing incentives,
# offering/removing threats/punishments,
# distraction,
# changing exposure to cues (triggers) for the behaviour,
# prompts/cues,
# goal-setting,
# (increasing the salience of) emotional/health/social/environmental/regret consequences, 
# self-monitoring of the behaviour and outcomes of behaviour,
# mental rehearsal of successful performance (planning?), 
# self-talk,
# focus on past success,
# comparison of outcomes via persuasive argument,
# pros/cons and comparative imaging of future outcomes,
# identification of self as role model,
# self-affirmation,
# reframing,
# cognitive dissonance,
# reattribution,
# (increasing salience of) antecedents

A typical instantiations of these techniques in therapy isexposure / response prevention for OCD.

===Conditioning theories===

Conditioning plays a huge part in the concept of persuasion. It is more often about leading someone into taking certain actions of their own, rather than giving direct commands. In advertisements for example, this is done by attempting to connect a positive emotion to a brand/product logo. This is often done by creating commercials that make people laugh, using a sexual undertone, inserting uplifting images and/or music etc. and then ending the commercial with a brand/product logo. Great examples of this are professional athletes. They are paid to connect themselves to things that can be directly related to their roles; sport shoes, tennis rackets, golf balls, or completely irrelevant things like soft drinks, popcorn poppers and panty hose. The important thing for the advertiser is to establish a connection to the consumer.

This conditioning is thought to affect how people view certain products, knowing that most purchases are made on the basis of emotion. Just like you sometimes recall a memory from a certain smell or sound, the objective of some ads is solely to bring back certain emotions when you see their logo in your local store. The hope is that repeating the message several times makes consumers more likely to purchase the product because they already connect it with a good emotion and positive experience.
Stefano DellaVigna and Matthew Gentzkow did a comprehensive study on the effects of persuasion in different domains. They discovered that persuasion has little or no effect on advertisement; however, there was a substantial effect of persuasion on voting if there was face-to-face contact.

===Cognitive dissonance theory===

Leon Festinger originally proposed the theory of cognitive dissonance in 1957. He theorized that human beings constantly strive for mental consistency. Our cognition (thoughts, beliefs, or attitudes) can be in agreement, unrelated, or in disagreement with each other. Our cognition can also be in agreement or disagreement with our behaviors. When we detect conflicting cognition, or dissonance, it gives us a sense of incompleteness and discomfort. For example, a person who is addicted to smoking cigarettes but also suspects it could be detrimental to their health suffers from cognitive dissonance.

Festinger suggests that we are motivated to reduce this dissonance until our cognition is in harmony with itself. We strive for mental consistency. There are four main ways we go about reducing or eliminating our dissonance:
# changing our minds about one of the facets of cognition
# reducing the importance of a cognition
# increasing the overlap between the two, and 
# re-evaluating the cost/reward ratio.
Revisiting the example of the smoker, they can either quit smoking, reduce the importance of their health, convince themself they are not at risk, or decide that the reward of smoking is worth the cost of their health.

Cognitive dissonance is powerful when it relates to competition and self-concept. The most famous example of how cognitive dissonance can be used for persuasion comes from Festinger and Carlsmith&#x27;s 1959 experiment in which participants were asked to complete a very dull task for an hour. Some were paid $20, while others were paid $1, and afterwards they were instructed to tell the next waiting participants that the experiment was fun and exciting. Those who were paid $1 were much more likely to convince the next participants that the experiment really was enjoyable than those who received $20. This is because $20 is enough reason to participate in a dull task for an hour, so there is no dissonance. Those who received $1 experienced great dissonance, so they had to truly convince themselves that the task actually was enjoyable to avoid feeling taken advantage of, and therefore reduce their dissonance.

===Elaboration likelihood model===

Persuasion has traditionally been associated with two routes:
* Central route: Whereby an individual evaluates information presented to them based on the pros and cons of it and how well it supports their values
* Peripheral route: Change is mediated by how attractive the source of communication is and by bypassing the deliberation process.

The Elaboration likelihood model (ELM) forms a new facet of the route theory. It holds that the probability of effective persuasion depends on how successful the communication is at bringing to mind a relevant mental representation, which is the elaboration likelihood. Thus if the target of the communication is personally relevant, this increases the elaboration likelihood of the intended outcome and would be more persuasive if it were through the central route. Communication which does not require careful thought would be better suited to the peripheral route.

===Functional theories===
Functional theorists attempt to understand the divergent attitudes individuals have towards people, objects or issues in different situations. There are four main functional attitudes:
# Adjustment function: A main motivation for individuals is to increase positive external rewards and minimize the costs. Attitudes serve to direct behavior towards the rewards and away from punishment.
# Ego Defensive function: The process by which an individual protects their ego from being threatened by their own negative impulses or threatening thoughts.
# Value-expressive: When an individual derives pleasure from presenting an image of themselves which is in line with their self-concept and the beliefs that they want to be associated with.
# Knowledge function: The need to attain a sense of understanding and control over one&#x27;s life. An individual&#x27;s attitudes therefore serve to help set standards and rules which govern their sense of being.

When communication targets an underlying function, its degree of persuasiveness influences whether individuals change their attitude after determining that another attitude would more effectively fulfill that function.

===Inoculation theory===

A vaccine introduces a weak form of a virus that can easily be defeated to prepare the immune system should it need to fight off a stronger form of the same virus. In much the same way, the theory of inoculation suggests that a certain party can introduce a weak form of an argument that is easily thwarted in order to make the audience inclined to disregard a stronger, full-fledged form of that argument from an opposing party.

This often occurs in negative advertisements and comparative advertisements—both for products and political causes. An example would be a manufacturer of a product displaying an ad that refutes one particular claim made about a rival&#x27;s product, so that when the audience sees an ad for said rival product, they refute the product claims automatically.

===Narrative transportation theory===

Narrative transportation theory proposes that when people lose themselves in a story, their attitudes and intentions change to reflect that story. The mental state of narrative transportation can explain the persuasive effect of stories on people, who may experience narrative transportation when certain contextual and personal preconditions are met, as Green and Brock postulate for the transportation-imagery model. Narrative transportation occurs whenever the story receiver experiences a feeling of entering a world evoked by the narrative because of empathy for the story characters and imagination of the story plot.

===Social judgment theory===

Social judgment theory suggests that when people are presented with an idea or any kind of persuasive proposal, their natural reaction is to immediately seek a way to sort the information subconsciously and react to it. We evaluate the information and compare it with the attitude we already have, which is called the initial attitude or anchor point.

When trying to sort incoming persuasive information, an audience evaluates whether it lands in their latitude of acceptance, latitude of non-commitment or indifference, or the latitude of rejection. The size of these latitudes varies from topic to topic. Our &quot;ego-involvement&quot; generally plays one of the largest roles in determining the size of these latitudes. When a topic is closely connected to how we define and perceive ourselves, or deals with anything we care passionately about, our latitudes of acceptance and non-commitment are likely to be much smaller and our attitude of rejection much larger. A person&#x27;s anchor point is considered to be the center of their latitude of acceptance, the position that is most acceptable to them.

An audience is likely to distort incoming information to fit into their unique latitudes. If something falls within the latitude of acceptance, the subject tends to assimilate the information and consider it closer to his anchor point than it really is. Inversely, if something falls within the latitude of rejection, the subject tends to contrast the information and convince themself the information is farther away from their anchor point than it really is.

When trying to persuade an individual target or an entire audience, it is vital to first learn the average latitudes of acceptance, non-commitment, and rejection of your audience. It is ideal to use persuasive information that lands near the boundary of the latitude of acceptance if the goal is to change the audience&#x27;s anchor point. Repeatedly suggesting ideas on the fringe of the acceptance latitude makes people gradually adjust their anchor points, while suggesting ideas in the rejection latitude or even the non-commitment latitude does not change the audience&#x27;s anchor point.

== Methods ==

Persuasion methods are also sometimes referred to as &quot;persuasion tactics&quot; or &quot;persuasion strategies&quot;.

===Use of force===
There is the use of force in persuasion, which does not have any scientific theories, except for its use to make demands. The use of force is then a precedent to the failure of less direct means of persuasion. Application of this strategy can be interpreted as a threat since the persuader does not give options to their request.

===Weapons of influence===
Robert Cialdini, in &quot;Influence&quot;, his book on persuasion, defined six &quot;influence cues or weapons of influence&quot;: Influence is the process of changing.

====Reciprocity====

The principle of reciprocity states that when a person provides us with something, we attempt to repay them in kind. Reciprocation produces a sense of obligation, which can be a powerful tool in persuasion. The reciprocity rule is effective because it can be overpowering and instill in us a sense of obligation. Generally, we have a dislike for individuals who neglect to return a favor or provide payment when offered a free service or gift. As a result, reciprocation is a widely held principle. This societal standard makes reciprocity extremely powerful persuasive technique, as it can result in unequal exchanges and can even apply to an uninvited first favor. Reciprocity applies to the marketing field because of its use as a powerful persuasive technique. The marketing tactic of &quot;free samples&quot; demonstrates the reciprocity rule because of the sense of obligation that the rule produces. This sense of obligation comes from the desire to repay the marketer for the gift of a &quot;free sample.&quot;

====Commitment and consistency====
Consistency is an important aspect of persuasion because it:
# is highly valued by society, 
# results in a beneficial approach to daily life, and 
# provides a valuable shortcut through the complicated nature of modern existence.
Consistency allows us to more effectively make decisions and process information. The concept of consistency states that someone who commits to something, orally or in writing, is more likely to honor that commitment. This is especially true for written commitments, as they appear psychologically more concrete and can create hard proof. Someone who commits to a stance tends to behave according to that commitment. Commitment is an effective persuasive technique, because once you get someone to commit, they are more likely to engage in self-persuasion, providing themselves and others with reasons and justifications to support their commitment in order to avoid dissonance. Cialdini notes Chinese brainwashing of American prisoners of war in Korean War to rewrite their self-image and gain automatic unenforced compliance. Another example is children being made to repeat the Pledge of Allegiance each morning and why marketers make you close popups by saying &quot;I&#x27;ll sign up later&quot; or &quot;No thanks, I prefer not making money&quot;.

====Social proof====
Social learning, also known as social proof, is a core principle among almost all forms of persuasion. It is based on the idea of peer influence, and is considered essential for audience-centered approaches to persuasive messages. The principle of social proof suggests what people believe or do is typically learned by observing the norms of those around us. People naturally conform their actions and beliefs to fit what society expects, as the rewards for doing so are usually greater than standing out.

&quot;The power of the crowd&quot; is thought to be highly involved in the decisions we make. Social proof is often utilized by people in a situation that requires a decision be made. In uncertain or ambiguous situations, when multiple possibilities create choices we must make, people are likely to conform to what others do. We take cues from those around us as to what the appropriate behavior is in that moment. People often feel they will make fewer mistakes &quot;by acting in accord with social evidence than by behaving contrary to it.&quot;

====Likeness====
This principle is simple and concise. People say &quot;yes&quot; to people that they like. Two major factors contribute to overall likeness. The first is physical attractiveness. People who are physically attractive seem more persuasive. They get what they want and they can easily change others&#x27; attitudes. This attractiveness is proven to send favorable messages/impressions of other traits that a person may have, such as talent, kindness, and intelligence. The second factor is similarity. People are more easily persuaded by others they deem as similar to themselves.

====Authority====
People are more prone to believing those with authority. They have the tendency to believe that if an expert says something, it must be true. People are more likely to adhere to opinions of individuals who are knowledgeable and trustworthy. Although a message often stands or falls on the weight of its ideas and arguments, a person&#x27;s attributes or implied authority can have a large effect on the success of their message.

In The True Believer, Eric Hoffer noted, &quot;People whose lives are barren and insecure seem to show a greater willingness to obey than people who are self-sufficient and self-confident. To the frustrated, freedom from responsibility is more attractive than freedom from restraint. . . . They willingly abdicate the directing of their lives to those who want to plan, command and shoulder all responsibility.&quot;

In the Milgram study, a series of experiments begun in 1961, a &quot;teacher&quot; and a &quot;learner&quot; were placed in two different rooms. The &quot;learner&quot; was attached to an electric harness that could administer shock. The &quot;teacher&quot; was told by a supervisor, dressed in a white scientist&#x27;s coat, to ask the learner questions and punish him when he got a question wrong. The teacher was instructed by the study supervisor to deliver an electric shock from a panel under the teacher&#x27;s control. After delivery, the teacher had to up the voltage to the next notch. The voltage went up to 450 volts. The catch to this experiment was that the teacher did not know that the learner was an actor faking the pain sounds he heard and was not actually being harmed. The experiment was being done to see how obedient we are to authority. &quot;When an authority tells ordinary people it is their job to deliver harm, how much suffering will each subject be willing to inflict on an entirely innocent other person if the instructions come &#x27;from above&#x27;?.&quot; In this study, the results showed that the teachers were willing to give as much pain as was available to them. The conclusion was that people are willing to bring pain upon others when they are directed to do so by some authority figure.

====Scarcity====
Scarcity could play an important role in the process of persuasion. When something has limited availability, people assign it more value. As one of the six basic principles behind the science of persuasion, then, &quot;scarcity&quot; can be leveraged to convince people to buy into some suggestions, heed the advice or accept the business proposals. According to Robert Cialdini, Regents&#x27; Professor of Psychology and Marketing at Arizona State University and Distinguished Professor of Marketing in the W. P. Carey School, whatever is rare, uncommon or dwindling in availability — this idea of scarcity — confers value on objects, or even relationships.

There are two major reasons why the scarcity principle works:
* When things are difficult to get, they are usually more valuable, so that can make it seem to have better quality.
* When things become less available, we could lose the chance to acquire them.
When this happens, people usually assign the scarce item or service more value simply because it is harder to acquire. This principle is that everyone wants things that are out of their reach. Something easily available is not that desirable as something very rare.

=== Persuasive technology ===
=== List of methods ===
By appeal to reason:
* Logic
* Logical argument
* Rhetoric
* Scientific evidence (proof)
* Scientific method

By appeal to emotion:
* Cosmetic Advertising
* Presentation and Imagination
* Pity
* Propaganda
* Manipulation (psychology)
* Seduction
* Tradition

Aids to persuasion:
* Body language
* Communication skill or Rhetoric
* Personality tests and conflict style inventory help devise strategy based on an individual&#x27;s preferred style of interaction
* Sales techniques

Other techniques:
* Deception
* Hypnosis
* Power (social and political)
* Subliminal advertising

Coercive techniques, some of which are highly controversial or not scientifically proven effective:
* Brainwashing
* Coercive persuasion
* Force
* Mind control
* Torture
== In culture ==
It is through a basic cultural personal definition of persuasion that everyday people understand how others are attempting to influence them and then how they influence others. The dialogue surrounding persuasion is constantly evolving because of the necessity to use persuasion in everyday life. Persuasion tactics traded in society have influences from researchers, which may sometimes be misinterpreted.
To keep evolutionary advantage, in the sense of wealth and survival, you must persuade and not be persuaded. To understand cultural persuasion, researchers gather knowledge from domains such as &quot;buying, selling, advertising, and shopping, as well as parenting and courting.&quot;

Methods of persuasion vary by culture, both in prevalence and effectiveness. For example, advertisements tend to appeal to different values according to whether they are used in collectivistic or individualistic cultures.

===Persuasion Knowledge Model (PKM)===
The Persuasion Knowledge Model (PKM) was created by Friestad and Wright in 1994. This framework allows the researchers to analyze the process of gaining and using everyday persuasion knowledge. The researchers suggest the necessity of including &quot;the relationship and interplay between everyday folk knowledge and scientific knowledge on persuasion, advertising, selling, and marketing in general.&quot;

To educate the general population about research findings and new knowledge about persuasion, a teacher must draw on their pre-existing beliefs from folk persuasion to make the research relevant and informative to lay people, which creates &quot;mingling of their scientific insights and commonsense beliefs.&quot;

As a result of this constant mingling, the issue of persuasion expertise becomes messy. Expertise status can be interpreted from a variety of sources like job titles, celebrity, or published scholarship.

It is through this multimodal process that we create concepts like, &quot;Stay away from car salesmen, they will try to trick you.&quot; The kind of persuasion techniques blatantly employed by car salesmen creates an innate distrust of them in popular culture. According to Psychology Today, they employ tactics ranging from making personal life ties with the customer to altering reality by handing the customer the new car keys before the purchase.

Campbell proposed and empirically demonstrated that some persuasive advertising approaches lead consumers to infer manipulative intent on the marketer&#x27;s part. Once consumers infer manipulative intent, they are less persuaded by the marketer, as indicated by attenuated advertising attitudes, brand attitudes and purchase intentions. Campbell and Kirmani developed an explicit model of the conditions under which consumers use persuasion knowledge in evaluating influence agents such as salespersons.

==Neurobiology==

An article showed that EEG measures of anterior prefrontal asymmetry might be a predictor of persuasion. Research participants were presented with arguments that favored and arguments that opposed the attitudes they already held. Those whose brain was more active in left prefrontal areas said that they paid the most attention to statements with which they agreed while those with a more active right prefrontal area said that they paid attention to statements that disagreed. This is an example of defensive repression, the avoidance or forgetting of unpleasant information. Research has shown that the trait of defensive repression is related to relative left prefrontal activation. In addition, when pleasant or unpleasant words, probably analogous to agreement or disagreement, were seen incidental to the main task, an fMRI scan showed preferential left prefrontal activation to the pleasant words.

One way therefore to increase persuasion would seem to be to selectively activate the right prefrontal cortex. This is easily done by monaural stimulation to the contralateral ear. The effect apparently depends on selective attention rather than merely the source of stimulation. This manipulation had the expected outcome: more persuasion for messages coming from the left.

== Modern Persuasion and Fallacies ==
&quot;Persuasion, traditionally studied through classical frameworks such as Aristotle&#x27;s appeals of &quot;logos&quot;, &quot;ethos&quot;, and &quot;pathos&quot;, has evolved with modern rhetorical theories. Kenneth Burke, a prominent 20th-century rhetorician, expanded the understanding of persuasion by introducing the concept of &quot;identification&quot;. According to Burke, effective persuasion is not merely about logical argumentation or emotional appeal but about creating a sense of shared identity and values between the speaker and the audience. In Burke’s view, persuasion works when the audience feels a connection or alignment with the speaker&#x27;s perspective, thus making the message more compelling. This contrasts with the more transactional nature of classical persuasion and highlights a relational and symbolic aspect of communication.

Burke also pointed out that rhetoric is deeply embedded in social interactions, not just in public speeches or debates but in everyday communication. He argued that language shapes how people perceive their social world, influencing actions and decisions. Thus, persuasion is fundamentally about how language constructs and maintains social realities, making it a critical force in both personal and public life.

In addition to these modern perspectives, understanding fallacies is crucial for effective persuasion. Fallacies are logical errors that can compromise the integrity of an argument. Kenneth Burke’s emphasis on ethical persuasion highlights the importance of recognizing these fallacies to avoid manipulation and misinformation. Examples of common fallacies include:

* Ad Hominem: Attacking the character of the speaker rather than the argument itself. This shifts focus from the message to irrelevant personal traits.
* Appeal to Ignorance: Arguing that something is true because it has not been proven false, which bypasses the need for evidence and logical reasoning.
* Slippery Slope: Suggesting that a minor action will inevitably lead to a series of negative consequences without providing evidence for this causal chain.

Understanding these fallacies allows individuals to critique arguments effectively and ensures that persuasion remains an ethical practice. In this way, Burke’s theory not only broadens the scope of persuasion to include identification and shared meaning but also reinforces the need for ethical and transparent communication practices.&quot;

== See also ==
==References==
==Further reading==
*Cialdini, Robert B. &quot;Harnessing the Science of Persuasion&quot; (Archive). &quot;Harvard Business Review&quot;. October 2001.
*Druckman, James N. 2022. &quot;&quot; &quot;Annual Review of Political Science&quot;.
*Herbert I. Abelson, &quot;Persuasion: How opinions and attitudes are changed&quot;, Springer Publishing Company, 1965
*Jacquelyn Kegley and Krzysztof Piotr Skowroński, eds. &quot;Persuasion and Compulsion in Democracy&quot;, Lexington 2013.
*Richard E. Vatz, &quot;The Only Authentic Book of Persuasion&quot;, Kendall Hunt, 2013

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1231428" start="0" end="10" title="Persuasion" label="Persuasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231428" start="14" end="29" title="Persuasion" label="persuasion arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q43201039" start="36" end="49" title="umbrella term" label="umbrella term"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307337" start="54" end="63" title="Social influence" label="influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q34394" start="106" end="112" title="belief" label="belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q622645" start="115" end="124" title="Attitude (psychology)" label="attitudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q706622" start="126" end="135" title="intention" label="intention"/>
<link wikidata="Q644302" start="138" end="148" title="motivation" label="motivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="154" end="164" title="Behavior" label="behaviours"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="210" end="218" title="Rhetoric" label="Rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="294" end="311" title="Classics" label="classical subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496938" start="933" end="944" title="sales pitch" label="sales pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839940" start="952" end="966" title="trial advocacy" label="trial advocacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="1076" end="1086" title="Propaganda" label="Propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q325980" start="1192" end="1200" title="Coercion" label="Coercion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="1668" end="1674" title="ancient Greece" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="1691" end="1699" title="rhetoric" label="rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255221" start="1704" end="1713" title="elocution" label="elocution"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="2081" end="2090" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024" start="2465" end="2476" title="Communication" label="communicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q484318" start="2493" end="2498" title="Ethos" label="Ethos"/>
<link wikidata="Q180832" start="2703" end="2708" title="Logos" label="Logos"/>
<link wikidata="Q107342" start="2850" end="2859" title="syllogism" label="syllogism"/>
<link wikidata="Q633885" start="3063" end="3069" title="Pathos" label="Pathos"/>
<link wikidata="Q913" start="3262" end="3270" title="Socrates" label="Socrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="3354" end="3367" title="Thomas Hobbes" label="Thomas Hobbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="3454" end="3467" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="3760" end="3769" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012745" start="4516" end="4531" title="Burden of proof (law)" label="burden of proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q275462" start="4816" end="4844" title="Presumption of innocence" label="Innocent until proven guilty"/>
<link wikidata="Q422913" start="5150" end="5159" title="enthymeme" label="enthymeme"/>
<link wikidata="Q186150" start="5344" end="5353" title="Fallacy" label="fallacies"/>
<link wikidata="Q484511" start="5564" end="5583" title="inductive reasoning" label="inductive reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282674" start="6481" end="6506" title="Dispositional attribution" label="Dispositional attribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q900584" start="6884" end="6907" title="Situational attribution" label="Situational attribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q575786" start="7291" end="7320" title="fundamental attribution error" label="fundamental attribution error"/>
<link wikidata="Q30044308" start="10929" end="10947" title="Stefano DellaVigna" label="Stefano DellaVigna"/>
<link wikidata="Q315916" start="11255" end="11269" title="Leon Festinger" label="Leon Festinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860557" start="12557" end="12569" title="self-concept" label="self-concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467425" start="19403" end="19415" title="force (law)" label="use of force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198516" start="19748" end="19763" title="Robert Cialdini" label="Robert Cialdini"/>
<link wikidata="Q743263" start="21927" end="21939" title="brainwashing" label="brainwashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="21952" end="21968" title="prisoners of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="21972" end="21982" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q875611" start="22106" end="22126" title="Pledge of Allegiance (United States)" label="Pledge of Allegiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993355" start="22332" end="22344" title="social proof" label="social proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770513" start="24407" end="24424" title="The True Believer" label="The True Believer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191474" start="24829" end="24842" title="Milgram study" label="Milgram study"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430334" start="26867" end="26885" title="scarcity heuristic" label="scarcity principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="27433" end="27438" title="Logic" label="Logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186619" start="27441" end="27457" title="Logical argument" label="Logical argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="27460" end="27468" title="Rhetoric" label="Rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320364" start="27471" end="27490" title="Scientific evidence" label="Scientific evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="27501" end="27518" title="Scientific method" label="Scientific method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174020" start="27544" end="27564" title="Cosmetics advertising" label="Cosmetic Advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q604733" start="27567" end="27579" title="Presentation" label="Presentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34516" start="27584" end="27595" title="Imagination" label="Imagination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724817" start="27598" end="27602" title="Pity" label="Pity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="27605" end="27615" title="Propaganda" label="Propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q905726" start="27618" end="27643" title="Manipulation (psychology)" label="Manipulation (psychology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527023" start="27646" end="27655" title="Seduction" label="Seduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q82821" start="27658" end="27667" title="Tradition" label="Tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q477298" start="27691" end="27704" title="Body language" label="Body language"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="27730" end="27738" title="Rhetoric" label="Rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475455" start="27741" end="27758" title="Personality tests" label="Personality tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160208" start="27763" end="27787" title="conflict style inventory" label="conflict style inventory"/>
<link wikidata="Q194189" start="27872" end="27888" title="Sales techniques" label="Sales techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q170028" start="27910" end="27919" title="Deception" label="Deception"/>
<link wikidata="Q8609" start="27922" end="27930" title="Hypnosis" label="Hypnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="27933" end="27961" title="Power (social and political)" label="Power (social and political)"/>
<link wikidata="Q310661" start="27964" end="27986" title="Subliminal advertising" label="Subliminal advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q743263" start="28090" end="28102" title="Brainwashing" label="Brainwashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q743263" start="28105" end="28124" title="Coercive persuasion" label="Coercive persuasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402" start="28127" end="28132" title="Force" label="Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q743263" start="28135" end="28147" title="Brainwashing" label="Mind control"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="28150" end="28157" title="Torture" label="Torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="28799" end="28810" title="advertising" label="advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430243" start="29046" end="29060" title="Collectivism and individualism" label="collectivistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="29064" end="29079" title="individualism" label="individualistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198516" start="34859" end="34878" title="Robert Cialdini" label="Cialdini, Robert B."/>
<link wikidata="Q277351" start="34945" end="34968" title="Harvard Business Review" label="Harvard Business Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q60998085" start="34991" end="35009" title="James N. Druckman" label="Druckman, James N."/>
<link wikidata="Q7329639" start="35320" end="35335" title="Richard E. Vatz" label="Richard E. Vatz"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24898" wikidata="Q208487" url="?curid=24898" title="Prime Minister of Israel">
<text>The prime minister of Israel (, Hebrew abbreviation: ; , &quot;Ra&#x27;īs al-Ḥukūma&quot;) is the head of government and chief executive of the State of Israel.

Israel is a parliamentary republic with a president as the head of state. The president&#x27;s powers are largely ceremonial, while the prime minister holds the executive power. The official residence of the prime minister, &quot;Beit Aghion,&quot; is in Jerusalem. The current prime minister is Benjamin Netanyahu of Likud, the ninth person to hold the position (excluding caretakers).

Following an election, the president nominates a member of the Knesset to become prime minister after asking party leaders whom they support for the position. The first candidate the president nominates has 28 days to form a viable government that can command a majority in the Knesset. He then presents a government platform and must receive a vote of confidence from the Knesset to take office. In practice, the prime minister is usually the leader of the largest party in the governing coalition. Since it is all but impossible for one party to win a majority in the Knesset, all Israeli governments have been coalitions between two or more parties. Between 1996 and 2001, the prime minister was directly elected, separately from the Knesset.

The prime minister&#x27;s position is greatly enhanced compared to his counterparts in other parliamentary republics because he is both &quot;de jure&quot; and &quot;de facto&quot; chief executive. This is because Basic Law: The Government explicitly vests executive power in the Government, of which the prime minister is the leader. In most other parliamentary republics, the president is at least nominal chief executive, while usually required by convention to act on the advice of the cabinet.

==History==

The office of Prime Minister came into existence on 14 May 1948, the date of the Declaration of the Establishment of the State of Israel, when the provisional government was created. David Ben-Gurion, leader of Mapai and head of the Jewish Agency, became Israel&#x27;s first prime minister. The position became permanent on 8 March 1949, when the first government was formed. Ben-Gurion retained his role until late 1953, when he resigned to settle in the Kibbutz of Sde Boker. He was replaced by Moshe Sharett. However, Ben-Gurion returned in a little under two years to reclaim his position. He resigned for a second time in 1963, breaking away from Mapai to form Rafi. Levi Eshkol took over as head of Mapai and prime minister. He became the first prime minister to head the country under the banner of two parties when Mapai formed the Alignment with Ahdut HaAvoda in 1965. In 1968 he also became the only party leader to command an absolute majority in the Knesset, after Mapam and Rafi merged into the Alignment, giving it 63 seats in the 120-seat Knesset.

On 26 February 1969, Eshkol became the first prime minister to die in office. He was temporarily replaced by Yigal Allon, whose stint lasted less than a month, as the party persuaded Golda Meir to return to political life and become prime minister in March 1969. Meir was Israel&#x27;s first woman prime minister, and the third in the world (after Sirimavo Bandaranaike and Indira Gandhi).

Meir resigned in 1974 after the Agranat Commission published its findings on the Yom Kippur War, even though it had absolved her of blame. Yitzhak Rabin took over, though he also resigned towards the end of the eighth Knesset&#x27;s term following a series of scandals. Those included the suicide of Housing Minister Avraham Ofer after police began investigating allegations that he had used party funds illegally, and the affair involving Asher Yadlin (the governor-designate of the Bank of Israel), who was sentenced to five years in prison for having accepted bribes. Rabin&#x27;s wife, Leah, was also found to have had an overseas bank account, which was illegal in Israel at the time.

Menachem Begin became the first right-wing prime minister when his Likud won the 1977 elections, and retained the post in the 1981 elections. He resigned in 1983 for health reasons, passing the reins of power to Yitzhak Shamir.

After the 1984 elections had proved inconclusive with neither the Alignment nor Likud able to form a government, a national unity government was formed with a rotating prime ministership – Shimon Peres took the first two years, and was replaced by Shamir midway through the Knesset term. Although the 1988 elections produced another national unity government, Shamir was able to take the role alone. Peres made an abortive bid to form a left-wing government in 1990, but failed, leaving Shamir in power until 1992. Rabin became prime minister for the second time when he led Labour to victory in the 1992 elections. After his assassination on 4 November 1995, Peres took over as prime minister.

===Direct election===

During the thirteenth Knesset (1992–1996) it was decided to hold a separate ballot for prime minister modeled after American presidential elections. This system was instituted in part because the Israeli electoral system makes it all but impossible for one party to win a majority. While only two parties—Mapai/Labour and Likud—had ever led governments, the large number of parties or factions in a typical Knesset usually prevents one party from winning the 61 seats needed for a majority.

In 1996, when the first such election took place, the outcome was a surprise win for Benjamin Netanyahu after election polls predicted that Peres was the winner. However, in the Knesset election held at the same time, Labour won more votes than any other party (27%). Thus Netanyahu, despite his theoretical position of power, needed the support of the religious parties to form a viable government.

Ultimately Netanyahu failed to hold the government together, and early elections for both prime minister and the Knesset were called in 1999. Although five candidates intended to run, the three representing minor parties (Benny Begin of Herut – The National Movement, Azmi Bishara of Balad, and Yitzhak Mordechai of the Centre Party) dropped out before election day, and Ehud Barak beat Netanyahu in the election. However, the new system again appeared to have failed; although Barak&#x27;s One Israel alliance (an alliance of Labour, Gesher, and Meimad) won more votes than any other party in the Knesset election, they garnered only 26 seats, the lowest ever by a winning party or alliance. Barak needed to form a coalition with six smaller parties to form a government.

In early 2001, Barak resigned following the outbreak of the al-Aqsa Intifada. However, the government was not brought down, and only elections for prime minister were necessary. In the election itself, Ariel Sharon of Likud comfortably beat Barak, taking 62.4% of the vote. However, because Likud only had 21 seats in the Knesset, Sharon had to form a national unity government. Following Sharon&#x27;s victory, it was decided to do away with separate elections for prime minister and return to the previous system.

===2003 onwards===
The 2003 elections were carried out in the same manner as prior to 1996. Likud won 38 seats, the highest by a party for over a decade, and as party leader Sharon was duly appointed Prime Minister. However, towards the end of his term and largely as a result of the deep divisions within Likud over Israel&#x27;s unilateral disengagement plan, Sharon broke away from his party to form Kadima, managing to maintain his position as prime minister and also becoming the first prime minister not to be a member of either Labour or Likud (or their predecessors). However, he suffered a stroke in January 2006, in the midst of election season, leading Ehud Olmert to become acting prime minister in the weeks leading to the elections. He was voted by the cabinet to be interim prime minister just after the 2006 elections, when Sharon had reached 100 days of incapacitation. He thus became Israel&#x27;s third interim prime minister, only days before forming his own new government as the official Prime Minister of Israel.

In 2008, amid accusations of corruption and challenges from his own party, Olmert resigned. However, his successor Tzipi Livni was unable to form a coalition government. In the election in the following year, while Kadima won the most seats, it was the Likud leader Benjamin Netanyahu who was given the task of forming a government. He was able to do so, thus beginning his second term as Prime Minister of Israel.

In the 2013 election, the Likud Yisrael Beiteinu alliance emerged as the largest faction. After forming a coalition, Netanyahu secured his third prime ministership. In 2015, Netanyahu managed to stay in power. Multiple disagreements with his coalition members led to the 2019–2022 Israeli political crisis.

In 2021, Naftali Bennett became prime minister. He was succeeded in July 2022 by his coalition partner, Yair Lapid. In December 2022, Benjamin Netanyahu returned to the prime ministership, as a result of the previous month&#x27;s election.

==Order of succession==
If the prime minister dies in office, the cabinet chooses an interim prime minister to run the government until a new government is placed in power. Yigal Allon served as interim prime minister following Levi Eshkol&#x27;s death, as did Shimon Peres following the assassination of Yitzhak Rabin.

According to Israeli law, if a prime minister is temporarily incapacitated rather than dies (as was the case following Ariel Sharon&#x27;s stroke in early 2006), power is transferred to the acting prime minister, until the prime minister recovers (Ehud Olmert took over from Sharon), for up to 100 days. If the prime minister is declared permanently incapacitated, or that period expires, the president of Israel oversees the process of assembling a new governing coalition, and in the meantime the acting prime minister or other incumbent minister is appointed by the cabinet to serve as interim prime minister.

In the case of Sharon, elections were already due to occur within 100 days of the beginning of his coma; thus, the post-election coalition-building process pre-empted the emergency provisions for the selection of a new prime minister. Nevertheless, Olmert was appointed interim prime minister on 16 April 2006, after the elections, just days before he formed a government on 4 May 2006, becoming the official prime minister.

===Acting, vice and deputy prime minister===

Aside from the position of Acting Prime Minister, there are also vice prime ministers and deputy prime ministers.

===Interim prime minister===
The interim prime minister (, &quot;Rosh HaMemshala Ba-foal&quot; lit. &quot;prime minister de facto&quot;) is appointed by the government if the incumbent is dead or permanently incapacitated, or if his tenure was ended due to a criminal conviction.

Israeli law distinguishes the terms &quot;acting prime minister&quot; (מלא מקום ראש הממשלה), filling in for the incumbent prime minister, temporarily, and acting in the incumbent&#x27;s office, while the incumbent is in office, and an &quot;interim prime minister&quot; in office. Only if the incumbent prime minister becomes &quot;temporarily incapacitated&quot; will the acting prime minister act in the incumbent&#x27;s office and will be standing in for him for up to 100 consecutive days, while the incumbent is in office. Legally, the &quot;100 consecutive days&quot; limit, in the language of the law, only stipulates that the incumbent then is deemed to be &quot;permanently incapacitated&quot; and that the limited time for an acting prime minister to act in the incumbent&#x27;s office is over.

In 2006, Ehud Olmert, after standing in for Prime Minister Sharon for 100 consecutive days, as acting prime minister, did not automatically assume office as an interim prime minister. The government voted to appoint him, and in addition, he was also a member of prime minister&#x27;s party, which enabled them to appoint him to the role.

Shimon Peres was the foreign minister when Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin was assassinated, and was voted unanimously to assume office as an interim prime minister until a new Government would be placed in power (that he later formed by himself). Yigal Allon was also voted to be the interim prime minister after Prime Minister Levi Eshkol suddenly died and served until Golda Meir formed her government.

Both the interim and acting prime ministers&#x27; authorities are identical to those of a prime minister, with the exception of not having the authority to dissolve the Knesset.

===Interim government===
An &#x27;interim government&#x27; (, &quot;Memshelet Ma&#x27;avar&quot; lit. &quot;transitional government&quot;) is the same government, having been changed in their legal status, after the death, resignation, permanent incapacitation, or criminal conviction of the prime minister, as well as after the prime minister&#x27;s request to dissolve the Knesset (Israeli parliament) was published through the president&#x27;s decree, or after it was defeated by a motion of no confidence (these actions are regarded by the law as &quot;the Government shall be deemed to have resigned&quot;), or after election and before the forming of a new government.

==Prime Minister&#x27;s residence==
Since 1974, the official residence of the prime minister is &quot;Beit Aghion&quot;, at the corner of Balfour and Smolenskin streets in Rehavia, Jerusalem.

==List of prime ministers of Israel==

;Term of office in years
==See also==
* Beit Aghion
* Cabinet of Israel
* Prime Minister&#x27;s Office (Israel)

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* All Prime Ministers of Israel Knesset website
* The PM&#x27;s Who Shaped Israel – slideshow by &quot;The First Post&quot;
* Family Trees of all Prime Minister of Israel</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q208487" start="4" end="28" title="Prime Minister of Israel" label="prime minister of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148801" start="32" end="51" title="Hebrew abbreviations" label="Hebrew abbreviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="98" end="116" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="144" end="159" title="Israel" label="State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q327948" start="204" end="213" title="President of Israel" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="221" end="234" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894040" start="392" end="403" title="Beit Aghion" label="Beit Aghion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="417" end="426" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q43723" start="458" end="476" title="Benjamin Netanyahu" label="Benjamin Netanyahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q187009" start="480" end="485" title="Likud" label="Likud"/>
<link wikidata="Q16938967" start="487" end="524" title="List of prime ministers of Israel" label="the ninth person to hold the position"/>
<link wikidata="Q133396" start="613" end="620" title="Knesset" label="Knesset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368137" start="1511" end="1536" title="Basic Laws of Israel" label="Basic Law: The Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578249" start="1577" end="1587" title="Cabinet of Israel" label="Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q223732" start="1891" end="1946" title="Israeli Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of the Establishment of the State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q37610" start="1993" end="2009" title="David Ben-Gurion" label="David Ben-Gurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453052" start="2021" end="2026" title="Mapai" label="Mapai"/>
<link wikidata="Q41189" start="2043" end="2056" title="Jewish Agency for Israel" label="Jewish Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674684" start="2157" end="2173" title="1949 Israeli Constituent Assembly election" label="first government"/>
<link wikidata="Q161387" start="2266" end="2273" title="Kibbutz" label="Kibbutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026531" start="2277" end="2286" title="Sde Boker" label="Sde Boker"/>
<link wikidata="Q208477" start="2307" end="2320" title="Moshe Sharett" label="Moshe Sharett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915113" start="2476" end="2480" title="Rafi (political party)" label="Rafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q191123" start="2482" end="2493" title="Levi Eshkol" label="Levi Eshkol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453052" start="2515" end="2520" title="Mapai" label="Mapai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579409" start="2650" end="2659" title="Alignment (Israel)" label="Alignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968280" start="2665" end="2678" title="Ahdut HaAvoda" label="Ahdut HaAvoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428864" start="2787" end="2792" title="Mapam" label="Mapam"/>
<link wikidata="Q319015" start="2983" end="2994" title="Yigal Allon" label="Yigal Allon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42992" start="3057" end="3067" title="Golda Meir" label="Golda Meir"/>
<link wikidata="Q194291" start="3222" end="3243" title="Sirimavo Bandaranaike" label="Sirimavo Bandaranaike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="3248" end="3261" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594416" start="3297" end="3315" title="Agranat Commission" label="Agranat Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="3346" end="3360" title="Yom Kippur War" label="Yom Kippur War"/>
<link wikidata="Q34060" start="3404" end="3417" title="Yitzhak Rabin" label="Yitzhak Rabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890132" start="3476" end="3497" title="1973 Israeli legislative election" label="eighth Knesset&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909729" start="3582" end="3594" title="Avraham Ofer" label="Avraham Ofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12410780" start="3688" end="3694" title="Yadlin affair" label="affair"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3705" end="3717" title="Asher Yadlin" label="Asher Yadlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q441183" start="3855" end="3859" title="Leah Rabin" label="Leah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289203" start="3891" end="3912" title="Dollar Account affair" label="overseas bank account"/>
<link wikidata="Q130873" start="3956" end="3970" title="Menachem Begin" label="Menachem Begin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187009" start="4023" end="4028" title="Likud" label="Likud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917062" start="4037" end="4051" title="1977 Israeli legislative election" label="1977 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917008" start="4082" end="4096" title="1981 Israeli legislative election" label="1981 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q184351" start="4168" end="4182" title="Yitzhak Shamir" label="Yitzhak Shamir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917025" start="4195" end="4209" title="1984 Israeli legislative election" label="1984 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q327922" start="4300" end="4325" title="national unity government" label="national unity government"/>
<link wikidata="Q57410" start="4374" end="4386" title="Shimon Peres" label="Shimon Peres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917001" start="4486" end="4500" title="1988 Israeli legislative election" label="1988 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q210703" start="4760" end="4766" title="Israeli Labor Party" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917044" start="4785" end="4799" title="1992 Israeli legislative election" label="1992 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608162" start="4811" end="4824" title="Assassination of Yitzhak Rabin" label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917044" start="4915" end="4933" title="1992 Israeli legislative election" label="thirteenth Knesset"/>
<link wikidata="Q47566" start="5020" end="5051" title="United States presidential election" label="American presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917048" start="5425" end="5433" title="1996 Israeli general election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q43723" start="5481" end="5499" title="Benjamin Netanyahu" label="Benjamin Netanyahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480394" start="5933" end="5937" title="1999 Israeli legislative election" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663586" start="6019" end="6030" title="Benny Begin" label="Benny Begin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916522" start="6034" end="6063" title="Herut – The National Movement" label="Herut – The National Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q313589" start="6065" end="6077" title="Azmi Bishara" label="Azmi Bishara"/>
<link wikidata="Q143719" start="6081" end="6086" title="Balad (political party)" label="Balad"/>
<link wikidata="Q29427" start="6092" end="6109" title="Yitzhak Mordechai" label="Yitzhak Mordechai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909407" start="6117" end="6129" title="Center Party (Israel)" label="Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q125731" start="6168" end="6178" title="Ehud Barak" label="Ehud Barak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480394" start="6201" end="6209" title="1999 Israeli general election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q749411" start="6288" end="6298" title="One Israel" label="One Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891023" start="6332" end="6338" title="Gesher (1996 political party)" label="Gesher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552150" start="6344" end="6350" title="Meimad" label="Meimad"/>
<link wikidata="Q49106" start="6631" end="6647" title="Second Intifada" label="al-Aqsa Intifada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733907" start="6756" end="6771" title="2001 Israeli prime ministerial election" label="election itself"/>
<link wikidata="Q60206" start="6773" end="6785" title="Ariel Sharon" label="Ariel Sharon"/>
<link wikidata="Q782051" start="7111" end="7125" title="2003 Israeli legislative election" label="2003 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q196122" start="7405" end="7448" title="Israeli disengagement from Gaza" label="Israel&amp;#x27;s unilateral disengagement plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q39655" start="7491" end="7497" title="Kadima" label="Kadima"/>
<link wikidata="Q93181" start="7752" end="7763" title="Ehud Olmert" label="Ehud Olmert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720560" start="7907" end="7921" title="2006 Israeli legislative election" label="2006 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q151796" start="8240" end="8251" title="Tzipi Livni" label="Tzipi Livni"/>
<link wikidata="Q911180" start="8302" end="8332" title="2009 Israeli legislative election" label="election in the following year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334537" start="8548" end="8561" title="2013 Israeli legislative election" label="2013 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813338" start="8567" end="8589" title="Likud Yisrael Beiteinu" label="Likud Yisrael Beiteinu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012412" start="8709" end="8713" title="2015 Israeli legislative election" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q89194084" start="8812" end="8846" title="2018–2022 Israeli political crisis" label="2019–2022 Israeli political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q39318" start="8858" end="8873" title="Naftali Bennett" label="Naftali Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396120" start="8953" end="8963" title="Yair Lapid" label="Yair Lapid"/>
<link wikidata="Q106181016" start="9057" end="9087" title="2022 Israeli legislative election" label="previous month&amp;#x27;s election"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9601" end="9622" title="Deputy leaders of Israel#Acting Prime Minister" label="acting prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720560" start="10346" end="10355" title="2006 Israeli legislative election" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894040" start="13399" end="13410" title="Beit Aghion" label="Beit Aghion"/>
<link wikidata="Q19008" start="13435" end="13442" title="Arthur Balfour" label="Balfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371532" start="13447" end="13457" title="Peretz Smolenskin" label="Smolenskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q654128" start="13469" end="13476" title="Rehavia" label="Rehavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894040" start="13569" end="13580" title="Beit Aghion" label="Beit Aghion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578249" start="13583" end="13600" title="Cabinet of Israel" label="Cabinet of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4516222" start="13603" end="13640" title="Prime Minister&amp;#x27;s Office (Israel)" label="Prime Minister&amp;#x27;s Office (Israel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734174" start="13800" end="13814" title="The First Post" label="The First Post"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24899" wikidata="Q191954" url="?curid=24899" title="President of France">
<text>The president of France, officially the president of the French Republic (), is the executive head of state of France, and the commander-in-chief of the French Armed Forces. As the presidency is the supreme magistracy of the country, the position is the highest office in France. The powers, functions and duties of prior presidential offices, in addition to their relation with the prime minister and government of France, have over time differed with the various constitutional documents since the Second Republic. 

The president of the French Republic is the co-prince of Andorra, grand master of the Legion of Honour and of the National Order of Merit. The officeholder is also honorary proto-canon of the Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran in Rome, although some have rejected the title in the past. 

The current president is Emmanuel Macron, who succeeded François Hollande on 14 May 2017 following the 2017 presidential election, and was inaugurated for a second term on 7 May 2022 following the 2022 presidential election.

==History==
The presidency of France was first publicly proposed during the July Revolution of 1830, when it was offered to the Marquis de Lafayette. He demurred in favour of Prince Louis Phillipe, who became King of the French.

Eighteen years later, during the opening phases of the Second Republic, the title was created for a popularly elected head of state, the first of whom was Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte, nephew of Emperor Napoleon. Bonaparte served as president until he staged a self-coup against the republic, proclaiming himself Napoleon III, Emperor of the French.

Under the Third Republic the president was at first quite powerful, mainly because the royalist party was strong when the constitutional laws of 1875 were established, and it was hoped that a member of one of the two branches of the royal family would be able to serve as president and turn France into a constitutional monarchy. However, the next legislature was dominated by Republicans, and after President Patrice de MacMahon had unsuccessfully tried to obtain a new royalist majority by dissolving the , his successor Jules Grévy promised in 1879 that he would not use his presidential power of dissolution, and therefore lost his control over the legislature, effectively creating a parliamentary system that would be maintained for 80 years until the accession of Charles de Gaulle as president in 1959.

Indeed, when the Fourth Republic was created, after the Second World War, it was a parliamentary system, in which the office of President of the Republic was a largely ceremonial one.

The Constitution of the Fifth Republic, adopted in 1958, greatly increased the president&#x27;s powers. A 1962 referendum changed the constitution, so that the president would be directly elected by universal suffrage and not by the electoral college established in 1958. In 2000, a referendum shortened the presidential term from seven years ({{lang|fr|Septennat}}) to five years ({{lang|fr|Quinquennat}}). A maximum of two consecutive terms was imposed after a 2008 constitutional reform.

==Election==
{{further|Presidential elections in France}}

=== Term limits ===
Since the 1962 presidential referendum, the president has been directly elected by universal suffrage; previously, an electoral college decided the head of state. The length of the presidential term was reduced from seven years to five years following a 2000 referendum; the first election for a shorter term was held in 2002. Then-president Jacques Chirac was first elected in 1995 and again in 2002, and would have been able to run in 2007 had he chosen to, given the lack of term limits. 

Following a further change, the constitutional law of 2008 on the modernization of the institutions of the Fifth Republic, a president cannot serve more than two consecutive terms. François Mitterrand and Jacques Chirac were previously the only presidents to date who have served a full two terms (14 years for the former, 12 years for the latter). Incumbent Emmanuel Macron is the fourth president (after de Gaulle, Mitterrand, and Chirac) to win re-election, having done so in 2022.

=== Electoral process ===
French presidential elections are conducted using run-off voting, which ensures that the elected president always obtains a majority: if no candidate receives a majority of votes in the first round of voting, the two highest-scoring candidates arrive at a run-off. After a new president is elected, they go through a solemn investiture ceremony called a {{lang|fr|passation des pouvoirs}} (&quot;handing over of powers&quot;).

In order to be admitted as an official candidate, potential candidates must receive signed nominations (known as {{lang|fr|parrainages}}, for &quot;sponsors&quot;) from more than 500 elected local officials, mostly mayors. These officials must be from at least 30 {{lang|fr|départements}} or overseas collectivities, and no more than 10% of them should be from the same {{lang|fr|département}} or collectivity. Furthermore, each official may nominate only one candidate. 

There are exactly 45,543 elected officials, including 33,872 mayors. Spending and financing of campaigns and political parties are highly regulated. There is a cap on spending (at approximately €20 million) and government public financing of 50% of spending if the candidate scores more than 5%. If the candidate receives less than 5% of the vote, the government funds €8,000,000 to the party (€4,000,000 paid in advance). Advertising on TV is forbidden, but official time is given to candidates on public TV. An independent agency regulates election and party financing.

==Powers==
The French Fifth Republic is a semi-presidential system. Unlike most other European heads of state, the French president is quite powerful. Although the Prime Minister of France, through their government as well as Parliament, oversees much of the nation&#x27;s actual day-to-day domestic affairs, the French president wields significant influence and authority, especially in the fields of national security and foreign policy. The president&#x27;s greatest power is the ability to choose the prime minister. However, since it is the French National Assembly that has the sole power to dismiss the prime minister&#x27;s government, the president is forced to name a prime minister who can command the support of a majority in the assembly. Since 2002, the legislative elections are held a few weeks after the presidential; a majority supporting the president&#x27;s party or at the very least not opposing the president&#x27;s choice is therefore very likely to be obtained. They have also the duty of arbitrating the functioning of governmental authorities for efficient service, as the head of state of France.

* When a majority of the Assembly has opposite political views to that of the president, this leads to political {{lang|fr|cohabitation}}. In that case, the President&#x27;s power is diminished, since much of the {{lang|la|de facto}} power relies on a supportive prime minister and National Assembly, and is not directly attributed to the post of president.
* When the majority of the Assembly sides with them, the president can take a more active role and may further influence government policy. The prime minister is then a more personal choice of the president, and can be easily replaced if the administration becomes unpopular. This device has been used in recent years by François Mitterrand, Jacques Chirac, and François Hollande.

Since 2002, the mandate of the president and the Assembly are both five years, and the two elections are close to each other. Therefore, the likelihood of a {{lang|fr|cohabitation}} is lower. Among the powers of the president:

* The president promulgates laws.
** The president has a suspensive veto: when presented with a law, they can request another reading of it by the Parliament, but only once per law.
** The president may also refer the law for review to the Constitutional Council prior to promulgation.
* The president may dissolve the French National Assembly.
* The president may refer treaties or certain types of laws to popular referendum, within certain conditions (among them the agreement of the prime minister or the Parliament).
* The president is the Chief of the Armed Forces.
* The president may order the use of nuclear weapons.
* The president names the prime minister. In theory, they cannot directly dismiss them, but at least a few recent PMs are known to have given an undated letter of resignation for themselves to the president upon taking office, and the president generally has some influence over the PM. The president also names and dismisses the other ministers, with the advice of the prime minister.
* The president names most officials (with the assent of the cabinet).
* The president names certain members of the Constitutional Council. (Former presidents are also members of this council)
* The president receives foreign ambassadors.
* The president may grant a pardon (but not an amnesty) to convicted criminals; the president can also lessen or suppress criminal sentences. This was of crucial importance when France still operated the death penalty: criminals sentenced to death would generally request that the president commute their sentence to life imprisonment.

All decisions of the president must be countersigned by the prime minister, except dissolving the National Assembly, choice of prime minister, and other dispositions referred to in Article 19.

===Detailed constitutional powers===
The constitutional attributions of the president are defined in Title II of the Constitution of France.

Article 5: The president of the republic shall see that the Constitution is observed. He shall ensure, by his arbitration, the proper functioning of the public authorities and the continuity of the State. He shall be the guarantor of national independence, territorial integrity and observance of treaties.

Article 8: The president of the republic shall appoint the prime minister. He shall terminate the appointment of the prime minister when the latter tenders the resignation of the Government. On the proposal of the prime minister, he shall appoint the other members of the Government and terminate their appointments.

Article 9: The president of the republic shall preside over the Council of Ministers.

Article 10: The president of the republic shall promulgate acts of parliament within fifteen days following the final adoption of an act and its transmission to the Government. He may, before the expiry of this time limit, ask Parliament to reconsider the act or sections of the Act. Reconsideration shall not be refused. &quot;While the President has to sign all acts adopted by parliament into law, he cannot refuse to do so and exercise a kind of right of veto; his only power in that matter is to ask for a single reconsideration of the law by parliament and this power is subject to countersigning by the Prime minister.&quot;

Article 11: The president could submit laws to the people in a referendum with advice and consent of the cabinet.

Article 12: The president of the republic may, after consulting the prime minister and the presidents of the assemblies, declare the National Assembly dissolved. A general election shall take place not less than twenty days and not more than forty days after the dissolution. The National Assembly shall convene as of right on the second Thursday following its election. Should it so convene outside the period prescribed for the ordinary session, a session shall be called by right for a fifteen-day period. No further dissolution shall take place within a year following this election.

Article 13: The president of the republic shall sign the ordinances and decrees deliberated upon in the Council of Ministers. He shall make appointments to the civil and military posts of the State. [...]

Article 14: The president of the republic shall accredit ambassadors and envoys extraordinary to foreign powers; foreign ambassadors and envoys extraordinary shall be accredited to him.

Article 15: The president of the republic shall be commander-in-chief of the armed forces. He shall preside over the higher national defence councils and committees.

Article 16: Where the institutions of the republic, the independence of the nation, the integrity of its territory or the fulfilment of its international commitments are under serious and immediate threat, and where the proper functioning of the constitutional public authorities is interrupted, the president of the republic shall take the measures required by these circumstances, after formally consulting the prime minister, the presidents of the assemblies and the Constitutional Council. He shall inform the nation of these measures in a message. The measures must stem from the desire to provide the constitutional public authorities, in the shortest possible time, with the means to carry out their duties. The Constitutional Council shall be consulted with regard to such measures. Parliament shall convene as of right. The National Assembly shall not be dissolved during the exercise of the emergency powers.

&quot;Article 16, allowing the president a limited form of rule by decree for a limited period of time in exceptional circumstance, has been used only once, by Charles de Gaulle during the Algerian War, from 23 April to 29 September 1961.&quot;

Article 17: The president of the republic has the right to grant pardon.

Article 18: The president of the republic shall communicate with the two assemblies of Parliament by means of messages, which he shall cause to be read and which shall not be the occasion for any debate. He can also give an address in front of the Congress of France in Versailles. Outside sessions, Parliament shall be convened especially for this purpose.

Article 19: Acts of the president of the republic, other than those provided for under articles 8 (first paragraph), 11, 12, 16, 18, 54, 56 and 61, shall be countersigned by the prime minister and, where required, by the appropriate ministers.

===Presidential amnesties===
Before the 2008 constitutional reform forbidding them, there was a tradition of so-called &quot;presidential amnesties&quot;, which are something of a misnomer: after the election of a president, and of a National Assembly of the same party, parliament would traditionally vote a law granting amnesty for some petty crimes (it was also a way of reducing jail overpopulation). This practice had been increasingly criticized, particularly because it was believed to inspire people to commit traffic offences in the months preceding the election. Such an amnesty law would also authorize the president to designate individuals who have committed certain categories of crimes to be offered amnesty, if certain conditions are met. Such individual measures have been criticized for the political patronage that they allow. The difference between an amnesty and a presidential pardon is that the former clears all subsequent effects of the sentencing, as though the crime had not been committed, while pardon simply relieves the sentenced individual from part or all of the remainder of the sentence.

==Criminal responsibility and impeachment==
Articles 67 and 68 organize the regime of criminal responsibility of the president. They were reformed by a 2007 constitutional act in order to clarify a situation that previously resulted in legal controversies. The president of the Republic enjoys immunity during their term: they cannot be requested to testify before any jurisdiction, they cannot be prosecuted, etc. However, the statute of limitations is suspended during their term, and enquiries and prosecutions can be restarted, at the latest one month after they leave office. The president is not deemed personally responsible for their actions in their official capacity, except where their actions are indicted before the International Criminal Court (France is a member of the ICC and the president is a French citizen as another following the Court&#x27;s rules) or where impeachment is moved against them. Impeachment can be pronounced by the Republican High Court, a special court convened from both houses of Parliament on the proposal of either House, should the president have failed to discharge their duties in a way that evidently precludes the continuation of their term.

==Succession and incapacity==

{{Presidential orders of succession}}
Upon the death in office, removal, or resignation of the president, the Senate&#x27;s president takes over as acting president. Alain Poher is the only person to have served in this temporary position, and has done so twice: the first time in 1969 after Charles de Gaulle&#x27;s resignation and a second time in 1974 after Georges Pompidou&#x27;s death while in office. In this situation, the president of the Senate does not have to resign from their position while acting as president. 

The first round of a new presidential election must be organized no sooner than twenty days and no later than thirty-five days following the vacancy of the presidency. Fifteen days can separate the first and second rounds of a presidential election; this means that the president of the Senate can only act as President of the Republic for a maximum period of fifty days. 

During this interim period, acting presidents are not allowed to dismiss the national assembly, nor are they allowed to call for a referendum or initiate any constitutional changes. If there is no president of the Senate, the powers of the president of the republic are exercised by the {{lang|fr|Gouvernement}}, meaning the Cabinet. This has been interpreted by some constitutional academics as meaning first the prime minister and, if they are themselves not able to act, the members of the cabinet in the order of the list of the decree that nominated them. This is in fact unlikely to happen, because if the president of the Senate is not able to act, the Senate will normally name a new president of the Senate, who will act as President of the Republic. 

During the Third French Republic the president of the Council of Ministers acted as president whenever the office was vacant. According to article 7 of the Constitution, if the presidency becomes vacant for any reason, or if the president becomes incapacitated, upon the request of the {{lang|fr|Gouvernement}}, the Constitutional Council may rule, by a majority vote, that the presidency is to be temporarily assumed by the president of the Senate. If the Council rules that the incapacity is permanent, the same procedure as for the resignation is applied, as described above. If the president cannot attend meetings, including meetings of the Council of Ministers, they can ask the prime minister to attend in their stead (Constitution, article 21). This clause has been applied by presidents travelling abroad, ill, or undergoing surgery. During the Second French Republic, there was a vice president. The only person to ever hold the position was Henri Georges Boulay de la Meurthe.

==Death in office==
Four French presidents have died in office:
* Sadi Carnot, who was assassinated by Sante Geronimo Caserio on 25 June 1894, aged 56.
* Félix Faure, who died on 16 February 1899, aged 58.
* Paul Doumer, who was assassinated by Paul Gorguloff on 7 May 1932, aged 75, the oldest to die in office.
* Georges Pompidou, who died on 2 April 1974, aged 62.

==Pay and official residences==

The president of the Republic is paid a salary according to a pay grade defined in comparison to the pay grades of the most senior members of the French Civil Service (&quot;out of scale&quot;, {{lang|fr|hors échelle}}, those whose pay grades are known as letters and not as numeric indices). In addition they are paid a residence stipend of 3%, and a function stipend of 25% on top of the salary and residence indemnity. This gross salary and these indemnities are the same as those of the prime minister, and are 50% higher than the highest paid to other members of the government, which is itself defined as twice the average of the highest (pay grade G) and the lowest (pay grade A1) salaries in the &quot;out of scale&quot; pay grades. {{As of|2008|alt=Using the 2008 &quot;out of scale&quot; pay grades,}} it amounts to a monthly pay of 20,963 euros, which fits the 19,000 euros quoted to the press in early 2008. Using the pay grades starting from 1 July 2009, this amounts to a gross monthly pay of €21,131. The salary and the residence stipend are taxable for income tax. The official residence and office of the president is the Élysée Palace in Paris. Other presidential residences include:

* the Hôtel de Marigny, standing next to the Élysée Palace, houses foreign official guests;
* the Château de Rambouillet is normally open to visitors when not used for (rare) official meetings;
* the Domaine national de Marly is normally open to visitors when not used for (rare) official meetings;
* the Fort de Brégançon, in Southeastern France, is the official presidential vacation residence. In 2013, it became a national monument and is opened to the public some moments since 2014. The French president&#x27;s private quarters there are still available for their use. La Lanterne became an official presidential vacation residence in 2007.

==Latest election==
{{main|2022 French presidential election}}

==Pension and benefits==
According to French law, former presidents of the Republic have guaranteed lifetime pension defined according to the pay grade of the Councillors of State, a courtesy diplomatic passport, and, according to the French Constitution (Article 56), membership of the Constitutional Council. They also get personnel, an apartment and/or office, and other amenities, though the legal basis for these is disputed. The current system for providing personnel and other amenities to the former French presidents was devised in 1981 by Michel Charasse, then advisor to President François Mitterrand, in order to care for former president Valéry Giscard d&#x27;Estaing and the widow of former President Georges Pompidou. In 2008, according to an answer by the services of the prime minister to a question from René Dosière, a member of the National Assembly, the facilities comprised: a security detail, a car with a chauffeur, first class train tickets and an office or housing space, as well as two people who service the space. In addition, funds are available for seven permanent assistants. President Hollande announced a reform of the system in 2016. Former presidents of France will no longer receive a car with chauffeur and the personnel in their living space was cut as well. Additionally, the number of assistants available for their use has been reduced, but a state flat or house remains available for former officeholders. Train tickets are also available if the trip is justified by the office of the former officeholder as part of official business. The security personnel around former presidents of France remained unchanged.

==Lists relating to the presidents of France==
{{Portal|Politics|France}}

* List of presidents of France
* List of presidents of France by tenure
* French presidential inauguration
* List of French non-presidential heads of state by tenure

==References==
{{reflist}}

==Further reading==
*How Powerful Is France&#x27;s President? A primer from the Council on Foreign Relations
* John Gaffney. &quot;Political Leadership in France: From Charles de Gaulle to Nicolas Sarkozy&quot; (Palgrave Macmillan; 2012), {{ISBN|978-0-230-36037-2}}. Explores mythology and symbolism in French political culture through a study of the personas crafted by de Gaulle and his five successors.

==External links==
* {{official website}}

{{Presidents of France}}
{{Navboxes
|list =
{{Heads of state of the European Union member states}}
{{Heads of state and government of Europe}}
{{European Council}}
{{List of Current Heads of State of G20}}
{{Portal bar|France|Politics}}
{{Authority control}}</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="4" end="23" title="President of France" label="president of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="40" end="72" title="President of France" label="president of the French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="94" end="107" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="111" end="117" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="127" end="145" title="Chief of the Armed Forces (France)" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q477986" start="153" end="172" title="French Armed Forces" label="French Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587677" start="383" end="397" title="Prime Minister of France" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450662" start="402" end="422" title="government of France" label="government of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q58326" start="500" end="515" title="Second French Republic" label="Second Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q683337" start="563" end="583" title="co-Princes of Andorra" label="co-prince of Andorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="605" end="621" title="Legion of Honour" label="Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q652962" start="633" end="656" title="Ordre national du Mérite" label="National Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q84090" start="711" end="745" title="Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran" label="Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052772" start="833" end="848" title="Emmanuel Macron" label="Emmanuel Macron"/>
<link wikidata="Q157" start="864" end="881" title="François Hollande" label="François Hollande"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020999" start="911" end="937" title="2017 French presidential election" label="2017 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q30638578" start="1005" end="1031" title="2022 French presidential election" label="2022 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q214028" start="1110" end="1125" title="July Revolution" label="July Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q186652" start="1162" end="1182" title="Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette" label="Marquis de Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="1216" end="1230" title="Louis Philippe I" label="Louis Phillipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q58326" start="1319" end="1334" title="French Second Republic" label="Second Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="1419" end="1443" title="Napoleon III" label="Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="1463" end="1471" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315743" start="1521" end="1530" title="1851 French coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="self-coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373953" start="1587" end="1608" title="Emperor of the French" label="Emperor of the French"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="1621" end="1635" title="French Third Republic" label="Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139585" start="1954" end="1970" title="1877 French legislative election" label="next legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q158838" start="2021" end="2040" title="Patrice de MacMahon" label="Patrice de MacMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q296083" start="2134" end="2145" title="Jules Grévy" label="Jules Grévy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="2300" end="2320" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="2382" end="2399" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q69829" start="2440" end="2455" title="French Fourth Republic" label="Fourth Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q200686" start="2632" end="2646" title="French Fifth Republic" label="Fifth Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327816" start="2714" end="2729" title="1962 French presidential election referendum" label="1962 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564487" start="2891" end="2901" title="2000 French constitutional referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621459" start="2962" end="2971" title="Septennat (France)" label="Septennat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258278" start="3071" end="3097" title="French constitutional law of 23 July 2008" label="2008 constitutional reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327816" start="3189" end="3217" title="1962 French presidential election referendum" label="1962 presidential referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="3262" end="3280" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141323" start="3297" end="3314" title="electoral college" label="electoral college"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564487" start="3433" end="3448" title="2000 French constitutional referendum" label="2000 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129306" start="3500" end="3504" title="2002 French presidential election" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105" start="3521" end="3535" title="Jacques Chirac" label="Jacques Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450660" start="3557" end="3561" title="1995 French presidential election" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q245238" start="3616" end="3620" title="2007 French presidential election" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258278" start="3704" end="3793" title="French constitutional law of 23 July 2008" label="constitutional law of 2008 on the modernization of the institutions of the Fifth Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="3853" end="3872" title="François Mitterrand" label="François Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105" start="3877" end="3891" title="Jacques Chirac" label="Jacques Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q30638578" start="4140" end="4155" title="2022 French presidential election" label="done so in 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="4234" end="4248" title="two-round system" label="run-off voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q167407" start="4508" end="4519" title="investiture" label="investiture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="4886" end="4898" title="departments of France" label="départements"/>
<link wikidata="Q719487" start="4904" end="4927" title="overseas collectivities" label="overseas collectivities"/>
<link wikidata="Q200686" start="5673" end="5694" title="French Fifth Republic" label="French Fifth Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="5700" end="5724" title="semi-presidential republic" label="semi-presidential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587677" start="5822" end="5846" title="Prime Minister of France" label="Prime Minister of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q258307" start="6060" end="6077" title="national security" label="national security"/>
<link wikidata="Q902873" start="6082" end="6096" title="foreign relations of France" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193582" start="6204" end="6228" title="National Assembly (France)" label="French National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009796" start="6907" end="6919" title="cohabitation (government)" label="cohabitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="7007" end="7015" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="7463" end="7482" title="François Mitterrand" label="François Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105" start="7484" end="7498" title="Jacques Chirac" label="Jacques Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q157" start="7504" end="7521" title="François Hollande" label="François Hollande"/>
<link wikidata="Q446780" start="7768" end="7779" title="promulgation" label="promulgates"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="7820" end="7824" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127218" start="7992" end="8014" title="Constitutional Council (France)" label="Constitutional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q193582" start="8071" end="8095" title="National Assembly (France)" label="French National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="8168" end="8178" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="8297" end="8322" title="Chief of the Armed Forces (France)" label="Chief of the Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002821" start="8361" end="8376" title="force de dissuasion" label="nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="9031" end="9037" title="pardon" label="pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q185943" start="9050" end="9057" title="amnesty" label="amnesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q832508" start="9651" end="9673" title="Constitution of France" label="Constitution of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q18552825" start="11783" end="11793" title="ordonnance" label="ordinances"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11798" end="11805" title="decree#France" label="decrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q121998" start="11989" end="12000" title="Ambassador" label="ambassadors"/>
<link wikidata="Q121998" start="12053" end="12063" title="ambassador" label="ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146145" start="13265" end="13279" title="rule by decree" label="rule by decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="13366" end="13383" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="13395" end="13407" title="Algerian War" label="Algerian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993145" start="13774" end="13792" title="Congress of the French Parliament" label="Congress of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071040" start="14469" end="14480" title="petty crime" label="petty crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q265939" start="14949" end="14958" title="patronage" label="patronage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457196" start="15548" end="15556" title="sovereign immunity" label="immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899048" start="15682" end="15704" title="statute of limitations" label="statute of limitations"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="15983" end="16011" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q480498" start="16170" end="16181" title="Impeachment" label="Impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q215987" start="16586" end="16592" title="Senate (France)" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12950" start="16642" end="16653" title="Alain Poher" label="Alain Poher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="16768" end="16785" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185" start="16837" end="16853" title="Georges Pompidou" label="Georges Pompidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="18151" end="18172" title="French Third Republic" label="Third French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q58326" start="18994" end="19016" title="French Second Republic" label="Second French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q115821123" start="19030" end="19044" title="vice President of France" label="vice president"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131179" start="19092" end="19126" title="Henri Georges Boulay de la Meurthe" label="Henri Georges Boulay de la Meurthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q215778" start="19195" end="19206" title="Sadi Carnot (statesman)" label="Sadi Carnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q928209" start="19232" end="19254" title="Sante Geronimo Caserio" label="Sante Geronimo Caserio"/>
<link wikidata="Q296076" start="19283" end="19294" title="Félix Faure" label="Félix Faure"/>
<link wikidata="Q12680" start="19337" end="19348" title="Paul Doumer" label="Paul Doumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337810" start="19374" end="19388" title="Paul Gorguloff" label="Paul Gorguloff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185" start="19444" end="19460" title="Georges Pompidou" label="Georges Pompidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161855" start="19677" end="19697" title="French Civil Service" label="French Civil Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="20600" end="20610" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q188190" start="20670" end="20683" title="Élysée Palace" label="Élysée Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3145892" start="20740" end="20756" title="Hôtel de Marigny" label="Hôtel de Marigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q648534" start="20832" end="20854" title="Château de Rambouillet" label="Château de Rambouillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q736185" start="20954" end="20959" title="Château de Marly" label="Marly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714663" start="21039" end="21056" title="Fort de Brégançon" label="Fort de Brégançon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3209959" start="21309" end="21320" title="La Lanterne (Versailles)" label="La Lanterne"/>
<link wikidata="Q769657" start="21605" end="21625" title="Conseil d&amp;#x27;État (France)" label="Councillors of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q43812" start="21638" end="21657" title="diplomatic passport" label="diplomatic passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309244" start="21995" end="22010" title="Michel Charasse" label="Michel Charasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="22038" end="22057" title="François Mitterrand" label="François Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124" start="22097" end="22126" title="Valéry Giscard d&amp;#x27;Estaing" label="Valéry Giscard d&amp;#x27;Estaing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185" start="22161" end="22177" title="Georges Pompidou" label="Georges Pompidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426115" start="22268" end="22280" title="René Dosière" label="René Dosière"/>
<link wikidata="Q29580" start="23180" end="23208" title="List of presidents of France" label="List of presidents of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q30673508" start="23211" end="23249" title="List of presidents of France by tenure" label="List of presidents of France by tenure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153927" start="23252" end="23284" title="French presidential inauguration" label="French presidential inauguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q30681613" start="23287" end="23343" title="List of French non-presidential heads of state by tenure" label="List of French non-presidential heads of state by tenure"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24900" wikidata="Q898359" url="?curid=24900" title="Plastic explosive">
<text>Plastic explosive is a soft and hand-moldable solid form of explosive material. Within the field of explosives engineering, plastic explosives are also known as putty explosives or blastics.

Plastic explosives are especially suited for explosive demolition. Common plastic explosives include Semtex and C-4. The first manufactured plastic explosive was gelignite in 1875, invented by Alfred Nobel.

==Usage==
Plastic explosives are especially suited for explosive demolition of obstacles and fortifications by combat engineers as they can be easily formed into ideal shapes for cutting structural members and have a high enough velocity of detonation and density for metal cutting work.

An early use of plastic explosives was in the warhead of the Petard demolition mortar of the British Armoured Vehicle Royal Engineers (AVRE) which was used to destroy concrete fortifications encountered during Operation Overlord (D-Day). The original use of Nobel 808 supplied by the SOE was for sabotage of German installations and railways in Occupied Europe.

They are generally not used for ordinary blasting as they tend to be significantly more expensive than other materials that perform just as well. A common commercial use of plastic explosives is for shock hardening high manganese percentage steel, a material typically used for train rail components and earth digging implements.

Reactive armor in tanks uses plastic explosives sandwiched between two plates of steel. Incoming high explosive shaped charge anti-tank rounds pierce the outer steel plate, then detonate the plastic explosive. This disrupts the energy from the incoming round and shields the tank.

==History==

The first plastic explosive was gelignite, invented by Alfred Nobel in 1875. Prior to World War I, the British explosives chemist Oswald Silberrad obtained British and U.S. patents for a series of plastic explosives called &quot;Nitrols&quot;, composed of nitrated aromatics, collodion, and oxidising inorganic salts. The language of the patents indicate that at this time, Silberrad saw no need to explain to &quot;those versed in the art&quot; either what he meant by plasticity or why it may be advantageous, as he only explains why his plastic explosive is superior to others of that type.

One of the simplest plastic explosives was Nobel&#x27;s Explosive No. 808, of the gelignite type, also known as &quot;Nobel 808&quot; (often just called &quot;Explosive 808&quot; in the British Armed Forces during the Second World War), developed by the British company Nobel Chemicals Ltd well before World War II. It had the appearance of green plasticine with a distinctive smell of almonds. During World War II it was extensively used by the British Special Operations Executive (SOE) at Aston House for sabotage missions. It is also the explosive used in HESH anti-tank shells and was an essential factor in the devising of the Gammon grenade. Captured SOE-supplied Nobel 808 was the explosive used in the failed 20 July plot assassination attempt on Adolf Hitler in 1944.

During and after World War II a number of new RDX-based explosives were developed, including Compositions C, C2, and eventually C3. Together with RDX, these incorporate various plasticizers to decrease sensitivity and make the composition plastic. The origin of the obsolete term &quot;plastique&quot; dates back to the Nobel 808 explosive introduced to the U.S. by the British in 1940. The samples of explosive brought to the U.S. by the Tizard Mission had already been packaged by the SOE ready for dropping via parachute container to the French Resistance and were therefore labeled in French, as &quot;Explosif Plastique&quot;. It is still referred to by this name in France and also by some Americans.

==Types==
===Composition C===

The British used a plastic explosive during World War II as a demolition charge. The specific explosive, Composition C, was 88.3% RDX and 11.7% non-oily, non-explosive plasticizer. The material was plastic between , but was brittle at colder temperatures and gummy at higher temperatures. Composition C was superseded by Composition C2, which used a mixture of 80% RDX and 20% plasticizer. Composition C2 had a wider temperature range at which it remained plastic, from . Composition C2 was replaced by Composition C3, which was a mixture of 77% RDX and 23% explosive plasticizer. C3 was effective but proved to be too brittle in cold weather and was replaced with C4. There are three classes of C4, with varying amounts of RDX and polyisobutylene.

===Semtex===


==List of plastic explosives==
* Australia: PE4, PE4-MC
* Austria: KNAUERIT SPEZIAL
* Czech Republic: Semtex-1H (orange-colored), Semtex 1A (red-colored), Semtex 10 (also called Pl Np 10; black-colored), Pl Hx 30 (gray-colored)
* Finland: PENO
* France: Hexomax, Composition C-4 PLASTRITE (FORMEX P1, Pla Np 87)
* Germany: Sprengkörper DM12, P8301, Seismoplast 1 (Sprengmasse, formbar)
* Netherlands: Knaverit S1 (light orange-colored)
* Greece: C3, C4
* India: PEK-1
* Israel: Semtex
* Italy: T-4 Plastico
* Norway: NM91 (HMX), C4, DPX10 (PE8)
* Pakistan: PE-3A
* Poland: PMW, NITROLIT
* Russia: PVV-5A Plastic Explosive
* Slovakia: CHEMEX (Composition C-4 equivalent), TVAREX 4A, Pl Hx 30
* South Africa: PE9 (Composition C-4 equivalent)
* Spain: PG2, PG4, GOMA 0, GOMA 1, GOMA 2
* Sweden: Sprängdeg m/46, NSP711 (PETN-based), NSH711 (cyclonite-based)
* Switzerland: PLASTEX produced by SSE
* Turkey: Composition C-4
* United Kingdom
** MOD (Ministry of Defence) explosives: PE2 (sheet explosive, superseded by SX2), PE3A (superseded by PE4), PE4 (pure to off-white slab, block, or stick, superseded by PE7 and PE8 in MOD usage), SX2 (sheet explosive, superseded by SX4), PE7 (pure to off-white slab or block, Hexomax variant), PE8 (pure to off-white slab or block, current in-service slab charge), SX4 (sheet explosive), DPX (DPX1 used in L26A1 Bangalore Torpedo Demolition Charge, DPX9 used in SABREX and as a key component of SX4)
** Non-MOD explosives: Composition C-4 (M5A1 and M112 charges produced by Mondial Defence Systems), Semtex (Several variants including Razor produced by Mondial Defence Systems, PW4 variant produced by Chemring))
* United States: Composition C-4 (pure white block or sheet, current in-service charges designated as M112 and M118), PETN and RDX based Sheet Explosive (Primasheet, Durasheet), DURABLOCK Advanced Demolition Explosive(ADX) Produced by Donovan Commercial Industries
* Yugoslavia/Serbia: PP–01 (Composition C-4 equivalent)

==See also==
* Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives

==References==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q898359" start="0" end="17" title="Plastic explosive" label="Plastic explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="60" end="78" title="explosive material" label="explosive material"/>
<link wikidata="Q4099838" start="100" end="122" title="explosives engineering" label="explosives engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q898359" start="161" end="177" title="Plastic explosive" label="putty explosives"/>
<link wikidata="Q898359" start="181" end="189" title="Plastic explosive" label="blastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q331483" start="247" end="257" title="demolition" label="demolition"/>
<link wikidata="Q62627" start="293" end="299" title="Semtex" label="Semtex"/>
<link wikidata="Q220775" start="304" end="307" title="C-4 (explosive)" label="C-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q902739" start="354" end="363" title="gelignite" label="gelignite"/>
<link wikidata="Q23810" start="385" end="397" title="Alfred Nobel" label="Alfred Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="493" end="506" title="fortification" label="fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q151197" start="511" end="526" title="combat engineer" label="combat engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q908624" start="629" end="651" title="velocity of detonation" label="velocity of detonation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="750" end="774" title="Mortar (weapon)#Spigot mortar" label="Petard demolition mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793804" start="790" end="822" title="Armoured Vehicle Royal Engineers" label="Armoured Vehicle Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="899" end="917" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q898359" start="947" end="956" title="Nobel 808" label="Nobel 808"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320053" start="1034" end="1049" title="German-occupied Europe" label="Occupied Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891954" start="1093" end="1101" title="Rock blasting" label="blasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499867" start="1251" end="1266" title="shock hardening" label="shock hardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="1272" end="1281" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052411" start="1383" end="1397" title="Reactive armor" label="Reactive armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q902739" start="1710" end="1719" title="gelignite" label="gelignite"/>
<link wikidata="Q23810" start="1733" end="1745" title="Alfred Nobel" label="Alfred Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1764" end="1775" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q210390" start="1943" end="1952" title="aromaticity" label="aromatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q898735" start="1954" end="1963" title="collodion" label="collodion"/>
<link wikidata="Q275482" start="2459" end="2479" title="British Armed Forces" label="British Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2491" end="2507" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045628" start="2543" end="2562" title="Nobel Chemicals Ltd" label="Nobel Chemicals Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q840688" start="2620" end="2630" title="plasticine" label="plasticine"/>
<link wikidata="Q240390" start="2727" end="2755" title="Special Operations Executive" label="Special Operations Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q85850226" start="2765" end="2776" title="Aston House" label="Aston House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034063" start="2833" end="2837" title="High explosive squash head" label="HESH"/>
<link wikidata="Q316936" start="2838" end="2847" title="anti-tank" label="anti-tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400286" start="2906" end="2920" title="Gammon bomb" label="Gammon grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q105570" start="2991" end="3003" title="20 July plot" label="20 July plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="3029" end="3041" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q190020" start="3098" end="3101" title="RDX" label="RDX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990635" start="3145" end="3182" title="Composition C" label="Compositions C, C2, and eventually C3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316767" start="3491" end="3505" title="Tizard Mission" label="Tizard Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="3593" end="3610" title="French Resistance" label="French Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q146012" start="4523" end="4538" title="polyisobutylene" label="polyisobutylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="4589" end="4598" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="4614" end="4621" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="4642" end="4656" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q62627" start="4658" end="4664" title="Semtex" label="Semtex"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="4786" end="4793" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="4802" end="4808" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="4870" end="4877" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4879" end="4896" title="Sprengkörper DM12" label="Sprengkörper DM12"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4920" end="4931" title="Sprengmasse" label="Sprengmasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="4944" end="4955" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="4994" end="5000" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="5011" end="5016" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="5026" end="5032" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="5043" end="5048" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190020" start="5050" end="5053" title="RDX" label="T-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="5065" end="5071" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q422206" start="5079" end="5082" title="HMX" label="HMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="5103" end="5111" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="5121" end="5127" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="5145" end="5151" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="5180" end="5188" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="5249" end="5261" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="5298" end="5303" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="5340" end="5346" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q189334" start="5372" end="5376" title="PETN" label="PETN"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="5412" end="5423" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="5451" end="5457" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="5477" end="5491" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="5495" end="5520" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="MOD (Ministry of Defence)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069644" start="6194" end="6202" title="Chemring Group" label="Chemring"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="6207" end="6220" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="6472" end="6482" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="6483" end="6489" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991245" start="6542" end="6589" title="Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives" label="Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24902" wikidata="Q267932" url="?curid=24902" title="Post-structuralism">
<text>Post-structuralism is a philosophical movement that questions the objectivity or stability of the various interpretive structures that are posited by structuralism and considers them to be constituted by broader systems of power. Although different post-structuralists present different critiques of structuralism, common themes include the rejection of the self-sufficiency of structuralism, as well as an interrogation of the binary oppositions that constitute its structures. Accordingly, post-structuralism discards the idea of interpreting media (or the world) within pre-established, socially constructed structures.

&quot;Structuralism&quot; proposes that human culture can be understood by means of a structure that is modeled on language. As a result, there is concrete reality on the one hand, abstract ideas about reality on the other hand, and a &quot;third order&quot; that mediates between the two. 

A post-structuralist response, then, might suggest that in order to build meaning out of such an interpretation, one must (falsely) assume that the definitions of these signs are both valid and fixed, and that the author employing structuralist theory is somehow above and apart from these structures they are describing so as to be able to wholly appreciate them. The rigidity and tendency to categorize intimations of universal truths found in structuralist thinking is a common target of post-structuralist thought, while also building upon structuralist conceptions of reality mediated by the interrelationship between signs.

Writers whose works are often characterised as post-structuralist include Roland Barthes, Jacques Derrida, Michel Foucault, Gilles Deleuze, and Jean Baudrillard, although many theorists who have been called &quot;post-structuralist&quot; have rejected the label.

== History ==
Post-structuralism emerged in France during the 1960s as a movement critiquing structuralism. According to J. G. Merquior, a love–hate relationship with structuralism developed among many leading French thinkers in the 1960s. The period was marked by the rebellion of students and workers against the state in May 1968.

In a 1966 lecture titled &quot;Structure, Sign, and Play in the Discourse of the Human Sciences&quot;, Jacques Derrida presented a thesis on an apparent rupture in intellectual life. Derrida interpreted this event as a &quot;decentering&quot; of the former intellectual cosmos. Instead of progress or divergence from an identified centre, Derrida described this &quot;event&quot; as a kind of &quot;play.&quot;

A year later, in 1967, Roland Barthes published &quot;The Death of the Author&quot;, in which he announced a metaphorical event: the &quot;death&quot; of the author as an authentic source of meaning for a given text. Barthes argued that any literary text has multiple meanings and that the author was not the prime source of the work&#x27;s semantic content. The &quot;Death of the Author,&quot; Barthes maintained, was the &quot;Birth of the Reader,&quot; as the source of the proliferation of meanings of the text.

=== Barthes and the need for metalanguage ===
In &quot;Elements of Semiology&quot; (1967), Barthes advances the concept of the &quot;metalanguage&quot;, a systematized way of talking about concepts like meaning and grammar beyond the constraints of a traditional (first-order) language; in a metalanguage, symbols replace words and phrases. Insofar as one metalanguage is required for one explanation of the first-order language, another may be required, so metalanguages may actually replace first-order languages. Barthes exposes how this structuralist system is regressive; orders of language rely upon a metalanguage by which it is explained, and therefore deconstruction itself is in danger of becoming a metalanguage, thus exposing all languages and discourse to scrutiny. Barthes&#x27; other works contributed deconstructive theories about texts.

=== Derrida&#x27;s lecture at Johns Hopkins ===
The occasional designation of post-structuralism as a movement can be tied to the fact that mounting criticism of Structuralism became evident at approximately the same time that Structuralism became a topic of interest in universities in the United States. This interest led to a colloquium at Johns Hopkins University in 1966 titled &quot;The Languages of Criticism and the Sciences of Man&quot;, to which such French philosophers as Jacques Derrida, Roland Barthes, and Jacques Lacan were invited to speak.

Derrida&#x27;s lecture at that conference, &quot;Structure, Sign, and Play in the Human Sciences&quot;, was one of the earliest to propose some theoretical limitations to Structuralism, and to attempt to theorize on terms that were clearly no longer structuralist.

The element of &quot;play&quot; in the title of Derrida&#x27;s essay is often erroneously interpreted in a linguistic sense, based on a general tendency towards puns and humour, while social constructionism as developed in the later work of Michel Foucault is said to create play in the sense of strategic agency by laying bare the levers of historical change.

== Post-structuralism and structuralism ==
Structuralism, as an intellectual movement in France in the 1950s and 1960s, studied underlying structures in cultural products (such as texts) and used analytical concepts from linguistics, psychology, anthropology, and other fields to interpret those structures. Structuralism posits the concept of binary opposition, in which frequently-used pairs of opposite-but-related words (concepts) are often arranged in a hierarchy; for example: Enlightenment/Romantic, male/female, speech/writing, rational/emotional, signified/signifier, symbolic/imaginary, and east/west.

Post-structuralism rejects the structuralist notion that the dominant word in a pair is dependent on its subservient counterpart, and instead argues that founding knowledge on either pure experience (phenomenology) or on systematic structures (structuralism) is impossible, because history and culture actually condition the study of underlying structures, and these are subject to biases and misinterpretations. Gilles Deleuze and others saw this impossibility not as a failure or loss, but rather as a cause for &quot;celebration and liberation.&quot; A post-structuralist approach argues that to understand an object (a text, for example), one must study both the object itself and the systems of knowledge that produced the object. The uncertain boundaries between structuralism and post-structuralism become further blurred by the fact that scholars rarely label themselves as post-structuralists. Some scholars associated with structuralism, such as Roland Barthes and Michel Foucault, also became noteworthy in post-structuralism.

== Authors ==
The following are often said to be post-structuralists, or to have had a post-structuralist period:
* Kathy Acker
* Giorgio Agamben
* Jean Baudrillard
* Roland Barthes
* Wendy Brown
* Judith Butler
* Rey Chow
* Hélène Cixous
* Jodi Dean
* Gilles Deleuze
* Jacques Derrida
* Umberto Eco
* John Fiske
* Michel Foucault
* Nancy Fraser
* Félix Guattari
* Luce Irigaray
* Julia Kristeva
* Teresa de Lauretis
* Sarah Kofman
* Jacques Lacan
* Philippe Lacoue-Labarthe
* Ernesto Laclau
* Jean-François Lyotard
* Achille Mbembe
* Todd May
* Chantal Mouffe
* Jean-Luc Nancy
* Avital Ronell
* Bernard Stiegler
* Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak

== Criticism ==
Some observers from outside of the post-structuralist camp have questioned the rigour and legitimacy of the field. American philosopher John Searle
suggested in 1990: &quot;The spread of &#x27;poststructuralist&#x27; literary theory is perhaps the best-known example of a silly but non-catastrophic phenomenon.&quot; Similarly, physicist Alan Sokal in 1997 criticized &quot;the postmodernist/poststructuralist gibberish that is now hegemonic in some sectors of the American academy.&quot;

Literature scholar Norman Holland in 1992 saw post-structuralism as flawed due to reliance on Saussure&#x27;s linguistic model, which was seriously challenged by the 1950s and was soon abandoned by linguists:Saussure&#x27;s views are not held, so far as I know, by modern linguists, only by literary critics and the occasional philosopher. [Strict adherence to Saussure] has elicited wrong film and literary theory on a grand scale. One can find dozens of books of literary theory bogged down in signifiers and signifieds, but only a handful that refers to Chomsky.&quot;

== See also ==
== References ==
=== Sources ===

* Angermuller, J. (2015): &quot;Why There Is No Poststructuralism in France. The Making of an Intellectual Generation.&quot; London: Bloomsbury.
* Angermuller, J. (2014): &quot;Poststructuralist Discourse Analysis. Subjectivity in Enunciative Pragmatics.&quot; Houndmills, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan
* Barry, P. &quot;Beginning theory: an introduction to literary and cultural theory&quot;. Manchester University Press, Manchester, 2002.
* Barthes, Roland. &quot;Elements of Semiology&quot;. New York: Hill and Wang, 1967.
* Cuddon, J. A. &quot;Dictionary of Literary Terms &amp; Literary Theory&quot;. London: Penguin, 1998.
* Eagleton, T. &quot;Literary theory: an introduction&quot; Basil Blackwell, Oxford,1983.
* Matthews, E. &quot;Twentieth-Century French Philosophy&quot;. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1996.
* Ryan, M. &quot;Literary theory: a practical introduction&quot;. Blackwell Publishers Inc, Massachusetts,1999.
* Wolfreys, J &amp; Baker, W (eds). &quot;Literary theories: a case study in critical performance&quot;. Macmillan Press, Hong Kong,1996.
== External links ==

*&quot;Structure, Sign, and Play in the Discourse of the Human Sciences&quot; - Jacques Derrida
*&quot;Some Post-Structural Assumptions&quot; - John Lye
*Talking pomo: An analysis of the post-modern movement, by Steve Mizrach
*Information on Michel Foucault, including an archive of writings and lectures
*poststructuralism.info - A collaborative website that aims to allow users not only to describe post-structuralist ideas but to create new ideas and concepts based on post-structuralist foundations</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q267932" start="0" end="18" title="Post-structuralism" label="Post-structuralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179168" start="150" end="163" title="structuralism" label="structuralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="223" end="228" title="Power (social and political)" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920592" start="428" end="445" title="binary opposition" label="binary opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="670" end="677" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466334" start="710" end="747" title="Structural linguistics" label="structure that is modeled on language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9510" start="780" end="787" title="reality" label="reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q131841" start="814" end="818" title="idea" label="idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q179109" start="1621" end="1635" title="Roland Barthes" label="Roland Barthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="1637" end="1652" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Jacques Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="1654" end="1669" title="Michel Foucault" label="Michel Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q184226" start="1671" end="1685" title="Gilles Deleuze" label="Gilles Deleuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q182847" start="1691" end="1707" title="Jean Baudrillard" label="Jean Baudrillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1855" end="1861" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q179168" start="1904" end="1917" title="structuralism" label="structuralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186314" start="1932" end="1946" title="José Guilherme Merquior" label="J. G. Merquior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030284" start="1950" end="1972" title="love–hate relationship" label="love–hate relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743" start="2135" end="2143" title="May 1968 events in France" label="May 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q7625080" start="2177" end="2241" title="Structure, Sign, and Play in the Discourse of the Human Sciences" label="Structure, Sign, and Play in the Discourse of the Human Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="2249" end="2264" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Jacques Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q179109" start="2581" end="2595" title="Roland Barthes" label="Roland Barthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166649" start="2612" end="2635" title="The Death of the Author" label="The Death of the Author"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358934" start="3131" end="3152" title="Elements of Semiology" label="Elements of Semiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q193983" start="3209" end="3221" title="metalanguage" label="metalanguage"/>
<link wikidata="Q180348" start="3737" end="3751" title="deconstruction" label="deconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="4274" end="4298" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="4415" end="4430" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Jacques Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q179109" start="4432" end="4446" title="Roland Barthes" label="Roland Barthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q169906" start="4452" end="4465" title="Jacques Lacan" label="Jacques Lacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7625080" start="4539" end="4586" title="Structure, Sign, and Play in the Discourse of the Human Sciences" label="Structure, Sign, and Play in the Human Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642673" start="4940" end="4962" title="social constructionism" label="social constructionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="4997" end="5012" title="Michel Foucault" label="Michel Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q179168" start="5161" end="5174" title="Structuralism" label="Structuralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791627" start="5271" end="5288" title="Cultural artifact" label="cultural products"/>
<link wikidata="Q234460" start="5298" end="5302" title="text (literary theory)" label="text"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="5339" end="5350" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="5352" end="5362" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="5364" end="5376" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q651448" start="5398" end="5407" title="Interpretation (disambiguation)" label="interpret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920592" start="5462" end="5479" title="binary opposition" label="binary opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="5601" end="5614" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="5615" end="5623" title="Romanticism" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5836" end="5847" title=":wikt: subservient" label="subservient"/>
<link wikidata="Q179235" start="5931" end="5944" title="Phenomenology (philosophy)" label="phenomenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q58778" start="5952" end="5958" title="system" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q184226" start="6144" end="6158" title="Gilles Deleuze" label="Gilles Deleuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q58778" start="6420" end="6426" title="system" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q179109" start="6687" end="6701" title="Roland Barthes" label="Roland Barthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="6706" end="6721" title="Michel Foucault" label="Michel Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q270641" start="6886" end="6897" title="Kathy Acker" label="Kathy Acker"/>
<link wikidata="Q311687" start="6900" end="6915" title="Giorgio Agamben" label="Giorgio Agamben"/>
<link wikidata="Q182847" start="6918" end="6934" title="Jean Baudrillard" label="Jean Baudrillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q179109" start="6937" end="6951" title="Roland Barthes" label="Roland Barthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q183265" start="6954" end="6965" title="Wendy Brown (political theorist)" label="Wendy Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q219368" start="6968" end="6981" title="Judith Butler" label="Judith Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q15433082" start="6984" end="6992" title="Rey Chow" label="Rey Chow"/>
<link wikidata="Q234964" start="6995" end="7008" title="Hélène Cixous" label="Hélène Cixous"/>
<link wikidata="Q18764158" start="7011" end="7020" title="Jodi Dean" label="Jodi Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q184226" start="7023" end="7037" title="Gilles Deleuze" label="Gilles Deleuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="7040" end="7055" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Jacques Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q12807" start="7058" end="7069" title="Umberto Eco" label="Umberto Eco"/>
<link wikidata="Q705089" start="7072" end="7082" title="John Fiske (media studies)" label="John Fiske"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="7085" end="7100" title="Michel Foucault" label="Michel Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q267536" start="7103" end="7115" title="Nancy Fraser" label="Nancy Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q352465" start="7118" end="7132" title="Félix Guattari" label="Félix Guattari"/>
<link wikidata="Q28918" start="7135" end="7148" title="Luce Irigaray" label="Luce Irigaray"/>
<link wikidata="Q159876" start="7151" end="7165" title="Julia Kristeva" label="Julia Kristeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q292326" start="7168" end="7186" title="Teresa de Lauretis" label="Teresa de Lauretis"/>
<link wikidata="Q448427" start="7189" end="7201" title="Sarah Kofman" label="Sarah Kofman"/>
<link wikidata="Q169906" start="7204" end="7217" title="Jacques Lacan" label="Jacques Lacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333153" start="7220" end="7244" title="Philippe Lacoue-Labarthe" label="Philippe Lacoue-Labarthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q454802" start="7247" end="7261" title="Ernesto Laclau" label="Ernesto Laclau"/>
<link wikidata="Q193257" start="7264" end="7285" title="Jean-François Lyotard" label="Jean-François Lyotard"/>
<link wikidata="Q340234" start="7288" end="7302" title="Achille Mbembe" label="Achille Mbembe"/>
<link wikidata="Q637580" start="7305" end="7313" title="Todd May (philosopher)" label="Todd May"/>
<link wikidata="Q236173" start="7316" end="7330" title="Chantal Mouffe" label="Chantal Mouffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q503017" start="7333" end="7347" title="Jean-Luc Nancy" label="Jean-Luc Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q450663" start="7350" end="7363" title="Avital Ronell" label="Avital Ronell"/>
<link wikidata="Q822727" start="7366" end="7382" title="Bernard Stiegler" label="Bernard Stiegler"/>
<link wikidata="Q240851" start="7385" end="7411" title="Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak" label="Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak"/>
<link wikidata="Q295012" start="7565" end="7576" title="John Searle" label="John Searle"/>
<link wikidata="Q459381" start="7646" end="7661" title="literary theory" label="literary theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q370022" start="7767" end="7777" title="Alan Sokal" label="Alan Sokal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="7807" end="7820" title="postmodernism" label="postmodernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q182034" start="7861" end="7870" title="hegemonic" label="hegemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16090509" start="7938" end="7952" title="Norman Holland" label="Norman Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="8013" end="8021" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Saussure"/>
<link wikidata="Q28793" start="8309" end="8313" title="film theory" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="8476" end="8483" title="Chomsky" label="Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q18927789" start="8543" end="8558" title="Johannes Angermuller" label="Angermuller, J."/>
<link wikidata="Q18927789" start="8688" end="8703" title="Johannes Angermuller" label="Angermuller, J."/>
<link wikidata="Q15492154" start="9071" end="9084" title="J. A. Cuddon" label="Cuddon, J. A."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24903" wikidata="Q1456892" url="?curid=24903" title="Peace process">
<text>A peace process is the set of sociopolitical negotiations, agreements and actions that aim to solve a specific armed conflict.

==Definitions==
Prior to an armed conflict occurring, peace processes can include the prevention of an intrastate or inter-state dispute from escalating into military conflict. The United Nations Department of Peace Operations (UNDPO) terms the prevention of disputes from escalating into armed conflicts as &quot;conflict prevention&quot;. In 2007, the United Nations Secretary-General&#x27;s Policy Committee classed both initial prevention of an armed conflict and prevention of the repeat of a solved conflict as peacebuilding.

For peace processes to resolve an armed conflict, Izumi Wakugawa, advisor to the Japan-based International Peace Cooperation Program, suggests a definition of a peace process as &quot;a mixture of politics, diplomacy, changing relationships, negotiation, mediation, and dialogue in both official and unofficial arenas&quot;, which he attributes to Harold H. Saunders of the United States Institute of Peace (USIP). Wakugawa categorises these processes into two stages: the ceasing of armed conflict and the processes of sociological reorganisation.

===Ceasing of armed conflict===
Non-military processes for stopping an armed conflict stage are generally classed as peacemaking. Military methods by globally organised military forces of stopping a local armed conflict are typically classed as peace enforcement.

===Reorganisation===
The prevention of the repeat of a solved conflict (as well as the preventing of an armed conflict from occurring at all) is usually classed as peacebuilding. UNDPO defines peacebuilding to include &quot;measures [that] address core issues that effect the functioning of society and the State&quot;. The use of neutral military forces to sustain ceasefires during this phase, typically by United Nations peacekeeping forces, can be referred to as peacekeeping.

===Overlapping definitions===
The terms &quot;peacemaking&quot;, &quot;peacekeeping&quot; and &quot;peacebuilding&quot; tend to be used broadly, with their meanings defined in terms of the phases of various peace process mechanisms blurring and overlapping in practice.

==Institutions==

The construction of international institutions, especially during the twentieth century, has to a large degree been motivated by the desire to provide a broad global context of peacebuilding. That includes the League of Nations and the United Nations and regional institutions such as the European Union. Institutions involved in encouraging or overseeing some of the steps in specific peace processes include the United Nations Department of Peace Operations.

==Elements: terminology==
The Peace Accords Matrix of the Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies at the University of Notre Dame, United States, uses the term &quot;provisions&quot; to describe specific elements of peace processes in intrastate conflicts. This includes a list of 51 different elements, including amnesties; ceasefires; arms embargoes; releases of political prisoners; truth and reconciliation commissions; and reforms of the constitution, or of military, police, judicial or educational institutions or of the media.

Other specific elements of peace processes include exchanges, confidence-building measures, humanitarian corridors, peace treaties and transitional justice.

==Criticism==
Edward Luttwak argues that conventional wars should not be interrupted before they could burn themselves out and the preconditions for a long-lasting peace are established. Stable peace settlement is possible only with the exhaustion of belligerents or the decisive victory of one side. &quot;Hopes for military success must fade for accommodation to become more attractive than further combat,&quot; but premature ceasefires prevent belligerents from exhaustion and let them rearm their forces. That in turn prolongs war and leads to further killings and destruction.

==Women&#x27;s participation==

According to Neville Melvin Gertze of Namibia, speaking at an October 2019 meeting of the United Nations Security Council, peace agreements that are the result of negotiations including women are 35 percent more likely to last at least 15 years than those which are the result of men-only negotiations. At the same meeting, United Nations Secretary-General António Guterres stated that women were excluded from peace processes, attacks against women human rights defenders had increased, and only a &quot;tiny percentage&quot; of funding for peacebuilding was given to women&#x27;s organisations.

==See also==
* Arab–Israeli normalization
* De-escalation
* List of peace processes
* Peace

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1456892" start="2" end="15" title="Peace process" label="peace process"/>
<link wikidata="Q745692" start="30" end="44" title="political sociology" label="sociopolitical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589437" start="309" end="354" title="United Nations Department of Peace Operations" label="United Nations Department of Peace Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632158" start="645" end="658" title="peacebuilding" label="peacebuilding"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="711" end="725" title="Izumi Wakugawa" label="Izumi Wakugawa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="754" end="793" title="International Peace Cooperation Program" label="International Peace Cooperation Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q5660906" start="1009" end="1027" title="Harold H. Saunders" label="Harold H. Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484897" start="1035" end="1067" title="United States Institute of Peace" label="United States Institute of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157606" start="1328" end="1339" title="peacemaking" label="peacemaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456466" start="1456" end="1473" title="peace enforcement" label="peace enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632158" start="1640" end="1653" title="peacebuilding" label="peacebuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077987" start="1885" end="1919" title="List of United Nations peacekeeping missions" label="United Nations peacekeeping forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="1943" end="1955" title="peacekeeping" label="peacekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="2457" end="2474" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2483" end="2497" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="2536" end="2550" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589437" start="2661" end="2706" title="United Nations Department of Peace Operations" label="United Nations Department of Peace Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063394" start="2767" end="2813" title="Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies" label="Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q178848" start="2821" end="2845" title="University of Notre Dame" label="University of Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2847" end="2860" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q185943" start="3030" end="3039" title="amnesty" label="amnesties"/>
<link wikidata="Q208383" start="3041" end="3050" title="ceasefire" label="ceasefire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793859" start="3053" end="3065" title="arms embargo" label="arms embargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q217105" start="3081" end="3099" title="political prisoner" label="political prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501336" start="3102" end="3137" title="truth and reconciliation commission" label="truth and reconciliation commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001775" start="3303" end="3311" title="prisoner exchange" label="exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160085" start="3314" end="3342" title="confidence-building measures" label="confidence-building measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939489" start="3344" end="3365" title="humanitarian corridor" label="humanitarian corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q625298" start="3368" end="3382" title="peace treaty" label="peace treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q845562" start="3387" end="3407" title="transitional justice" label="transitional justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657585" start="3424" end="3438" title="Edward Luttwak" label="Edward Luttwak"/>
<link wikidata="Q429245" start="3451" end="3467" title="conventional war" label="conventional war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="4064" end="4071" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="4116" end="4147" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q311440" start="4383" end="4399" title="António Guterres" label="António Guterres"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="4595" end="4621" title="women&amp;#x27;s rights" label="women&amp;#x27;s organisations"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202647" start="4639" end="4665" title="Arab–Israeli normalization" label="Arab–Israeli normalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182511" start="4668" end="4681" title="De-escalation" label="De-escalation"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359646" start="4684" end="4707" title="List of peace processes" label="List of peace processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q454" start="4710" end="4715" title="Peace" label="Peace"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24905" wikidata="Q963741" url="?curid=24905" title="Peyton Randolph">
<text>Peyton Randolph (September 10, 1721 – October 22, 1775) was an American politician and planter who was a Founding Father of the United States. Born into Virginia&#x27;s wealthiest and most powerful family, Randolph served as speaker of Virginia&#x27;s House of Burgesses, president of the first two Virginia Conventions, and president of the First Continental Congress. He also served briefly as president of the Second Continental Congress.

In 1774, Randolph signed the Continental Association, a trade boycott adopted by the First Continental Congress in response to the British Parliament&#x27;s Intolerable Acts. Randolph was a first cousin once removed of Thomas Jefferson and was also related to John Marshall, the fourth Chief Justice of the United States, and Robert E. Lee, commander of the Confederate States Army in the American Civil War.

==Early life==
Randolph was born in Tazewell Hall, his family&#x27;s estate in Williamsburg, Virginia. His father was Sir John Randolph, and his brother was John Randolph. Peyton Randolph was 15 when his father died. He attended the College of William &amp; Mary and later studied law at Middle Temple at the Inns of Court in London, becoming a member of the bar in 1743.

A lifelong resident of Williamsburg, the colony&#x27;s capital, Randolph was to follow in the footsteps of his father, grandfather, and great-grandfather, all of whom served as speaker of the Virginia House of Burgesses.

==Political career==

In 1748, Randolph was appointed attorney general of the Colony of Virginia and the same year was elected to the Virginia House of Burgesses, where he would serve for the remainder of his life. It was Randolph&#x27;s dual roles as attorney general and as burgess that would lead to an extraordinary conflict of interest in 1751. Governor Robert Dinwiddie had imposed a fee for the certification of land patents, which the House of Burgesses strongly objected to. The House selected Randolph to represent their cause to Crown authorities in London. In his role as attorney general, though, he was responsible for defending actions taken by the governor. Randolph left for London, over the objections of Governor Dinwiddie, and was replaced for a short time as attorney general by George Wythe. Randolph resumed his post on his return at the behest of Wythe as well as officials in London, who also recommended the governor drop the new fee.

In 1765, Randolph found himself at odds with a freshman burgess, Patrick Henry, over the colony&#x27;s response to the Stamp Act. The House appointed Randolph to draft objections to the act, but his more conservative plan was trumped when five of Henry&#x27;s seven Virginia Stamp Act Resolutions passed. Henry&#x27;s proposals were approved at a meeting of the House in which most of the members were absent and while Randolph was presiding in the absence of the speaker.

Randolph resigned as king&#x27;s attorney (attorney general) in 1766, as fellow Burgesses elected him as their speaker upon the death of his relative, the powerful Speaker John Robinson. Sitting as the General Court, they also appointed Randolph one of the executors (along with Wythe and Edmund Pendleton) of the former speaker&#x27;s estate, which was a major financial scandal. As friction between Britain and the colonies progressed, Randolph grew to favor independence. In 1769 the House of Burgesses was dissolved by Governor Norborne Berkeley, 4th Baron Botetourt, in response to its actions against the Townshend Acts. In 1773, Randolph chaired the Virginia committee of correspondence. The next governor, John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore, also dissolved the House of Burgesses in 1774 when it showed solidarity with Boston, Massachusetts, following the Boston Port Act.

Randolph chaired meetings of the first of five Virginia Conventions of former House members, principally at a Williamsburg tavern, which worked toward responses to the unwelcome tax measures imposed by the British government. On March 21, 1775, he was president of the Second Virginia Convention in Richmond that debated independence (the setting of Patrick Henry&#x27;s famous &quot;Give me liberty or give me death!&quot; speech). In April, Randolph negotiated with Lord Dunmore for the removal of gunpowder from the Williamsburg arsenal during the Gunpowder Incident, which was a confrontation between the governor&#x27;s forces and Virginia militia, led by Henry.

The House of Burgesses was called back by Lord Dunmore one last time in June 1775 to address British Prime Minister Lord North&#x27;s Conciliatory Resolution. Randolph, who was a delegate to the Continental Congress, returned to Williamsburg to take his place as Speaker. Randolph indicated that the resolution had not been sent to the Congress (it had instead been sent to each colony individually in an attempt to divide them and bypass the Continental Congress). The House of Burgesses rejected the proposal, which was also later rejected by the Continental Congress.

Randolph was thus the last speaker of the House of Burgesses (their role was replaced by the Virginia Conventions and later the House of Delegates in 1776). Randolph also served as the president of the Third Virginia Convention in July 1775, which as a legislative body elected a committee of safety to act as the colony&#x27;s executive since Lord Dunmore had abandoned the capital and took refuge on a British warship. Pendleton succeeded Randolph as president of the later conventions.

===Continental Congress===
Virginia selected Randolph as one of its delegates to the Continental Congress in Philadelphia in 1774 and 1775. Fellow delegates elected him their president (speaker) of both the First Continental Congress (which requested that King George III repeal the Coercive Acts and passed the Continental Association) as well as Second Continental Congress (which extended the Olive Branch Petition as a final attempt at reconciliation). However, Randolph fell ill during each term. Henry Middleton of South Carolina succeeded him as president from his resignation on October 22, 1774, two days after presiding over the passage and signing of the Continental Association, until his return on May 10, 1775. He was again elected president of Congress, but Randolph left for Virginia four days later and was succeeded as president by John Hancock.

==Death and legacy==

Randolph returned as a Virginia delegate but suffered a five-hour-long fit of apoplexy and died while dining with Thomas Jefferson in Philadelphia on October 22, 1775. His remains were returned to Williamsburg and were interred at the chapel of the College of William &amp; Mary. Since renamed the Wren Building, Randolph remains buried in the chapel following its restoration. As the Continental Congress had assumed governmental duties for the colonies as a whole, such as appointing ambassadors, some consider Randolph to have been the first President of the United States, even though he died in 1775.

The Continental Congress honored Randolph by naming one of the first naval frigates as the USS &quot;Randolph&quot;, as well by naming a fort at the junction of the Ohio River and the Kanawha River, as Fort Randolph.

Randolph County, North Carolina; Randolph, Massachusetts; and Randolph County, Indiana, were named to honor the colonial statesman. During World War II, the early &quot;Essex&quot;-class aircraft carrier USS &quot;Randolph&quot; (CV-15) was named for him. The Peyton Randolph House in Colonial Williamsburg was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1970.

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==

* Randolph&#x27;s Congressional Biography
* Virginia Colonial Dynasties VA Historical Society {Reference only}
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q963741" start="0" end="15" title="Peyton Randolph" label="Peyton Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="105" end="141" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Father of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291899" start="169" end="204" title="Randolph family of Virginia" label="wealthiest and most powerful family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758037" start="225" end="232" title="Speaker (politics)" label="speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q920609" start="252" end="270" title="House of Burgesses" label="House of Burgesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934209" start="299" end="319" title="Virginia Conventions" label="Virginia Conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857508" start="325" end="368" title="President of the Continental Congress" label="president of the First Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983034" start="413" end="440" title="Second Continental Congress" label="Second Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231641" start="472" end="495" title="Continental Association" label="Continental Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q252612" start="528" end="554" title="First Continental Congress" label="First Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="574" end="592" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365292" start="600" end="616" title="Intolerable Acts" label="Intolerable Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23009870" start="633" end="658" title="Cousin" label="first cousin once removed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="662" end="678" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q310829" start="703" end="716" title="John Marshall" label="John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="729" end="763" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="769" end="782" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="801" end="824" title="Confederate States Army" label="Confederate States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="832" end="850" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291899" start="904" end="914" title="Randolph family of Virginia" label="his family"/>
<link wikidata="Q492346" start="932" end="954" title="Williamsburg, Virginia" label="Williamsburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528015" start="971" end="988" title="John Randolph (politician)" label="Sir John Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254208" start="1010" end="1023" title="John Randolph (loyalist)" label="John Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="1086" end="1115" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q925942" start="1141" end="1154" title="Middle Temple" label="Middle Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q278697" start="1162" end="1175" title="Inns of Court" label="Inns of Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1179" end="1185" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015569" start="1208" end="1215" title="bar (law)" label="the bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728480" start="1362" end="1379" title="Henry Soane" label="great-grandfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597987" start="1403" end="1445" title="speaker of the Virginia House of Burgesses" label="speaker of the Virginia House of Burgesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818656" start="1502" end="1518" title="Attorney General of Virginia" label="attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q920609" start="1582" end="1609" title="Virginia House of Burgesses" label="Virginia House of Burgesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q211067" start="1768" end="1788" title="conflict of interest" label="conflict of interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q935269" start="1807" end="1823" title="Robert Dinwiddie" label="Robert Dinwiddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16253261" start="1867" end="1878" title="land patent" label="land patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397321" start="2248" end="2260" title="George Wythe" label="George Wythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q311885" start="2475" end="2488" title="Patrick Henry" label="Patrick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335777" start="2529" end="2538" title="Stamp Act 1765" label="Stamp Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934478" start="2676" end="2706" title="Virginia Stamp Act Resolutions" label="Virginia Stamp Act Resolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255275" start="3056" end="3069" title="John Robinson (Virginia politician, born 1705)" label="John Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048125" start="3173" end="3189" title="Edmund Pendleton" label="Edmund Pendleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932214" start="3240" end="3263" title="John Robinson estate scandal" label="major financial scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7050434" start="3416" end="3454" title="Norborne Berkeley, 4th Baron Botetourt" label="Norborne Berkeley, 4th Baron Botetourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093092" start="3495" end="3509" title="Townshend Acts" label="Townshend Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986806" start="3550" end="3577" title="Committees of correspondence" label="committee of correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q336639" start="3598" end="3630" title="John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore" label="John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="3709" end="3715" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612780" start="3746" end="3761" title="Boston Port Act" label="Boston Port Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934209" start="3811" end="3831" title="Virginia Conventions" label="Virginia Conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="4063" end="4071" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528812" start="4148" end="4181" title="Give me liberty or give me death!" label="Give me liberty or give me death!"/>
<link wikidata="Q985470" start="4315" end="4333" title="Gunpowder Incident" label="Gunpowder Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q312593" start="4549" end="4559" title="Frederick North, Lord North" label="Lord North"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158704" start="4567" end="4590" title="Conciliatory Resolution" label="Conciliatory Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="4628" end="4648" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q320275" start="5133" end="5151" title="Virginia House of Delegates" label="House of Delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985399" start="5285" end="5304" title="Committee of safety (American Revolution)" label="committee of safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q252612" start="5702" end="5728" title="First Continental Congress" label="First Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="5756" end="5766" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365292" start="5778" end="5791" title="Intolerable Acts" label="Coercive Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231641" start="5807" end="5830" title="Continental Association" label="Continental Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983034" start="5843" end="5870" title="Second Continental Congress" label="Second Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676888" start="5891" end="5912" title="Olive Branch Petition" label="Olive Branch Petition"/>
<link wikidata="Q143317" start="5997" end="6012" title="Henry Middleton" label="Henry Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q272774" start="6345" end="6357" title="John Hancock" label="John Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q8264724" start="6460" end="6468" title="apoplexy" label="apoplexy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="6496" end="6512" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037738" start="6680" end="6693" title="Wren Building" label="Wren Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="6927" end="6957" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873279" start="7080" end="7104" title="USS Randolph (1776)" label="USS &amp;quot;Randolph&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915" start="7154" end="7164" title="Ohio River" label="Ohio River"/>
<link wikidata="Q918867" start="7173" end="7186" title="Kanawha River" label="Kanawha River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471894" start="7191" end="7204" title="Fort Randolph (West Virginia)" label="Fort Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q507943" start="7207" end="7238" title="Randolph County, North Carolina" label="Randolph County, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q54191" start="7240" end="7263" title="Randolph, Massachusetts" label="Randolph, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q506552" start="7269" end="7293" title="Randolph County, Indiana" label="Randolph County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705509" start="7411" end="7443" title="USS Randolph (CV-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;Randolph&amp;quot; (CV-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179632" start="7467" end="7488" title="Peyton Randolph House" label="Peyton Randolph House"/>
<link wikidata="Q841700" start="7492" end="7513" title="Colonial Williamsburg" label="Colonial Williamsburg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24910" wikidata="Q1070472" url="?curid=24910" title="Product topology">
<text>In topology and related areas of mathematics, a product space is the Cartesian product of a family of topological spaces equipped with a natural topology called the product topology. This topology differs from another, perhaps more natural-seeming, topology called the box topology, which can also be given to a product space and which agrees with the product topology when the product is over only finitely many spaces. However, the product topology is &quot;correct&quot; in that it makes the product space a categorical product of its factors, whereas the box topology is too fine; in that sense the product topology is the natural topology on the Cartesian product.

==Definition==
Throughout, formula_1 will be some non-empty index set and for every index formula_2 let formula_3 be a topological space.
Denote the Cartesian product of the sets formula_3 by

formula_5

and for every index formula_2 denote the formula_7-th by

formula_8

The &#x27;, sometimes called the &#x27;, on formula_9 is defined to be the coarsest topology (that is, the topology with the fewest open sets) for which all the projections formula_10 are continuous. The Cartesian product formula_11 endowed with the product topology is called the .
The open sets in the product topology are arbitrary unions (finite or infinite) of sets of the form formula_12 where each formula_13 is open in formula_3 and formula_15 for only finitely many formula_16 In particular, for a finite product (in particular, for the product of two topological spaces), the set of all Cartesian products between one basis element from each formula_3 gives a basis for the product topology of formula_18 That is, for a finite product, the set of all formula_12 where formula_13 is an element of the (chosen) basis of formula_21 is a basis for the product topology of formula_18

The product topology on formula_9 is the topology generated by sets of the form formula_24 where formula_25 and formula_13 is an open subset of formula_27 In other words, the sets

formula_28

form a subbase for the topology on formula_29 A subset of formula_30 is open if and only if it is a (possibly infinite) union of intersections of finitely many sets of the form formula_31 The formula_32 are sometimes called open cylinders, and their intersections are cylinder sets.

The product topology is also called the because a sequence (or more generally, a net) in formula_9 converges if and only if all its projections to the spaces formula_3 converge.
Explicitly, a sequence formula_35 (respectively, a net formula_36) converges to a given point formula_37 if and only if formula_38 in formula_3 for every index formula_2 where formula_41 denotes formula_42 (respectively, denotes formula_43).
In particular, if formula_44 is used for all formula_7 then the Cartesian product is the space formula_46 of all real-valued functions on formula_47 and convergence in the product topology is the same as pointwise convergence of functions.

==Examples==

If the real line formula_48 is endowed with its standard topology then the product topology on the product of formula_49 copies of formula_48 is equal to the ordinary Euclidean topology on formula_51 (Because formula_49 is finite, this is also equivalent to the box topology on formula_51)

The Cantor set is homeomorphic to the product of countably many copies of the discrete space formula_54 and the space of irrational numbers is homeomorphic to the product of countably many copies of the natural numbers, where again each copy carries the discrete topology.

Several additional examples are given in the article on the initial topology.

==Properties==

The set of Cartesian products between the open sets of the topologies of each formula_3 forms a basis for what is called the box topology on formula_29 In general, the box topology is finer than the product topology, but for finite products they coincide.

The product space formula_57 together with the canonical projections, can be characterized by the following universal property: if formula_58 is a topological space, and for every formula_2 formula_60 is a continuous map, then there exists continuous map formula_61 such that for each formula_25 the following diagram commutes:

This shows that the product space is a product in the category of topological spaces. It follows from the above universal property that a map formula_61 is continuous if and only if formula_64 is continuous for all formula_65 In many cases it is easier to check that the component functions formula_66 are continuous. Checking whether a map formula_67 is continuous is usually more difficult; one tries to use the fact that the formula_68 are continuous in some way.

In addition to being continuous, the canonical projections formula_69 are open maps. This means that any open subset of the product space remains open when projected down to the formula_27 The converse is not true: if formula_71 is a subspace of the product space whose projections down to all the formula_3 are open, then formula_71 need not be open in formula_30 (consider for instance formula_75) The canonical projections are not generally closed maps (consider for example the closed set formula_76 whose projections onto both axes are formula_77).

Suppose formula_78 is a product of arbitrary subsets, where formula_79 for every formula_65 If all formula_81 are then formula_78 is a closed subset of the product space formula_30 if and only if every formula_81 is a closed subset of formula_27 More generally, the closure of the product formula_78 of arbitrary subsets in the product space formula_30 is equal to the product of the closures:

formula_88

Any product of Hausdorff spaces is again a Hausdorff space.

Tychonoff&#x27;s theorem, which is equivalent to the axiom of choice, states that any product of compact spaces is a compact space. A specialization of Tychonoff&#x27;s theorem that requires only the ultrafilter lemma (and not the full strength of the axiom of choice) states that any product of compact Hausdorff spaces is a compact space.

If formula_89 is fixed then the set

formula_90

is a dense subset of the product space formula_30.

==Relation to other topological notions==

Separation
* Every product of T0 spaces is T0.
* Every product of T1 spaces is T1.
* Every product of Hausdorff spaces is Hausdorff.
* Every product of regular spaces is regular.
* Every product of Tychonoff spaces is Tychonoff.
* A product of normal spaces be normal.

Compactness
* Every product of compact spaces is compact (Tychonoff&#x27;s theorem).
* A product of locally compact spaces be locally compact. However, an arbitrary product of locally compact spaces where all but finitely many are compact locally compact (This condition is sufficient and necessary).

Connectedness
* Every product of connected (resp. path-connected) spaces is connected (resp. path-connected).
* Every product of hereditarily disconnected spaces is hereditarily disconnected.

Metric spaces
* Countable products of metric spaces are metrizable spaces.

==Axiom of choice==

One of many ways to express the axiom of choice is to say that it is equivalent to the statement that the Cartesian product of a collection of non-empty sets is non-empty. The proof that this is equivalent to the statement of the axiom in terms of choice functions is immediate: one needs only to pick an element from each set to find a representative in the product. Conversely, a representative of the product is a set which contains exactly one element from each component.

The axiom of choice occurs again in the study of (topological) product spaces; for example, Tychonoff&#x27;s theorem on compact sets is a more complex and subtle example of a statement that requires the axiom of choice and is equivalent to it in its most general formulation, and shows why the product topology may be considered the more useful topology to put on a Cartesian product.

==See also==
* 
* - Sometimes called the projective limit topology
* 
* 

==Notes==
==References==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="3" end="11" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="33" end="44" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070472" start="48" end="61" title="Product topology" label="product space"/>
<link wikidata="Q173740" start="69" end="86" title="Cartesian product" label="Cartesian product"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="102" end="119" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980793" start="137" end="153" title="natural topology" label="natural topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070472" start="165" end="181" title="Product topology" label="product topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951625" start="269" end="281" title="box topology" label="box topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q906456" start="336" end="342" title="Comparison of topologies" label="agrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q919107" start="511" end="530" title="Product (category theory)" label="categorical product"/>
<link wikidata="Q906456" start="579" end="583" title="Comparison of topologies" label="fine"/>
<link wikidata="Q21285678" start="731" end="740" title="index set" label="index set"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="790" end="807" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q173740" start="820" end="837" title="Cartesian product" label="Cartesian product"/>
<link wikidata="Q906456" start="1019" end="1036" title="coarsest topology" label="coarsest topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="1132" end="1142" title="Continuous (topology)" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q810214" start="1884" end="1893" title="Base (topology)" label="generated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739990" start="2034" end="2041" title="subbase" label="subbase"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="2075" end="2081" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q185359" start="2147" end="2152" title="Union (set theory)" label="union"/>
<link wikidata="Q185837" start="2156" end="2169" title="Intersection (set theory)" label="intersections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5199271" start="2251" end="2264" title="open cylinder" label="open cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5199271" start="2295" end="2307" title="cylinder set" label="cylinder set"/>
<link wikidata="Q133250" start="2361" end="2369" title="sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191147" start="2392" end="2395" title="Net (mathematics)" label="net"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="2844" end="2848" title="Real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="2856" end="2864" title="Function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778098" start="2935" end="2956" title="pointwise convergence" label="pointwise convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q35689" start="2993" end="3002" title="real line" label="real line"/>
<link wikidata="Q15629907" start="3034" end="3051" title="standard topology" label="standard topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118078" start="3153" end="3171" title="Euclidean topology" label="Euclidean topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951625" start="3248" end="3260" title="box topology" label="box topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q273188" start="3281" end="3291" title="Cantor set" label="Cantor set"/>
<link wikidata="Q202906" start="3295" end="3307" title="homeomorphic" label="homeomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="3326" end="3340" title="Countable" label="countably many"/>
<link wikidata="Q175116" start="3355" end="3369" title="discrete space" label="discrete space"/>
<link wikidata="Q607728" start="3398" end="3415" title="irrational number" label="irrational number"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="3480" end="3494" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416298" start="3611" end="3627" title="initial topology" label="initial topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951625" start="3771" end="3783" title="box topology" label="box topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q906456" start="3830" end="3835" title="Finer topology" label="finer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417809" start="4011" end="4029" title="universal property" label="universal property"/>
<link wikidata="Q621542" start="4221" end="4229" title="Commutative diagram" label="commutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q919107" start="4271" end="4278" title="Product (category theory)" label="product"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000555" start="4286" end="4316" title="category of topological spaces" label="category of topological spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="4399" end="4413" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632649" start="4774" end="4782" title="open map" label="open map"/>
<link wikidata="Q660730" start="4934" end="4942" title="Subspace (topology)" label="subspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632649" start="5144" end="5154" title="closed map" label="closed map"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="5677" end="5692" title="Hausdorff space" label="Hausdorff space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137014" start="5723" end="5747" title="Tychonoff&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Tychonoff&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q179692" start="5776" end="5791" title="axiom of choice" label="axiom of choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="5820" end="5833" title="compact space" label="compact space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137014" start="5875" end="5899" title="Tychonoff&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Tychonoff&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q106671513" start="5919" end="5940" title="the ultrafilter lemma" label="the ultrafilter lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="6027" end="6036" title="Hausdorff space" label="Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q673444" start="6119" end="6131" title="Dense set" label="dense subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148924" start="6239" end="6247" title="T0 space" label="T0 space"/>
<link wikidata="Q284347" start="6275" end="6283" title="T1 space" label="T1 space"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="6311" end="6326" title="Hausdorff space" label="Hausdorff space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193403" start="6361" end="6374" title="regular space" label="regular space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191433" start="6407" end="6422" title="Tychonoff space" label="Tychonoff space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071795" start="6453" end="6465" title="normal space" label="normal space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137014" start="6537" end="6561" title="Tychonoff&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Tychonoff&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q583034" start="6579" end="6600" title="locally compact space" label="locally compact space"/>
<link wikidata="Q253405" start="6814" end="6823" title="Connectedness" label="connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="7012" end="7024" title="metric space" label="metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194053" start="7030" end="7046" title="metrizable space" label="metrizable space"/>
<link wikidata="Q179692" start="7103" end="7118" title="axiom of choice" label="axiom of choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137014" start="7641" end="7665" title="Tychonoff&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Tychonoff&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24913" wikidata="Q1198088" url="?curid=24913" title="Playdia">
<text>The (developed under the codename &quot;BA-X&quot;) is a fifth-generation home video game console released exclusively in Japan in 1994 at the initial price of ¥24,800. It was intended for a young audience and, like many consoles of the era (such as the LaserActive and the 3DO Interactive Multiplayer), was marketed more as a multimedia home entertainment system than as a dedicated gaming console, with anime quiz software and edutainment making up most of the game library. The Playdia uses a single infrared joypad with simple controls. Bandai, the Playdia&#x27;s manufacturer, was the only software publisher to support this console (except for VAP who published &quot;Ie Naki Ko - Suzu no Sentaku&quot; instead of Bandai).

==Overview==
The Playdia has a CD-ROM drive, and the software is on CD-ROM. The controller has two AAA batteries with infrared wireless that can be stored in the main unit. The target age group was set mainly for elementary school students as both the hardware and software were inexpensive for home games at the time.

The Playdia can create anime-style full motion video (FMV) using CD-based games. Most are interactive learning experiences, but Bandai created a few video games with an interactive component based on its franchise series, including &quot;Gundam&quot;, &quot;Sailor Moon&quot;, &quot;Ultra Man&quot;, and &quot;Dragon Ball Z&quot;. They lack true game action. As a simple interactive cartoon, the player just directs the on-screen figure by choosing from the menu options that are presented to them on the Playdia control pad. Playdia is the only 8-bit fifth-generation game machine, because the products of the competitors at that time have 32-bit CPUs and 64-bit CPUs across the board. The system had to rely on Bandai&#x27;s IPs which started to be redundant.  

On the main body and software package, there is a logo of &quot;QIS&quot; and the notation &quot;This software is dedicated to the QIS standard&quot;. QIS is an abbreviation of &quot;Quick Interactive System&quot; and indicates a high-speed access function to CD-ROM. There is no BIOS or menu when the user starts the console without a disc, all that shows is a blue screen.

The Playdia had poor sales, therefore for Bandai, the console was a failure. Bandai discontinued the console in 1996 and the unsold consoles were converted by Banpresto, a Bandai subsidiary, into coin-operated Micha King machines that played anime clips in Japanese arcades and shops. Its successor was Apple Pippin that Bandai co-developed, which was also unsuccessful.

==Playdia software==
===1994===
* 09/23 - &quot;Dragon Ball Z - Shin Saiyajin Zetsumetsu Keikaku Chikyū Hen&quot; - [BAPD-01]
* 09/23 - &quot;Bishōjo Senshi Sailor Moon S - Quiz Taiketsu! Sailor Power Kesshū!!&quot; - [BAPD-02]
* 09/23 - &quot;SD Gundam Daizukan&quot; - [BAPD-03]
* 09/28 - &quot;Ultraman Powered - Kaijū Gekimetsu Sakusen&quot; - [BAPD-04]
* 09/28 - &quot;Hello Kitty - Yume no Kuni Daibōken&quot; - [BAPD-05]
* 11/25 - &quot;Aqua Adventure - Blue Lilty&quot; - [BAPD-06]
* 11/25 - &quot;Newton museum - Kyōryū Nendaiki Zenpen&quot; - [BAPD-07]
* 11/25 - &quot;Newton museum - Kyōryū Nendaiki Kōhen&quot; - [BAPD-08]
* 12/08 - &quot;Shuppatsu! Dōbutsu Tankentai&quot; - [BAPD-09]
* 12/16 - &quot;Ultra Seven - Chikyū Bōei Sakusen&quot; - [BAPD-10]
* 12/16 - &quot;Dragon Ball Z - Shin Saiyajin Zetsumetsu Keikaku Uchū Hen&quot; - [BAPD-11]

===1995===
* 01/24 - &quot;Norimono Banzai!! - Kuruma Daishūgō!!&quot; - [BAPD-12]
* 01/24 - &quot;Norimono Banzai!! - Densha Daishūgō!!&quot; - [BAPD-13]
* 03/22 - &quot;Ie Naki Ko - Suzu no Sentaku&quot; - [VPRJ-09722]
* 03/22 - &quot;Gamera - The Time Adventure&quot; - [BAPD-15]
* 06/22 - &quot;Elements Voice Series vol.1 Mika Kanai - Wind&amp;Breeze&quot; - [BAPD-18]
* 06/22 - &quot;Elements Voice Series vol.2 Rica Fukami - Private Step&quot; - [BAPD-19]
* 06/22 - &quot;Elements Voice Series vol.3 Aya Hisakawa - Forest Sways&quot; - [BAPD-20]
* 07/28 - &quot;Bishōjo Senshi Sailor Moon SuperS - Sailor Moon to Hiragana Lesson!&quot; - [BAPD-21]
* 07/28 - &quot;Ultraman - Hiragana Dai Sakusen&quot; - [BAPD-22]
* 07/28 - &quot;Ultraman - Alphabet TV e Yōkoso&quot; - [BAPD-23]
* 08/24 - &quot;Bishōjo Senshi Sailor Moon SS - Sailor Moon to Hajimete no Eigo&quot; - [BAPD-24]
* 08/24 - &quot;Bishōjo Senshi Sailor Moon SS - Yōkoso! Sailor Yōchien&quot; - [BAPD-25]
* 08/24 - &quot;Ultraman - Oide yo! Ultra Yōchien&quot; - [BAPD-26]
* 10/20 - &quot;Chōgōkin Selections&quot; - [BKPD-01]
* 11/16 - &quot;Elements Voice Series vol.4 Yuri Shiratori - Rainbow Harmony&quot; - [BKPD-02]
* 12/15 - &quot;Soreike! Anpanman - Picnic de Obenkyō&quot; - [BAPD-27]

===1996===
* 03/22 - &quot;Ultraman - Sūji de Asobō Ultra Land&quot; - [BAPD-28]
* 03/22 - &quot;Ultraman - Ultraman Chinō UP Dai Sakusen&quot; - [BAPD-29]
* 03/27 - &quot;Elements Voice Series vol.5 Mariko Kouda - Welcome to the Marikotown!&quot; - [BKPD-03]
* 04/24 - &quot;Nintama Rantarō - Gungun Nobiru Chinō Hen&quot; - [BKPD-04]
* 05/15 - &quot;Nintama Rantarō - Hajimete Oboeru Chishiki Hen&quot; - [BKPD-05]
* 06/26 - &quot;Gekisou Sentai Carranger - Tatakae! Hiragana Racer&quot; - [BKPD-06]

===Not for sale===
* &quot;Yumi to Tokoton Playdia&quot; - [BS-003]
* &quot;Go! Go! Ackman Planet&quot; - [BS-005]
* &quot;Jamp Gentei Special - 4 Dai Hero Battle Taizen&quot; - [BS-006]
* &quot;Bandai Item Collection 70&quot; - [BS-007]
* &quot;Playdia IQ Kids&quot; - [BS-009]
* &quot;Kero Kero Keroppi - Uki Uki Party Land&quot; - [BS-010]

==Hardware==

* Sanyo Lc89515 - CD-ROM Host Interface
* Toshiba TA2035F - CD Focus tracking server
* Toshiba tc9263f - CD Single Chip processor
* Rohm 6398FP - 4 Channel BTL Driver for CD Player motor
* Toshiba TMP87C800F - 8 Bit Microcontroller (8 kb ROM, 16 kb RAM) - 8 MHz Operation, can access 64 kb (TLCS-870 series which is based heavily on the Z80)
* Sharp LH52B256 - 256 kb (32K x 8) Static RAM chip
* NEC μPD78214GC - 8 Bit Microcontroller (16 kb ROM, 512 byte RAM) - 12 MHz Operation, can access 1 mb (NEC 78K series)
* Toshiba TC514256JAJ - 256K Word x 4 Fast Page DRAM Chip
* Asahi Kasei AK8000 - Audio / Video processor
* Philips DA8772AH - Triple 8 bit DAC converter
* Sony CX1229M - NTSC/PAL Decoder
* Rohm BA10324AF - Quad Op Amp
* Sanyo LC78835K - 18BIT DAC with filter
* Rohm BU3052BCF - Dual 4 Channel Analogue Multiplexer

==References==
==External links==

* https://www.kanzenshuu.com/tidbits/saiya-jin-zetsumetsu-keikaku/
* Playdia TV advert</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q590490" start="25" end="33" title="codename" label="codename"/>
<link wikidata="Q129728" start="57" end="73" title="Fifth generation of video game consoles" label="fifth-generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17589470" start="74" end="97" title="home video game console" label="home video game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="122" end="127" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276319" start="254" end="265" title="LaserActive" label="LaserActive"/>
<link wikidata="Q229429" start="274" end="301" title="3DO Interactive Multiplayer" label="3DO Interactive Multiplayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131765" start="327" end="337" title="multimedia" label="multimedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="405" end="410" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153173" start="429" end="440" title="Educational entertainment" label="edutainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q507269" start="541" end="547" title="Bandai" label="Bandai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723301" start="650" end="653" title="VAP (company)" label="VAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q709818" start="674" end="684" title="Ie Naki Ko" label="Ie Naki Ko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839187" start="829" end="842" title="AAA battery" label="AAA batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473699" start="1085" end="1102" title="full motion video" label="full motion video"/>
<link wikidata="Q732120" start="1288" end="1294" title="Gundam" label="Gundam"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1308" end="1319" title=":cs:Sailor_Moon" label="Sailor Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340870" start="1333" end="1342" title="Ultraman" label="Ultra Man"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1360" end="1373" title=":cs:Dragon_Ball" label="Dragon Ball Z"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1596" end="1601" title=":cs:8-bit" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1698" end="1701" title=":cs:CPU" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1714" end="1717" title=":cs:CPU" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371744" start="2350" end="2359" title="Banpresto" label="Banpresto"/>
<link wikidata="Q15015195" start="2494" end="2506" title="Apple Pippin" label="Apple Pippin"/>
<link wikidata="Q477916" start="2611" end="2624" title="Dragon Ball Z" label="Dragon Ball Z"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2627" end="2659" title="Dragon Ball Z Side Story: Plan to Eradicate the Saiyans" label="Shin Saiyajin Zetsumetsu Keikaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q17563018" start="2705" end="2733" title="Sailor Moon S" label="Bishōjo Senshi Sailor Moon S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066126" start="2807" end="2816" title="SD Gundam" label="SD Gundam"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636497" start="2860" end="2876" title="Ultraman Powered" label="Ultraman Powered"/>
<link wikidata="Q191794" start="2937" end="2948" title="Hello Kitty" label="Hello Kitty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531879" start="3277" end="3288" title="Ultra Seven" label="Ultra Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q709818" start="3593" end="3603" title="Ie Naki Ko" label="Ie Naki Ko"/>
<link wikidata="Q687240" start="3659" end="3665" title="Gamera" label="Gamera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193042" start="3749" end="3759" title="Mika Kanai" label="Mika Kanai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324613" start="3840" end="3851" title="Rica Fukami" label="Rica Fukami"/>
<link wikidata="Q49573" start="3929" end="3941" title="Aya Hisakawa" label="Aya Hisakawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17563017" start="3991" end="4024" title="Sailor Moon SuperS" label="Bishōjo Senshi Sailor Moon SuperS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058534" start="4093" end="4101" title="Ultraman (1966 TV series)" label="Ultraman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048744" start="4480" end="4488" title="Soul of Chogokin" label="Chōgōkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329075" start="4562" end="4576" title="Yuri Shiratori" label="Yuri Shiratori"/>
<link wikidata="Q568361" start="4638" end="4646" title="Anpanman" label="Anpanman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213069" start="4886" end="4898" title="Mariko Kouda" label="Mariko Kouda"/>
<link wikidata="Q713975" start="4962" end="4977" title="Nintama Rantarō" label="Nintama Rantarō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156853" start="5119" end="5143" title="Gekisou Sentai Carranger" label="Gekisou Sentai Carranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663922" start="5216" end="5220" title="Adachi Yumi" label="Yumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q220015" start="5312" end="5316" title="Weekly Jump" label="Jamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q507269" start="5384" end="5390" title="Bandai" label="Bandai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585709" start="5476" end="5493" title="Kero Kero Keroppi" label="Kero Kero Keroppi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960003" start="6049" end="6052" title="78K" label="78K"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24915" wikidata="Q33831" url="?curid=24915" title="Pidgin">
<text>A pidgin , or pidgin language, is a grammatically simplified means of communication that develops between two or more groups of people that do not have a language in common: typically, its vocabulary and grammar are limited and often drawn from several languages. It is most commonly employed in situations such as trade, or where both groups speak languages different from the language of the country in which they reside (but where there is no common language between the groups). 

Fundamentally, a pidgin is a simplified means of linguistic communication, as it is constructed impromptu, or by convention, between individuals or groups of people. A pidgin is not the native language of any speech community, but is instead learned as a second language.

A pidgin may be built from words, sounds, or body language from a multitude of languages as well as onomatopoeia. As the lexicon of any pidgin will be limited to core vocabulary, words with only a specific meaning in the lexifier language may acquire a completely new (or additional) meaning in the pidgin.

Pidgins have historically been considered a form of &quot;patois&quot;, unsophisticated simplified versions of their lexifiers, and as such usually have low prestige with respect to other languages. However, not all simplified or &quot;unsophisticated&quot; forms of a language are pidgins. Each pidgin has its own norms of usage which must be learned for proficiency in the pidgin.

A pidgin differs from a creole, which is the first language of a speech community of native speakers that at one point arose from a pidgin. Unlike pidgins, creoles have fully developed vocabulary and patterned grammar. Most linguists believe that a creole develops through a process of nativization of a pidgin when children of speakers of an acquired pidgin learn it and use it as their native language.

== Etymology ==
&quot;Pidgin&quot; derives from a Chinese pronunciation of the English word &quot;business&quot;, and all attestations from the first half of the nineteenth century given in the third edition of the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; mean &quot;business; an action, occupation, or affair&quot; (the earliest being from 1807). The term &quot;pidgin English&quot; (&#x27;business English&#x27;), first attested in 1855, shows the term in transition to referring to language, and by the 1860s the term &quot;pidgin&quot; alone could refer to Pidgin English. The term came to be used in a more general linguistic sense to refer to any simplified language by the late 19th century.

A popular false etymology for &quot;pidgin&quot; is English &quot;pigeon&quot;, a bird sometimes used for carrying brief written messages, especially in times prior to modern telecommunications.

== Terminology ==
The word &quot;pidgin&quot;, formerly also spelled &quot;pigion&quot;, was first applied to Chinese Pidgin English, but was later generalized to refer to any pidgin. &quot;Pidgin&quot; may also be used as the specific name for local pidgins or creoles, in places where they are spoken. For example, the name of the creole language Tok Pisin derives from the English words &quot;talk pidgin&quot;. Its speakers usually refer to it simply as &quot;pidgin&quot; when speaking English. Likewise, Hawaiian Creole English is commonly referred to by its speakers as &quot;Pidgin&quot;.

The term &quot;jargon&quot; has also been used to refer to pidgins, and is found in the names of some pidgins, such as Chinook Jargon. In this context, linguists today use &quot;jargon&quot; to denote a particularly rudimentary type of pidgin; however, this usage is rather rare, and the term &quot;jargon&quot; most often means the specialized vocabulary of some profession.

Pidgins may start out as or become trade languages, such as Tok Pisin. Trade languages can eventually evolve into fully developed languages in their own right, such as Swahili, distinct from the languages they were originally influenced by. Trade languages and pidgins can also influence an established language&#x27;s vernacular, especially amongst people who are directly involved in a trade where that pidgin is commonly used, which can alternatively result in a regional dialect being developed.

== Common traits ==

Pidgins are usually less morphologically complex but more syntactically rigid than other languages, and usually have fewer morphosyntactic irregularities than other languages.

Characteristics shared by most pidgins:
* Typologically most closely resemble isolating languages
* Uncomplicated clausal structure (e.g., no embedded clauses, etc.)
* Reduction or elimination of syllable codas
* Reduction of consonant clusters or breaking them with epenthesis
* Elimination of aspiration or sound changes
* Monophthongization is common, employment of as few basic vowels as possible, such as 
* Lack of morphophonemic variation
* Lack of tones, such as those found in Niger-Congo, Austroasiatic and Sino-Tibetan language families and in various families of the indigenous languages of the Americas
* Lack of grammatical tense; use of separate words to indicate tense, usually preceding the verb
* Lack of conjugation, declension or agreement
* Lack of grammatical gender or number, commonly supplanted by reduplication to represent plurals and superlatives, and other parts of speech that represent the concept being increased and clear indication of the gender of animated objects.
* Lack of clear parts of speech or word categorization; common use and derivation of new vocabulary through conversion, e.g. nominalization, verbification, adjectivization etc.

== Development ==
The initial development of a pidgin usually requires:

* prolonged, regular contact between the different language communities
* a need to communicate between them
* an absence of (or absence of widespread proficiency in) a widespread, accessible interlanguage

Keith Whinnom (in ) suggests that pidgins need three languages to form, with one (the superstrate) being clearly dominant over the others.

Linguists sometimes posit that pidgins can become creole languages when a generation of children learn a pidgin as their first language,
a process that regularizes speaker-dependent variation in grammar. Creoles can then replace the existing mix of languages to become the native language of a community (such as the Chavacano language in the Philippines, Krio in Sierra Leone, and Tok Pisin in Papua New Guinea). However, not all pidgins become creole languages; a pidgin may die out before this phase would occur (e.g. the Mediterranean Lingua Franca).

Other scholars, such as Salikoko Mufwene, argue that pidgins and creoles arise independently under different circumstances, and that a pidgin need not always precede a creole nor a creole evolve from a pidgin. Pidgins, according to Mufwene, emerged among trade colonies among &quot;users who preserved their native vernaculars for their day-to-day interactions&quot;. Creoles, meanwhile, developed in settlement colonies in which speakers of a European language, often indentured servants whose language would be far from the standard in the first place, interacted extensively with non-European slaves, absorbing certain words and features from the slaves&#x27; non-European native languages, resulting in a heavily basilectalized version of the original language. These servants and slaves would come to use the creole as an everyday vernacular, rather than merely in situations in which contact with a speaker of the superstrate was necessary.

== List of notable pidgins ==

Many of these languages are commonly referred to by their speakers as &quot;Pidgin&quot;. 

* Arablish
* Algonquian–Basque pidgin
* Arafundi-Enga Pidgin
* Arunachali Hindi
* Bamboo English
* Barikanchi Pidgin
* Basque–Icelandic pidgin
* Bimbashi Arabic
* Bislama (creolized)
* Bombay Hindi
* Borgarmålet
* Bozal Spanish
* Broken Oghibbeway
* Broken Slavey and Loucheux Jargon
* Broome Pearling Lugger Pidgin
* Camtho
* Cameroonian Pidgin English (creolized)
* Cocoliche
* Chinook Jargon 
* Duvle-Wano Pidgin
* Eskimo Trade Jargon
* Ewondo Populaire
* Fanagalo (Pidgin Zulu)
* Français Tirailleur 
* Hinglish
* Haflong Hindi
* International Sign
* Inuktitut-English Pidgin
* Kiautschou Pidgin German
* KiKAR (Swahili pidgin)
* Kwoma-Manambu Pidgin
* Kyakhta Russian–Chinese Pidgin
* Kyowa-go and Xieheyu
* Labrador Inuit Pidgin French
* Madras Bashai
* Maridi Arabic
* Maritime Polynesian Pidgin
* Mediterranean Lingua Franca (Sabir)
* Mekeo pidgins
* Mobilian Jargon
* Namibian Black German
* Ndyuka-Tiriyó Pidgin
* Nefamese
* Nigerian Pidgin (creolized)
* Nootka Jargon
* Pidgin Delaware
* Pidgin Hawaiian
* Pidgin Iha
* Pidgin Ngarluma
* Pidgin Onin
* Pidgin Wolof
* Pijin (creolized)
* Roquetas Pidgin Spanish
* Russenorsk
* Settler Swahili
* Surzhyk
* Sranan Tongo
* Taimyr Pidgin Russian
* Tây Bồi Pidgin French
* Tinglish
* Te Parau Tinito
* Tok Pisin (creolized)
* Turku language
* West Greenlandic Pidgin
* Yokohama Pidgin Japanese
* Barikanchi Pidgin
== See also ==
* Bilingual pun
* Camfranglais (Cameroon)
* Creole language
* Engrish
* Hiri Motu
* International auxiliary language
* Lingua franca
* Macaronic language
* Mixed language
* Spanglish
* Universal language

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
*Holm, John (2000), &quot;An Introduction to Pidgins and Creoles&quot;, Cambridge University Press

== External links ==
*Atlas of Pidgin and Creole Language Structures (APiCS)
*Language Varieties Web Site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33831" start="2" end="8" title="Pidgin" label="pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33831" start="14" end="29" title="Pidgin" label="pidgin language"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="154" end="162" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499736" start="189" end="199" title="vocabulary" label="vocabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="204" end="211" title="grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="315" end="320" title="trade" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="671" end="686" title="native language" label="native language"/>
<link wikidata="Q170239" start="858" end="870" title="onomatopoeia" label="onomatopoeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8096" start="879" end="886" title="lexicon" label="lexicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4536459" start="979" end="987" title="lexifier" label="lexifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q744710" start="1124" end="1130" title="patois" label="patois"/>
<link wikidata="Q919978" start="1223" end="1231" title="prestige (sociolinguistics)" label="prestige"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="1474" end="1480" title="creole language" label="creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="1495" end="1509" title="first language" label="first language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="1535" end="1549" title="native speaker" label="native speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980152" start="1736" end="1748" title="nativization" label="nativization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="1906" end="1913" title="Chinese Language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="2077" end="2102" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013103" start="2563" end="2578" title="false etymology" label="false etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856" start="2619" end="2625" title="pigeon" label="pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142909" start="2633" end="2746" title="Pigeon post" label="a bird sometimes used for carrying brief written messages, especially in times prior to modern telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435078" start="2859" end="2881" title="Chinese Pidgin English" label="Chinese Pidgin English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="3011" end="3018" title="Creole language" label="creoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34159" start="3098" end="3107" title="Tok Pisin" label="Tok Pisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35602" start="3259" end="3282" title="Hawaiian Creole English" label="Hawaiian Creole English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35173" start="3466" end="3480" title="Chinook Jargon" label="Chinook Jargon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17951" start="3646" end="3652" title="jargon" label="jargon"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="3759" end="3774" title="trade languages" label="trade languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q34159" start="3784" end="3793" title="Tok Pisin" label="Tok Pisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="3892" end="3899" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="4043" end="4053" title="vernacular" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="4190" end="4206" title="regional dialect" label="regional dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423311" start="4501" end="4520" title="isolating languages" label="isolating languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q117364" start="4537" end="4544" title="clause" label="clausal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122094" start="4565" end="4573" title="subordinate clause" label="embedded"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="4619" end="4632" title="syllable coda" label="syllable coda"/>
<link wikidata="Q878035" start="4690" end="4700" title="epenthesis" label="epenthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q320433" start="4718" end="4728" title="Aspiration (linguistics)" label="aspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q754984" start="4732" end="4745" title="sound changes" label="sound changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423916" start="4748" end="4766" title="Monophthongization" label="Monophthongization"/>
<link wikidata="Q661093" start="4844" end="4868" title="Morphophonology" label="morphophonemic variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="4879" end="4884" title="tone (linguistics)" label="tones"/>
<link wikidata="Q33838" start="4909" end="4920" title="Niger-Congo languages" label="Niger-Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="4922" end="4935" title="Austroasiatic languages" label="Austroasiatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45961" start="4940" end="4952" title="Sino-Tibetan languages" label="Sino-Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q51739" start="5002" end="5038" title="indigenous languages of the Americas" label="indigenous languages of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="5049" end="5066" title="grammatical tense" label="grammatical tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="5131" end="5135" title="verb" label="verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q474628" start="5146" end="5157" title="Conjugation (grammar)" label="conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188078" start="5159" end="5169" title="declension" label="declension"/>
<link wikidata="Q829903" start="5173" end="5182" title="Agreement (linguistics)" label="agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="5193" end="5211" title="grammatical gender" label="grammatical gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="5215" end="5221" title="grammatical number" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q221446" start="5246" end="5259" title="reduplication" label="reduplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q146786" start="5273" end="5280" title="plurals" label="plurals"/>
<link wikidata="Q577714" start="5285" end="5297" title="superlatives" label="superlatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q82042" start="5440" end="5455" title="parts of speech" label="parts of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783534" start="5532" end="5542" title="Conversion (word formation)" label="conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500667" start="5549" end="5563" title="nominalization" label="nominalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783534" start="5565" end="5578" title="verbification" label="verbification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201217" start="5867" end="5880" title="interlanguage" label="interlanguage"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="6072" end="6087" title="creole language" label="creole language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33281" start="6339" end="6357" title="Chavacano language" label="Chavacano language"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="6365" end="6376" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q35744" start="6378" end="6382" title="Sierra Leone Krio language" label="Krio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="6386" end="6398" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q34159" start="6404" end="6413" title="Tok Pisin" label="Tok Pisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="6417" end="6433" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q636479" start="6547" end="6574" title="Mediterranean Lingua Franca" label="Mediterranean Lingua Franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404530" start="6602" end="6618" title="Salikoko Mufwene" label="Salikoko Mufwene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122364" start="7047" end="7066" title="indentured servants" label="indentured servants"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="7174" end="7179" title="slave" label="slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415654" start="7295" end="7303" title="basilect" label="basilect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886400" start="7662" end="7686" title="Algonquian–Basque pidgin" label="Algonquian–Basque pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143040" start="7689" end="7709" title="Arafundi-Enga Pidgin" label="Arafundi-Enga Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7712" end="7728" title="Arunachali Hindi" label="Arunachali Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853404" start="7731" end="7745" title="Bamboo English" label="Bamboo English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450802" start="7748" end="7765" title="Barikanchi Pidgin" label="Barikanchi Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q810378" start="7768" end="7791" title="Basque–Icelandic pidgin" label="Basque–Icelandic pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913707" start="7794" end="7809" title="Bimbashi Arabic" label="Bimbashi Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35452" start="7812" end="7819" title="Bislama" label="Bislama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543151" start="7834" end="7846" title="Bombay Hindi" label="Bombay Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10433128" start="7849" end="7860" title="Borgarmålet" label="Borgarmålet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845508" start="7863" end="7876" title="Bozal Spanish" label="Bozal Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q20710801" start="7879" end="7896" title="Broken Oghibbeway" label="Broken Oghibbeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973472" start="7899" end="7912" title="Broken Slavey" label="Broken Slavey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973472" start="7917" end="7932" title="Loucheux Jargon" label="Loucheux Jargon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975277" start="7935" end="7964" title="Broome Pearling Lugger Pidgin" label="Broome Pearling Lugger Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q63036871" start="7967" end="7973" title="Camtho" label="Camtho"/>
<link wikidata="Q35541" start="7976" end="8002" title="Cameroonian Pidgin English" label="Cameroonian Pidgin English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35166" start="8017" end="8026" title="Cocoliche" label="Cocoliche"/>
<link wikidata="Q35173" start="8029" end="8043" title="Chinook Jargon" label="Chinook Jargon"/>
<link wikidata="Q56364" start="8047" end="8064" title="Duvle-Wano Pidgin" label="Duvle-Wano Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209871" start="8067" end="8086" title="Eskimo Trade Jargon" label="Eskimo Trade Jargon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419075" start="8089" end="8105" title="Ewondo Populaire" label="Ewondo Populaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q35727" start="8108" end="8116" title="Fanagalo" label="Fanagalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356225" start="8133" end="8152" title="Français Tirailleur" label="Français Tirailleur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638398" start="8167" end="8180" title="Haflong Hindi" label="Haflong Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q35754" start="8183" end="8201" title="International Sign" label="International Sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q16930526" start="8204" end="8228" title="Inuktitut-English Pidgin" label="Inuktitut-English Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q108314615" start="8231" end="8255" title="Kiautschou Pidgin German" label="Kiautschou Pidgin German"/>
<link wikidata="Q16938952" start="8258" end="8263" title="KiKAR" label="KiKAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q11732406" start="8283" end="8303" title="Kwoma-Manambu Pidgin" label="Kwoma-Manambu Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062960" start="8306" end="8336" title="Kyakhta Russian–Chinese Pidgin" label="Kyakhta Russian–Chinese Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q701884" start="8339" end="8347" title="Kyowa-go" label="Kyowa-go"/>
<link wikidata="Q701884" start="8352" end="8359" title="Xieheyu" label="Xieheyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467589" start="8362" end="8390" title="Labrador Inuit Pidgin French" label="Labrador Inuit Pidgin French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033314" start="8393" end="8406" title="Madras Bashai" label="Madras Bashai"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068289" start="8409" end="8422" title="Maridi Arabic" label="Maridi Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q60787571" start="8425" end="8451" title="Maritime Polynesian Pidgin" label="Maritime Polynesian Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q636479" start="8454" end="8481" title="Mediterranean Lingua Franca" label="Mediterranean Lingua Franca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8492" end="8505" title="Mekeo language#Trade language" label="Mekeo pidgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q13333" start="8508" end="8523" title="Mobilian Jargon" label="Mobilian Jargon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35759" start="8526" end="8547" title="Namibian Black German" label="Namibian Black German"/>
<link wikidata="Q13591205" start="8550" end="8570" title="Ndyuka-Tiriyó Pidgin" label="Ndyuka-Tiriyó Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987002" start="8573" end="8581" title="Nefamese" label="Nefamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q33655" start="8584" end="8599" title="Nigerian Pidgin" label="Nigerian Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16334327" start="8614" end="8627" title="Nootka Jargon" label="Nootka Jargon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183938" start="8630" end="8645" title="Pidgin Delaware" label="Pidgin Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191289" start="8648" end="8663" title="Pidgin Hawaiian" label="Pidgin Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994495" start="8666" end="8676" title="Pidgin Iha" label="Pidgin Iha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7022078" start="8679" end="8694" title="Pidgin Ngarluma" label="Pidgin Ngarluma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093910" start="8697" end="8708" title="Pidgin Onin" label="Pidgin Onin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191291" start="8711" end="8723" title="Pidgin Wolof" label="Pidgin Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q36699" start="8726" end="8731" title="Pijin language" label="Pijin"/>
<link wikidata="Q85797849" start="8746" end="8769" title="Roquetas Pidgin Spanish" label="Roquetas Pidgin Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q505125" start="8772" end="8782" title="Russenorsk" label="Russenorsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456938" start="8785" end="8800" title="Settler Swahili" label="Settler Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q430396" start="8803" end="8810" title="Surzhyk" label="Surzhyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q33989" start="8813" end="8825" title="Sranan Tongo" label="Sranan Tongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16930506" start="8828" end="8849" title="Taimyr Pidgin Russian" label="Taimyr Pidgin Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233794" start="8852" end="8873" title="Tây Bồi Pidgin French" label="Tây Bồi Pidgin French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546608" start="8876" end="8884" title="Tinglish" label="Tinglish"/>
<link wikidata="Q105676960" start="8887" end="8902" title="Te Parau Tinito" label="Te Parau Tinito"/>
<link wikidata="Q34159" start="8905" end="8914" title="Tok Pisin" label="Tok Pisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q126915359" start="8929" end="8943" title="Turku language" label="Turku language"/>
<link wikidata="Q17036301" start="8946" end="8969" title="West Greenlandic Pidgin" label="West Greenlandic Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054636" start="8972" end="8996" title="Yokohama Pidgin Japanese" label="Yokohama Pidgin Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450802" start="8999" end="9016" title="Barikanchi Pidgin" label="Barikanchi Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528176" start="9034" end="9047" title="Bilingual pun" label="Bilingual pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q847064" start="9050" end="9062" title="Camfranglais" label="Camfranglais"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="9076" end="9091" title="Creole language" label="Creole language"/>
<link wikidata="Q368901" start="9094" end="9101" title="Engrish" label="Engrish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33617" start="9104" end="9113" title="Hiri Motu" label="Hiri Motu"/>
<link wikidata="Q838296" start="9116" end="9148" title="International auxiliary language" label="International auxiliary language"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="9151" end="9164" title="Lingua franca" label="Lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q154247" start="9167" end="9185" title="Macaronic language" label="Macaronic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33694" start="9188" end="9202" title="Mixed language" label="Mixed language"/>
<link wikidata="Q56418" start="9205" end="9214" title="Spanglish" label="Spanglish"/>
<link wikidata="Q41511" start="9217" end="9235" title="Universal language" label="Universal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="9368" end="9394" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24916" wikidata="Q346127" url="?curid=24916" title="Polish">
<text>Polish may refer to:
* Anything from or related to Poland, a country in Europe
* Polish language
* Polish people, people from Poland or of Polish descent
* Polish chicken
* Polish brothers (Mark Polish and Michael Polish, born 1970), American twin screenwriters
* Kevin Polish, an American Paralympian archer

Polish may refer to:
* Polishing, the process of creating a smooth and shiny surface by rubbing or chemical action
** French polishing, polishing wood to a high gloss finish
* Nail polish
* Shoe polish
* Polish (screenwriting), improving a script in smaller ways than in a rewrite

==See also==
* 
* Polishchuk (surname)
* Polonaise (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q346127" start="0" end="6" title="Polish" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="51" end="57" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="81" end="96" title="Polish language" label="Polish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="99" end="112" title="Polish people" label="Polish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q385059" start="156" end="170" title="Polish chicken" label="Polish chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089457" start="173" end="188" title="Polish brothers" label="Polish brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q64875601" start="264" end="276" title="Kevin Polish" label="Kevin Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q346127" start="310" end="316" title="Polish" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054722" start="333" end="342" title="Polishing" label="Polishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040889" start="428" end="444" title="French polishing" label="French polishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q223807" start="486" end="497" title="Nail polish" label="Nail polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q913617" start="500" end="511" title="Shoe polish" label="Shoe polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429919" start="514" end="536" title="Polish (screenwriting)" label="Polish (screenwriting)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16881316" start="610" end="630" title="Polishchuk (surname)" label="Polishchuk (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q418748" start="633" end="659" title="Polonaise (disambiguation)" label="Polonaise (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24918" wikidata="Q755179" url="?curid=24918" title="People's Liberation Army Navy">
<text>The People&#x27;s Liberation Army Navy, also known as the People&#x27;s Navy, PLA Navy or simply Chinese Navy, is the naval warfare branch of the People&#x27;s Liberation Army, the national military of the People&#x27;s Republic of China. It is composed of five sub-branches: the Surface Force, the Submarine Force, the Coastal Defense Force, the Marine Corps and the Naval Air Force, with a total strength of 384,000 personnel, including 100,000 marines and 50,000 naval aviation personnel. The PLAN&#x27;s combat units are deployed among three theater command fleets, namely the North Sea, East Sea and South Sea Fleet, which serve the Northern, Eastern and Southern Theater Command, respectively.

The PLAN was formally established on 23 April 1949 and traces its lineage to maritime fighting units during the Chinese Civil War, including many elements of the Republic of China Navy which had defected. Until the late 1980s, the PLAN was largely a riverine and littoral force (brown-water navy) mostly in charge of coastal defense and patrol against potential Nationalist amphibious invasions and territorial waters disputes in the East and South China Sea (roles that are now largely relegated to the paramilitary China Coast Guard), and had been traditionally a maritime support subordinate to the PLA Ground Force. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Chinese leadership were freed from overland border concerns with the northern neighbor and shifted towards more forward-oriented foreign and national security policies in the 1990s, and the PLAN leaders were able to advocate for renewed attention toward limited command of the seas as a green-water navy operating in the marginal seas within the range of coastal air parity.

Into the 21st century, Chinese military officials have outlined plans to operate with blue water capability between the first and second island chains, with Chinese strategists talking about the modernization of the PLAN into &quot;a regional blue-water defensive and offensive navy.&quot; Transitioning into a blue-water navy, regular naval exercises and patrols have increased in the Taiwan Strait, the Senkaku Islands/Diaoyutai in the East China Sea, and within the nine-dash line in the South China Sea, and all of which China claims as its territory despite the Republic of China (ROC, i.e. Taiwan), Vietnam, Brunei, Malaysia and the Philippines each also claiming a significant part of the South China Sea. Some exercises and patrols of the PLAN in recent years went as close to and within the exclusive economic zones (EEZs) of Japan, Taiwan, Alaska, Australia, and New Zealand, although undisputed territorial waters have been not been crossed except in cases of innocent passage.

, the PLAN is the second-largest navy in the world by total displacement tonnage — at 2 million tons in 2024, behind only the United States Navy (USN) — and the largest navy globally by number of active sea-going ships (excluding coastal missile boats, gunboats and minesweepers) with over 370 surface ships and submarines in service, compared to approximately 292 ships and submarines in the USN. However, the Chinese fleets are much newer and smaller in tonnage, as about 70% of their warships were launched after 2010 and consist mostly of newly designed destroyers, frigates and corvettes with only a few amphibious warfare ships and the two commissioned aircraft carriers, while only about 25% of the American ships were launched after 2010 and majority of their tonnage are from its eleven 100,000-ton supercarriers, 21 large amphibious assault ships and experimental capital ships such as the Zumwalt-class destroyers. The dominance of Chinese shipbuilding capacity (over 230 times greater tonnage than the United States, according to the Alliance for American Manufacturing) have led the Office of Naval Intelligence to project that China will have 475 battle force ships by 2035 while the USN will have 305 to 317, which would put the United States in a numerical and operational disadvantage especially in the West Pacific according to a chair naval strategy professor at the Naval War College.

== History ==
The PLAN traces its lineage to units of the Republic of China Navy (ROCN) who defected to the People&#x27;s Liberation Army towards the end of the Chinese Civil War. A number of Japanese and Manchukuo Imperial Navy gunboats used to patrol the river border with the Soviet Union were also handed over to the PLA following the surrender of Japan. In 1949, Mao Zedong asserted that &quot;to oppose imperialist aggression, we must build a powerful navy&quot;. During the Landing Operation on Hainan Island, the communists used wooden junks fitted with mountain guns as both transport and warships against the ROCN. The navy was established on 23 April 1949 by consolidating regional naval forces under Joint staff Department command in Jiangyan (now in Taizhou, Jiangsu).

The Naval Academy was set up at Dalian on 22 November 1949, mostly with Soviet instructors. It then consisted of a motley collection of ships and boats acquired from the Kuomintang forces. The Naval Air Force was added two years later. By 1954, an estimated 2,500 Soviet naval advisers were in China—possibly one adviser to every thirty Chinese naval personnel—and the Soviet Union began providing modern ships.

With Soviet assistance, the navy reorganized in 1954 and 1955 into the North Sea Fleet, East Sea Fleet, and South Sea Fleet, and a corps of admirals and other naval officers was established from the ranks of the ground forces. In shipbuilding the Soviets first assisted the Chinese, then the Chinese copied Soviet designs without assistance, and finally the Chinese produced vessels of their own design. Eventually Soviet assistance progressed to the point that a joint Sino-Soviet Pacific Ocean fleet was under discussion.

===1950s and 1960s===

Through the upheavals of the late 1950s and 1960s the Navy remained relatively undisturbed. Under the leadership of Minister of National Defense Lin Biao, large investments were made in naval construction during the frugal years immediately after the Great Leap Forward. During the Cultural Revolution, a number of top naval commissars and commanders were purged.

Naval forces were used to suppress a revolt in Wuhan in July 1967, but the service largely avoided the turmoil affecting the country. Although it paid lip service to Mao and assigned political commissars aboard ships, the Navy continued to train, build, and maintain the fleets as well the coastal defense and aviation arms, as well as in the performance of its mission.

===1970s and 1980s===
In the 1970s, when approximately 20 percent of the defense budget was allocated to naval forces, the Navy grew dramatically. The conventional submarine force increased from 35 to 100 boats, the number of missile-carrying ships grew from 20 to 200, and the production of larger surface ships, including support ships for oceangoing operations, increased. The Navy also began development of nuclear attack submarines (SSN) and nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines (SSBN).

In the 1980s, under the leadership of Chief Naval Commander Liu Huaqing, the navy developed into a regional naval power, though naval construction continued at a level somewhat below the 1970s rate. Liu Huaqing was an Army officer who spent most of his career in administrative positions involving science and technology. It was not until 1988 that the People&#x27;s Liberation Army Navy was led by a naval officer. Liu was also very close to Deng Xiaoping as his modernization efforts were very much in keeping with Deng&#x27;s national policies.

While under his leadership Naval construction yards produced fewer ships than the 1970s, greater emphasis was placed on technology and qualitative improvement. Modernization efforts also encompassed higher educational and technical standards for personnel; reformulation of the traditional coastal defense doctrine and force structure in favor of more green-water operations; and training in naval combined-arms operations involving submarine, surface, naval aviation, and coastal defense forces.

Examples of the expansion of China&#x27;s capabilities were the 1980 recovery of an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) in the Western Pacific by a twenty-ship fleet, extended naval operations in the South China Sea in 1984 and 1985, and the visit of two naval ships to three South Asian nations in 1985. In 1982 the navy conducted a successful test of an underwater-launched ballistic missile. The navy also had some success in developing a variety of surface-to-surface and air-to-surface missiles, improving basic capabilities.

In 1986, the Navy&#x27;s order of battle included two &quot;Xia&quot;-class SSBNs armed with twelve CSS-N-3 missiles and three Han-class SSNs armed with six SY-2 cruise missiles. In the late 1980s, major deficiencies reportedly remained in anti-submarine warfare, mine warfare, naval electronics (including electronic countermeasures equipment), and naval aviation capabilities.

The PLA Navy was ranked in 1987 as the third largest navy in the world, although naval personnel had comprised only 12 percent of PLA strength. In 1987 the Navy consisted (as it does now) of the naval headquarters in Beijing; three fleet commands – the North Sea Fleet, based at Qingdao, Shandong; the East Sea Fleet, based at Ningbo; and the South Sea Fleet, based at Zhanjiang, Guangdong – and about 1,000 ships of which only approximately 350 are ocean going. The rest are small patrol or support craft.

The 350,000-person Navy included Naval Air Force units of 34,000 men, the Coastal Defense Forces of 38,000, and the Marine Corps of 56,500. Navy Headquarters, which controlled the three fleet commands, was subordinate to the PLA General Staff Department. In 1987, China&#x27;s 1,500 km coastline was protected by approximately 70 diesel-powered Romeo- and Whiskey-class submarines, which could remain at sea only a limited time.

Inside this protective ring and within range of shore-based aircraft were destroyers and frigates mounting Styx anti-ship missiles, depth-charge projectors, and guns up to 130 mm. Any invader penetrating the destroyer and frigate protection would have been swarmed by almost 900 fast-attack craft. Stormy weather limited the range of these small boats, however, and curtailed air support. Behind the inner ring were Coastal Defense Force personnel operating naval shore batteries of Styx missiles and guns, backed by ground force units deployed in depth.

===1990s and 2000s===
As the 21st century approached, the PLAN began to transition to an off-shore defensive strategy that entailed more out-of-area operations away from its traditional territorial waters. From 1990 to 2002, Jiang Zemin&#x27;s military reforms placed particular emphasis on the Navy.

Between 1989 and 1993, the training ship &quot;Zhenghe&quot; paid ports visits to Hawaii, Thailand, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and India. PLAN vessels visited Vladivostok in 1993, 1994, 1995, and 1996. PLAN task groups also paid visits to Indonesia in 1995; North Korea in 1997; New Zealand, Australia, and the Philippines in 1998; Malaysia, Tanzania, South Africa, the United States, and Canada in 2000; and India, Pakistan, France, Italy, Germany, Britain, Hong Kong, Australia, and New Zealand in 2001.

In March 1997, the &quot;Luhu&quot;-class guided missile destroyer &quot;Harbin&quot;, the &quot;Luda&quot;-class guided missile destroyer &quot;Zhuhai&quot;, and the replenishment oiler &quot;Nancang&quot; began the PLA Navy&#x27;s first circumnavigation of the Pacific Ocean, a 98-day voyage with port visits to Mexico, Peru, Chile, and the United States, including Pearl Harbor and San Diego. The flotilla was under the command of Vice Admiral Wang Yongguo, the commander-in-chief of the South Sea Fleet.

The &quot;Luhu&quot;-class guided missile destroyer &quot;Qingdao&quot; and the replenishment oiler &quot;Taicang&quot; completed the PLA Navy&#x27;s first circumnavigation of the world &quot;(pictured)&quot;, a 123-day voyage covering between 15 May – 23 September 2002. Port visits included Changi, Singapore; Alexandria, Egypt; Aksis, Turkey; Sevastopol, Ukraine; Piraeus, Greece; Lisbon, Portugal; Fortaleza, Brazil; Guayaquil, Ecuador; Callao, Peru; and Papeete in French Polynesia. The PLA naval vessels participated in naval exercises with the French frigates and , as well as exercises with the Peruvian Navy. The flotilla was under the command of Vice Admiral Ding Yiping, the commander-in-chief of the North Sea Fleet, and Captain Li Yujie was the commanding officer of the &quot;Qingdao&quot;.

Overall, between 1985 and 2006, PLAN naval vessels visited 18 Asian-Pacific nations, 4 South American nations, 8 European nations, 3 African nations, and 3 North American nations. In 2003, the PLAN conducted its first joint naval exercises during separate visits to Pakistan and India. Bi-lateral naval exercises were also carried out with exercises with the French, British, Australian, Canadian, Philippine, and United States navies.

On 26 December 2008, the PLAN dispatched a task group consisting of the guided missile destroyer &quot;Haikou&quot; (flagship), the guided missile destroyer &quot;Wuhan&quot;, and the supply ship &quot;Weishanhu&quot; to the Gulf of Aden to participate in anti-piracy operations off the coast of Somalia. A team of 16 Chinese Special Forces members from its Marine Corps armed with attack helicopters were on board. Since then, China has maintained a three-ship flotilla of two warships and one supply ship in the Gulf of Aden by assigning ships to the Gulf of Aden on a three monthly basis. Other recent PLAN incidents include the 2001 Hainan Island incident, a major submarine accident in 2003, and naval incidents involving the U.S. MSC-operated ocean surveillance ships and during 2009. At the occasion of the 60th anniversary of the PLAN, 52 to 56 vessels were shown in manoeuvres off Qingdao in April 2009 including previously unseen nuclear submarines.

The demonstration was seen as a sign of the growing status of China, while the CMC chairman, Hu Jintao, indicated that China is neither seeking regional hegemony nor entering an arms race.
Predictions by Western analysts that the PLAN would outnumber the USN submarine force as early as 2011 have failed to come true because the PRC curtailed both imports and domestic production of submarines.

=== 2010s and 2020s ===
Beginning in 2009, China ordered 4 Zubr-class LCAC from Ukraine and bought 4 more from the Hellenic Navy (Greece). These hovercraft/LCACs are built to send troops and armored vehicles (tanks, etc.) onto beaches in a fast manner, acting as a landing craft, and were viewed to be a direct threat to Taiwan&#x27;s pro-independence movement as well as the conflict over Senkaku Islands. China is continually shifting the power balance in Asia by building up the Navy&#x27;s Submarines, Amphibious warfare, and surface warfare capabilities.

Between 5–12 July 2013, a seven-ship task force from the North Sea Fleet joined warships from the Russian Pacific Fleet to participate in Joint Sea 2013, bilateral naval maneuvers held in the Peter the Great Bay of the Sea of Japan. To date, Joint Sea 2013 was the largest naval drill yet undertaken by the People&#x27;s Liberation Army Navy with a foreign navy.

On 2 April 2015, during the violent aftermath of a coup d&#x27;état in Yemen and amid an international bombing campaign, the PLAN helped ten countries get their citizens out of Yemen safely, evacuating them aboard a missile frigate from the besieged port city of Aden. The operation was described by Reuters as &quot;the first time that China&#x27;s military has helped other countries evacuate their people during an international crisis&quot;.

China&#x27;s participation in international maritime exercises is also increasing. In RIMPAC 2014, China was invited to send ships from their People&#x27;s Liberation Army Navy; marking not only the first time China participated in a RIMPAC exercise but also the first time China participated in a large-scale United States-led naval drill. On 9 June 2014, China confirmed it would be sending four ships to the exercise, a destroyer, frigate, supply ship, &amp; hospital ship. In April 2016, the People&#x27;s Republic of China was also invited to RIMPAC 2016 despite the tension in South China Sea.

PRC military expert Yin Zhuo said that due to present weaknesses in the PLAN&#x27;s ability to replenish their ships at sea, their future aircraft carriers will be forced to operate in pairs.
In a TV interview, Zhang Zhaozhong suggest otherwise, saying China is &quot;unlikely to put all her eggs in one basket&quot; and that the navy will likely rotate between carriers rather than deploy them all at once.

In 2017, PLAN hospital ship &quot;Peace Ark&quot; traveled to Djibouti (treating 7,841 Djiboutians), Sierra Leone, Gabon, Republic of Congo (treating 7,508 Congolese), Angola, Mozambique (treating 9,881 Mozambiquans), and Tanzania (treating 6,421 Tanzanians).&quot;&quot;

The PLAN continued its expansion into the 2020s, increasing its operational capacity, commissioning new ships, and constructing naval facilities. Observers note that the PLAN&#x27;s ongoing modernization is intended to build up the Chinese surface fleet and fix existing issues that limit the capability of the PLAN. Observers have noted that the PLAN&#x27;s expansion will allow it to project Chinese power in the South China Sea and allow for the navy to counter the USN&#x27;s operations in Asia. Chinese naval capability increased substantially in the 2010s and 2020s. According to the US-based think tank RAND Corporation, PLAN enjoyed major advantages in terms of naval technologies, missiles, and tonnage against regional rivals such as Taiwan, Japan, Vietnam, the Philippines, and India.

==Organization==

The PLAN is organized into several departments for purposes of command, control and coordination. Main operating forces are organized into fleets, each with its own headquarters, a commander (a Rear Admiral or Vice Admiral) and a Political Commisar. All PLAN headquarters are subordinate to the PLA Joint Staff Department and the Chairman of the Central Military Commission.

The navy has 240,000 personnel, including 15,000 marines.

===Fleets===
The People&#x27;s Liberation Army Navy is divided into three fleets:
* The North Sea Fleet, based in the Yellow Sea and headquartered in Qingdao, Shandong.
* The East Sea Fleet, based in the East China Sea and headquartered in Ningbo, Zhejiang.
* The South Sea Fleet, based in the South China Sea and headquartered in Zhanjiang, Guangdong.

===Branches===
====PLAN Surface Force====
The People&#x27;s Liberation Army Surface Force consists of all surface warships in service with the PLAN. They are organised into flotillas spread across the three main fleets.

====PLAN Submarine Force====

The People&#x27;s Liberation Army Navy Submarine Force consists of all nuclear and diesel-electric submarines in service with the PLAN.

The PRC is the last of the permanent members of the United Nations Security Council which has not conducted an operational ballistic missile submarine patrol, because of institutional problems. It operates a fleet of 68 submarines.

====PLAN Coastal Defense Force====

The PLAN Coastal Defence Force is a land-based branch of the PLAN in charge of coastal defence, with a strength of around 25,000 personnel. Also known as the coastal defense troops, they serve to defend China&#x27;s coastal and littoral areas from invasion via amphibious landings or air attacks.

Between the 1950s and 1960s, the Coastal Defense Force was primarily assigned to repel any Kuomintang attempts to infiltrate, invade and harass the Chinese coastline. After the Sino-Soviet split and the abandonment of KMT&#x27;s plans to recapture the Mainland, the Coastal Defense Force was focused on defending China&#x27;s coast from a possible Soviet sea-borne invasion throughout the 1960s to 1980s.

With the fall of the Soviet Union, the threat of an amphibious invasion of China has diminished and therefore the branch is often considered to no longer be a vital component of the PLAN, especially as the surface warships of the PLAN continue to improve in terms of anti-ship and air-defence capabilities and the PLAN&#x27;s power projection begins to extend beyond the first island chain.

Today the primary weapons of the coastal defense troops are the HY-2, YJ-82 and C-602 anti-ship missiles.

====PLAN Marine Corps====

The PLAN Marine Corps was originally established in the 1950s and then re-established in 1979 under PLAN organisation. It consists of around 20,000 marines, and is based in the South China Sea with the South Sea Fleet. The Marine Corps are considered elite troops, and are rapid deployment forces trained primarily in amphibious warfare and sometimes in air assaults to establish a beachhead or act as a spearhead during assault operations against enemy targets.

The marines are equipped with the standard Type 95 assault rifles as well as other small arms and personnel equipment, and a blue/littoral camouflage uniform as standard. The marines are also equipped with amphibious armoured fighting vehicles (including amphibious light tanks such as the Type 63, assault vehicles such as the ZTD-05 and IFVs such as ZBD-05), helicopters, naval artillery, anti-aircraft weapon systems and short range surface-to-air missiles.

With the PLAN&#x27;s accelerating efforts to expand its capabilities beyond territorial waters, it would be likely for the Marine Corps to play a greater role in terms of being an offshore expeditionary force similar to the USMC and Royal Marines.

====PLAN Air Force====

The People&#x27;s Liberation Army Naval Air Force (PLANAF) is the naval aviation branch of the PLAN and has a strength of around 25,000 personnel and 690 aircraft. It operates similar hardwares to the People&#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force, including fighter aircraft, bombers, attack aircraft, tankers, reconnaissance/early warning aircraft, electronic warfare aircraft, maritime patrol aircraft, transport aircraft and helicopters of various roles.

The PLA Naval Air Force has traditionally operated from coastal air bases, and received older aircraft than the PLAAF with less ambitious steps towards mass modernization. Advancements in new technologies, weaponry and aircraft acquisition were made after 2000. With the introduction of China&#x27;s first aircraft carrier, &quot;Liaoning&quot;, in 2012, the Naval Air Force is conducting carrier-based operations for the first time with the goal of building carrier battle group-focused blue water capabilities.

The PLANAF naval air bases include:
* North Sea Fleet: Dalian, Qingdao, Jinxi, Jiyuan, Laiyang, Jiaoxian, Xingtai, Laishan, Anyang, Changzhi, Liangxiang and Shan Hai Guan
* East Sea Fleet: Danyang, Daishan, Shanghai (Dachang), Ningbo, Luqiao, Feidong and Shitangqiao
* South Sea Fleet: Foluo, Haikou, Lingshui, Sanya, Guiping, Jialaishi and Lingling

===Relationship with other maritime organizations of China===

The PLAN is complemented by paramilitary maritime services such as the China Coast Guard. The Chinese Coast Guard was previously not under an independent command, considered part of the People&#x27;s Armed Police, under the local (provincial) border defense command, prior to its reorganization and consolidation as an unified service. It was formed from the integration of several formerly separate services such as China Marine Surveillance (CMS), General Administration of Customs, Armed Police, China Fishery Law Enforcement and local maritime militia.

The CMS performed mostly coastal and ocean search and rescue or patrols, and received quite a few large patrol ships that significantly enhanced their operations; while Customs, militia, Armed Police and Fishery Law Enforcement operated hundreds of small patrol craft. For maritime patrol services, these craft are usually quite well armed with machine guns and 37mm anti-aircraft guns. In addition, these services operated their own small aviation fleets to assist their maritime patrol capabilities, with Customs and CMS operating a handful of Harbin Z-9 helicopters, and a maritime patrol aircraft based on the Harbin Y-12 STOL transport.

Every coastal province has 1 to 3 Coast Guard squadrons:
* 3 Squadrons: Fujian, Guangdong
* 2 Squadrons: Liaoning, Shandong, Zhejiang, Hainan, Guangxi
* 1 Squadron: Heibei, Tianjin, Jiangsu, Shanghai

==Ranks==

The ranks in the People&#x27;s Liberation Army Navy are similar to those of the People&#x27;s Liberation Army Ground Force, Air Force and the Rocket Force. The current system of officer ranks and insignia dates from 1988 and is a revision of the ranks and insignia used from 1955 to 1965. The rank of Hai Jun Yi Ji Shang Jiang (First Class Admiral) was never held and was abolished in 1994. With the official introduction of the Type 07 uniforms all officer insignia are on either shoulders or sleeves depending on the type of uniform used. The current system of enlisted ranks and insignia dates from 1998.

===Commissioned officer ranks===
The rank insignia of commissioned officers.
===Other ranks===
The rank insignia of non-commissioned officers and enlisted personnel.
==Commanders==
* Xiao Jinguang (January 1950 − January 1980)
* Ye Fei (January 1980 – August 1982)
* Liu Huaqing (August 1982 – January 1988)
* Zhang Lianzhong (January 1988 – November 1996)
* Shi Yunsheng (November 1996 – June 2003)
* Zhang Dingfa (June 2003 – August 2006)
* Wu Shengli (August 2006 – January 2017)
* Shen Jinlong (January 2017 – September 2021)
* Dong Jun (September 2021 – December 2023)
* Hu Zhongming (December 2023–present)

==Contemporary topics==
===Strategy, plans, priorities===

The People&#x27;s Liberation Army Navy has become more prominent in recent years owing to a change in Chinese strategic priorities. The new strategic threats include possible conflict with the United States and/or a resurgent Japan in areas such as the Taiwan Strait or the South China Sea. As part of its overall program of naval modernization, the PLAN has a long-term plan of developing a blue water navy. Robert D. Kaplan has said that it was the collapse of the Soviet Union that allowed China to transfer resources from its army to its navy and other force projection assets.

China is constructing a major underground nuclear submarine base near Sanya, Hainan. In December 2007 the first Type 094 submarine was moved to Sanya.
The Daily Telegraph on 1 May 2008 reported that tunnels were being built into hillsides which could be capable of hiding up to 20 nuclear submarines from spy satellites. According to the Western news media the base is reportedly to help China project seapower well into the Pacific Ocean area, including challenging United States naval power.

During a 2008 interview with the BBC, Major General Qian Lihua, a senior Chinese defense official, stated that the PLAN aspired to possess a small number of aircraft carriers to allow it to expand China&#x27;s air defense perimeter. According to Qian the important issue was not whether China had an aircraft carrier, but what it did with it. On 13 January 2009, Adm. Robert F. Willard, head of the U.S. Pacific Command, called the PLAN&#x27;s modernization &quot;aggressive,&quot; and that it raised concerns in the region. On 15 July 2009, Senator Jim Webb of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee declared that only the &quot;United States has both the stature and the national power to confront the obvious imbalance of power that China brings&quot; to situations such as the claims to the Spratly and Paracel islands.

Ronald O&#x27;Rourke of the Congressional Research Service wrote in 2009 that the PLAN &quot;continues to exhibit limitations or weaknesses in several areas, including capabilities for sustained operations by larger formations in distant waters, joint operations with other parts of China’s military, C4ISR systems, anti-air warfare (AAW), antisubmarine warfare (ASW), MCM, and a dependence on foreign suppliers for certain key ship components.&quot;

In 1998 China purchased the discarded Ukrainian ship &quot;Varyag&quot; and began retrofitting it for naval deployment. On 25 September 2012, the People&#x27;s Liberation Army Navy took delivery of China&#x27;s first aircraft carrier, &quot;Liaoning&quot;. The 60,000-ton ship can accommodate 33 fixed wing aircraft. It is widely speculated that these aircraft will be the J15 fighter (the Chinese version of Russia&#x27;s SU-33).

In September 2015, satellite images showed that China may have started constructing its first indigenous Type 002 aircraft carrier. At the time, the layout suggested to be displacement of 50,000 tons and a hull to have a length of about 240 m and a beam of about 35 m. On 28 April 2017 the carrier was launched as &quot;Shandong&quot;.

Japan has raised concerns about the PLAN&#x27;s growing capability and the lack of transparency as its naval strength keeps on expanding. China has entered into service the world&#x27;s first anti-ship ballistic missile called DF-21D. The potential threat from the DF-21D against U.S. aircraft carriers has reportedly caused major changes in U.S. strategy.

On 28 June 2017 China launched the first of a new type of large destroyer, the Type 055 destroyer. The destroyer – the &quot;Nanchang&quot; – is, with its length of 180 m and at over 12,000 tons fully loaded, the second largest destroyer class in the world after the American Zumwalt-class destroyer. Eight destroyers to this design, rated by the United States Navy as &quot;cruisers&quot;, have been built or are under construction.

===Comparison to US Navy===
The strength of PLAN is often compared to that of the US Navy. PLAN is the second largest navy in the world in terms of tonnage which stands at 2 million tons as of 2022, only behind the United States Navy. PLAN has the largest number of major surface combatants of any navy globally with an overall battle force of approximately 350 surface ships and submarines – in comparison, the United States Navy&#x27;s battle force is approximately 293 ships.

Attempts have been made to compare PLAN&#x27;s firepower with the USN. A 2019 review found the USN fleet was able to deploy more &quot;battle force missiles&quot; (BFMs), defined as those missiles that contribute to battle missions, than the PLAN: USN fleet could deploy 11,000 BFMs, compared to 5250 BFMs for PLAN and 3326 BFMs for the Russian Navy. A 2016 review concluded that PLAN&#x27;s missiles had higher firepower than the USN&#x27;s, measured in terms of &quot;strike-mile&quot;, the ability to delivery a warhead using anti-ship missiles (ASM) across a given distance.
The review used the following formula for every ASM the navy had in its inventory:

: Total strike-miles=(Range of an ASM × Warhead weight of an ASM) × Number of such missiles carried by a warship × Number of such warships in the navy

It concluded the total firepower of the PLAN was 77 million strike-miles compared to 17 million strike-miles of the USN.

===Territorial disputes===

====Spratly Islands dispute====
The Spratly Islands dispute is a territorial dispute over the ownership of the Spratly Islands, a group of islands located in the South China Sea. States staking claims to various islands are Brunei, Malaysia, the Philippines, Taiwan, Vietnam, and People&#x27;s Republic of China. All except Brunei occupy some of the islands in dispute. The People&#x27;s Republic of China conducted naval patrols in the Spratly Islands and established a permanent base.

On 14 March 1988, Chinese and Vietnamese naval forces clashed over Johnson South Reef in the Spratly Islands, which involved three PLAN frigates.

In February 2011, the Chinese frigate &quot;Dongguan&quot; fired three shots at Philippine fishing boats in the vicinity of . The shots were fired after the frigate instructed the fishing boats to leave, and one of those boats experienced trouble removing its anchor. In May 2011, the Chinese patrol boats attacked and cut the cable of Vietnamese oil exploration ships near Spratly islands. The incidence sparked several anti-China protests in Vietnam. In June 2011, the Chinese navy conducted three days of exercises, including live fire drills, in the disputed waters. This was widely seen as a warning to Vietnam, which had also conducted live fire drills near the Spratly Islands. Chinese patrol boats fired repeated rounds at a target on an apparently uninhabited island, as twin fighter jets streaked in tandem overhead. 14 vessels participated in the maneuvers, staging antisubmarine and beach landing drills aimed at &quot;defending atolls and protecting sea lanes.&quot;

In May 2013, the Chinese navy&#x27;s three operational fleets deployed together for the first time since 2010. This combined naval maneuvers in the South China Sea coincided with the ongoing Spratly Islands dispute between China and the Philippines as well as deployment of the U.S. Navy&#x27;s Carrier Strike Group Eleven to the U.S. Seventh Fleet.

====Senkaku Islands dispute====
The Senkaku Islands dispute concerns a territorial dispute over a group of uninhabited islands known as the Diaoyu Islands in China, the Senkaku Islands in Japan, and Tiaoyutai Islands in Taiwan. Aside from a 1945 to 1972 period of administration by the United States, the archipelago has been controlled by Japan since 1895. The People&#x27;s Republic of China disputed the proposed U.S. handover of authority to Japan in 1971 and has asserted its claims to the islands since that time. Taiwan also has claimed these islands. The disputed territory is close to key shipping lanes and rich fishing grounds, and it may have major oil reserves in the area.

On some occasions, ships and planes from various mainland Chinese and Taiwanese government and military agencies have entered the disputed area. In addition to the cases where they escorted fishing and activist vessels, there have been other incursions. In an eight-month period in 2012, over forty maritime incursions and 160 aerial incursions occurred. For example, in July 2012, three Chinese patrol vessels entered the disputed waters around the islands.

Military escalation continued in 2013. In February, Japanese Defense Minister Itsunori Onodera claimed that a Chinese frigate had locked weapons-targeting radar onto a Japanese destroyer and helicopter on two occasions in January. A Chinese Jiangwei II class frigate and a Japanese destroyer were three kilometers apart, and the crew of the latter vessel went to battle stations. The Chinese state media responded that their frigates had been engaged in routine training at the time.

In May 2013, a flotilla of Chinese warships from its North Sea Fleet deployed from Qingdao for training exercises western North Pacific Ocean. It is not known if this deployment is related to the ongoing islands dispute between China and Japan.

====Other incidents====
On 22 July 2011, following its Vietnam port-call, the Indian amphibious assault vessel was reportedly contacted 45 nautical miles from the Vietnamese coast in the disputed South China Sea by a party identifying itself as the Chinese Navy and stating that the Indian warship was entering Chinese waters. According to a spokesperson for the Indian Navy, since there were no Chinese ships or aircraft were visible, the INS &quot;Airavat&quot; proceeded on her onward journey as scheduled. The Indian Navy further clarified that &quot;[t]here was no confrontation involving the INS &quot;Airavat&quot;. India supports freedom of navigation in international waters, including in the South China Sea, and the right of passage in accordance with accepted principles of international law. These principles should be respected by all.&quot;

On 11 July 2012, the Chinese frigate &quot;Dongguan&quot; ran aground on Hasa Hasa Shoal (&quot;pictured&quot;) located 60 nmi west of Rizal, which was within the Philippines&#x27; 200 nmi-EEZ. By 15 July, the frigate had been refloated and was returning to port with no injuries and only minor damage. During this incident, the 2012 ASEAN summit took place in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, amid the rising regional tensions.

===Anti-piracy operations in the Gulf of Aden===
On 18 December 2008, Chinese authorities deployed People&#x27;s Liberation Army Navy vessels to escort Chinese shipping in the Gulf of Aden. This deployment came after a series of attacks and attempted hijackings on Chinese vessels by Somali pirates. Reports suggest two destroyers (Type 052C 171 Haikou and Type 052B 169 Wuhan) and a supply ship are the ones being used.

This move was welcomed by the international community as the warships complement a multinational fleet already operating along the coast of Africa. Since this operation PLAN has sought the leadership of the ‘Shared Awareness and Deconfliction (SHADE)&#x27; body, which would require an increase in the number of ships contributing to the anti-piracy fleet. This is the first time Chinese warships have deployed outside the Asia-Pacific region for a military operation since Zheng He&#x27;s expeditions in the 15th century.

Since then more than 30 People&#x27;s Liberation Army Navy ships has deployed to the Gulf of Aden in 18 Escort Task Groups.

===2011 Libyan Civil War===
In the lead-up to the 2011 Libyan Civil War, the &quot;Xuzhou&quot; (530) was deployed from anti-piracy operations in the Gulf of Aden to help evacuate Chinese nationals from Libya.

===Yemen conflict===
During the Yemen conflict, in 2015, the Chinese Navy diverted frigates carrying out anti-piracy operations in Somalia to evacuate at least 600 Chinese and 225 foreign citizens working in Yemen. Among the non-Chinese evacuees were 176 Pakistani citizens, with smaller numbers from other countries, such as Ethiopia, Singapore, the UK, Italy, and Germany. Despite the evacuations, the Chinese embassy in Yemen continued to operate.

=== Ream Naval Base ===
== Equipment ==
China&#x27;s navy is the second-largest in the world in terms of tonnage.

As of 2018, the Chinese navy operates over 496 combat ships and 232 various auxiliary vessels and counts 255,000 seamen in its ranks. The Chinese Navy also employ more than 710 naval aircraft, including fighters, bombers and electronic warfare aircraft. China has large amount of artillery, torpedoes, and missiles included in their combat assets.

 China has the capacity to build more ships in one month than the United States builds in a year, with commercial vessels being built alongside warships and constructed to include military specifications. Experts have compared the country&#x27;s grip on the shipping industry as similar to Japan&#x27;s in the mid-1900s.

=== Ships and submarines ===
As of 2024, the navy has an overall battle force of more than 350 ships and submarines.

All ships and submarines currently in commission with the People&#x27;s Liberation Army Navy were built in China, with the exception of the Sovremenny-class destroyers, Kilo-class submarines and the aircraft carrier Liaoning. Those vessels were either imported from or originated in Russia.

China employs a wide range of Navy combatants including aircraft carriers, amphibious warfare ships, and destroyers. The Chinese Navy is undergoing modernization rapidly with nearly half of Chinese Navy combat ships built after 2010. China&#x27;s state-owned shipyards have built 83 ships in just eight years with unprecedented speed. China has its own independent maritime missile defense and naval combat system similar to US Aegis.

=== Aircraft ===
China operates carrier-based fighter aircraft to secure land, air and sea targets. The Chinese Navy also operates a wide range of helicopters for battlefield logistics, reconnaissance, patrol and medical evacuation.

=== Naval weaponry ===
The unique QBS-06 is an underwater assault rifle with 5.8×42 DBS-06, and is used by Naval frogmen. It is based on the Soviet APS.

In early February 2018, pictures of what is claimed to be a Chinese railgun were published online. In pictures the gun is shown mounted on the bow of a Type 072III-class landing ship &quot;Haiyangshan&quot;. Media is suggesting that the system is or soon will be ready for testing. In March 2018, it was reported that China had confirmed that it had begun testing its electromagnetic rail gun at sea.

==Future of the People&#x27;s Liberation Army Navy==


The PLAN&#x27;s ambitions include operating out to the first and second island chains, as far as the South Pacific near Australia, and spanning to the Aleutian islands, and operations extending to the Straits of Malacca near the Indian Ocean. The future PLAN fleet will be composed of a balance of combatant assets aimed at maximising the PLAN&#x27;s fighting effectiveness.

On the high end, there would be modern destroyers, such as stealth guided missile destroyers equipped with long-range air defense missiles and anti-submarine capabilities (Type 055). There would be modern destroyers equipped with long-range air defense missiles (Type 052B, Type 052C, Type 052D and Type 051C, and destroyers armed with supersonic anti-ship missiles (&quot;Sovremenny&quot; class).

There would be advanced nuclear-powered attack and ballistic missile submarines (Type 093, Type 095, Type 094, Type 096), advanced conventional attack submarines (&quot;Kilo&quot; and &quot;Yuan&quot; classes), aircraft carriers (Type 001, Type 002 and Type 003), and helicopter carriers (Type 075) and large amphibious warfare vessels (Type 071) capable of mobilizing troops at long distances.

On the medium and low end, there would be more economical multi-role capable frigates and destroyers (&quot;Luhu&quot;, &quot;Jiangwei II&quot; and &quot;Jiangkai&quot; classes), corvettes (&quot;Jiangdao&quot; class), fast littoral missile attack craft (&quot;Houjian&quot;, &quot;Houxin&quot; and &quot;Houbei&quot; classes), various landing ships and light craft, and conventionally powered coastal patrol submarines (&quot;Song&quot; class). The obsolete combat ships (based on 1960s designs) will be phased out in the coming decades as more modern designs enter full production.

Between 2001 and 2006 there was a rapid building and acquisition program, a trend which continued. There were more than a dozen new classes of ships built in those five years, totaling some 60 brand new ships (including landing ships and auxiliaries). Simultaneously, dozens of other ships have been either phased out of service or refitted with new equipment.

Submarines play a significant role in the development of the PLAN&#x27;s future fleet. This is made evident by the construction of a new type of nuclear ballistic missile submarine, the Type 094 and the Type 093 nuclear attack submarine. This will provide the PLAN with a more modern response for the need of a seaborne nuclear deterrent. The new submarines will also be capable of performing conventional strike and other special warfare requirements.

Ronald O&#x27;Rourke of the Congressional Research Service reported that the long-term goals of PLAN planning include:
* Assert or defend China&#x27;s claims in maritime territorial disputes and China&#x27;s interpretation of international laws relating to freedom of navigation in exclusive economic zones (an interpretation at odds with the U.S. interpretation);
* Protect China&#x27;s sea lines of communications to the Persian Gulf, on which China relies for some of its energy imports.

During the military parade on the 60th anniversary of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, the YJ-62 naval cruise missile made its first public appearance; the YJ-62 represents the next generation in naval weapons technology in the PLA.

Following the construction of its two smaller aircraft carriers, China began building the improved Type 003 carrier, which is expected to displace 83,000 tonnes and enable CATOBAR operations by 2022.

The PLAN may also operate from Gwadar or Seychelles for anti-piracy missions and to protect vital trade routes which may endanger China&#x27;s energy security in the case of a conflict. In 2016, China established her first overseas naval base in Djibouti, which provided necessary support for Chinese fleet and troops.

, China reportedly began testing designs for arsenal ships.

The Pentagon&#x27;s name for the Chinese sea based militia is the People&#x27;s Armed Forces Maritime Militia. Their future role is unknown, but war planners have been aware of their history and potential use in naval conflict.

, China&#x27;s shipbuilding workforce services over 7,000 vessels and is estimated to be nearly five times that of the United States.

== See also ==
* Chinese aircraft carrier programme
* China Coast Guard
* Dalian Naval Academy
* List of ships of the People&#x27;s Liberation Army Navy
* People&#x27;s Liberation Army Navy Band
* Political Commissar of the People&#x27;s Liberation Army Navy
* Political Department of the People&#x27;s Liberation Army Navy

==Notes==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q755179" start="4" end="38" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q755179" start="58" end="76" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy" label="People&amp;#x27;s Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q755179" start="78" end="86" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy" label="PLA Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q755179" start="97" end="109" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy" label="Chinese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q876274" start="118" end="131" title="naval warfare" label="naval warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q781132" start="132" end="138" title="military branch" label="branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="146" end="175" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16924613" start="280" end="293" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy Surface Force" label="Surface Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631653" start="299" end="314" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy Submarine Force" label="Submarine Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056698" start="320" end="341" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy Coastal Defense Force" label="Coastal Defense Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061382" start="347" end="359" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy Marine Corps" label="Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q10873008" start="368" end="383" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Naval Air Force" label="Naval Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898583" start="447" end="454" title="marines" label="marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898464" start="466" end="480" title="naval aviation" label="naval aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663913" start="546" end="561" title="theater commands of the People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="theater command"/>
<link wikidata="Q189524" start="562" end="567" title="naval fleet" label="fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q837282" start="581" end="590" title="North Sea Fleet" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q838163" start="592" end="600" title="East Sea Fleet" label="East Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587645" start="605" end="620" title="South Sea Fleet" label="South Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q22566824" start="638" end="646" title="Northern Theater Command" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q22566826" start="648" end="655" title="Eastern Theater Command" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q22442974" start="660" end="684" title="Southern Theater Command" label="Southern Theater Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="813" end="830" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q702116" start="863" end="885" title="Republic of China Navy" label="Republic of China Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="951" end="959" title="riverine" label="riverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q506894" start="964" end="972" title="littoral zone" label="littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746796" start="980" end="996" title="brown-water navy" label="brown-water navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138347" start="1018" end="1033" title="coastal defence and fortification" label="coastal defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765889" start="1038" end="1044" title="maritime patrol" label="patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358497" start="1053" end="1095" title="Project National Glory" label="potential Nationalist amphibious invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q213204" start="1100" end="1118" title="territorial waters" label="territorial waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q45341" start="1135" end="1139" title="East China Sea" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="1144" end="1159" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172005" start="1218" end="1235" title="China Coast Guard" label="China Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187401" start="1303" end="1319" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Ground Force" label="PLA Ground Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q131630594" start="1335" end="1363" title="collapse of the Soviet Union" label="collapse of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q181648" start="1498" end="1505" title="foreign policy" label="foreign"/>
<link wikidata="Q258307" start="1510" end="1527" title="national security" label="national security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761621" start="1631" end="1649" title="command of the sea" label="command of the sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746790" start="1656" end="1672" title="green-water navy" label="green-water navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q229088" start="1690" end="1702" title="marginal sea" label="marginal sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q898788" start="1732" end="1742" title="air parity" label="air parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564463" start="1831" end="1841" title="blue water" label="blue water"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454212" start="1865" end="1870" title="first island chain" label="first"/>
<link wikidata="Q21481552" start="1875" end="1894" title="second island chain" label="second island chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889134" start="1940" end="1953" title="modernization of the People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="modernization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622314" start="2056" end="2071" title="blue-water navy" label="blue-water navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q357104" start="2081" end="2095" title="naval exercise" label="naval exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q127031" start="2131" end="2144" title="Taiwan Strait" label="Taiwan Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q29460" start="2150" end="2165" title="Senkaku Islands" label="Senkaku Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q29460" start="2166" end="2175" title="Diaoyutai" label="Diaoyutai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735499" start="2214" end="2228" title="nine-dash line" label="nine-dash line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405450" start="2406" end="2456" title="territorial disputes in the South China Sea" label="claiming a significant part of the South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="2545" end="2568" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q686268" start="2716" end="2732" title="innocent passage" label="innocent passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139864" start="2753" end="2785" title="list of countries by level of military equipment" label="second-largest navy in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636358" start="2795" end="2815" title="displacement tonnage" label="displacement tonnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="2861" end="2879" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q843215" start="2973" end="2985" title="missile boat" label="missile boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q214196" start="2988" end="2995" title="gunboat" label="gunboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q202527" start="3001" end="3012" title="minesweeper" label="minesweeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914532" start="3029" end="3041" title="surface ship" label="surface ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="3047" end="3056" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q174736" start="3293" end="3302" title="destroyer" label="destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="3305" end="3312" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q170013" start="3318" end="3326" title="corvette" label="corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300236" start="3344" end="3367" title="amphibious warfare ship" label="amphibious warfare ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q849062" start="3377" end="3411" title="Chinese aircraft carrier programme" label="two commissioned aircraft carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="3543" end="3555" title="supercarrier" label="supercarrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q474748" start="3567" end="3590" title="amphibious assault ship" label="amphibious assault ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194368" start="3609" end="3621" title="capital ship" label="capital ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q229770" start="3635" end="3658" title="Zumwalt-class destroyer" label="Zumwalt-class destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="3686" end="3698" title="shipbuilding" label="shipbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821311" start="3781" end="3816" title="Alliance for American Manufacturing" label="Alliance for American Manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967781" start="3831" end="3859" title="Office of Naval Intelligence" label="Office of Naval Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q140686" start="4083" end="4088" title="chairperson" label="chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q11559269" start="4089" end="4103" title="naval strategy" label="naval strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q575662" start="4121" end="4138" title="Naval War College" label="Naval War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q702116" start="4199" end="4221" title="Republic of China Navy" label="Republic of China Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="4249" end="4278" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="4302" end="4319" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q699661" start="4346" end="4369" title="Manchukuo Imperial Navy" label="Manchukuo Imperial Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="4480" end="4498" title="surrender of Japan" label="surrender of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="4509" end="4519" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484605" start="4622" end="4656" title="Landing Operation on Hainan Island" label="Landing Operation on Hainan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q205011" start="4685" end="4690" title="Junk (ship)" label="junks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497061" start="4703" end="4716" title="mountain guns" label="mountain guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q22075564" start="4853" end="4875" title="Joint Staff Department of the Central Military Commission" label="Joint staff Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q75511" start="4887" end="4895" title="Jiangyan" label="Jiangyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57931" start="4904" end="4920" title="Taizhou, Jiangsu" label="Taizhou, Jiangsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018771" start="4924" end="4941" title="Dalian Naval Academy" label="The Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q74881" start="4956" end="4962" title="Dalian" label="Dalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="5094" end="5104" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q10873008" start="5117" end="5132" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Naval Air Force" label="Naval Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="5293" end="5305" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q837282" start="5408" end="5423" title="North Sea Fleet" label="North Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q838163" start="5425" end="5439" title="East Sea Fleet" label="East Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587645" start="5445" end="5460" title="South Sea Fleet" label="South Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="5477" end="5485" title="admirals" label="admirals"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="5567" end="5579" title="shipbuilding" label="shipbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q315475" start="6030" end="6038" title="Lin Biao" label="Lin Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q58715" start="6136" end="6154" title="Great Leap Forward" label="Great Leap Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="6167" end="6186" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11746" start="6297" end="6302" title="Wuhan" label="Wuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q974850" start="6848" end="6855" title="missile" label="missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914532" start="6921" end="6933" title="surface ship" label="surface ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q757587" start="7033" end="7058" title="SSN (hull classification symbol)" label="nuclear attack submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q683570" start="7085" end="7112" title="ballistic missile submarine" label="ballistic missile submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q602876" start="7183" end="7194" title="Liu Huaqing" label="Liu Huaqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="7524" end="7537" title="naval officer" label="naval officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="7566" end="7579" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564463" start="8024" end="8035" title="green-water" label="green-water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418029" start="8070" end="8083" title="combined-arms" label="combined-arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898464" start="8125" end="8139" title="naval aviation" label="naval aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138347" start="8145" end="8160" title="Coastal defence and fortification" label="coastal defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="8254" end="8288" title="intercontinental ballistic missile" label="intercontinental ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="8303" end="8318" title="Western Pacific Ocean" label="Western Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="8376" end="8391" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q179348" start="8552" end="8569" title="ballistic missile" label="ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143706" start="8629" end="8647" title="surface-to-surface missile" label="surface-to-surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049158" start="8652" end="8674" title="air-to-surface missile" label="air-to-surface missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11167066" start="8733" end="8748" title="order of battle" label="order of battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q247848" start="8762" end="8783" title="Type 092 submarine" label="&amp;quot;Xia&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q683570" start="8784" end="8788" title="SSBN" label="SSBN"/>
<link wikidata="Q928453" start="8808" end="8815" title="CSS-N-3" label="CSS-N-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366715" start="8835" end="8844" title="Type 091 submarine" label="Han-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151954" start="8865" end="8869" title="SY-2" label="SY-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="8870" end="8884" title="cruise missile" label="cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073579" start="8948" end="8970" title="anti-submarine warfare" label="anti-submarine warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="8972" end="8984" title="Naval mine" label="mine warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q849203" start="9015" end="9041" title="electronic countermeasures" label="electronic countermeasures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898464" start="9058" end="9072" title="naval aviation" label="naval aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q837282" start="9341" end="9356" title="North Sea Fleet" label="North Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q170322" start="9367" end="9374" title="Qingdao" label="Qingdao"/>
<link wikidata="Q838163" start="9390" end="9404" title="East Sea Fleet" label="East Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42780" start="9415" end="9421" title="Ningbo" label="Ningbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587645" start="9431" end="9446" title="South Sea Fleet" label="South Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q59144" start="9457" end="9466" title="Zhanjiang" label="Zhanjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="9882" end="9891" title="coastline" label="coastline"/>
<link wikidata="Q846078" start="9941" end="9946" title="Romeo-class submarine" label="Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q385734" start="9952" end="9959" title="Whiskey-class submarine" label="Whiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q174736" start="10100" end="10110" title="destroyers" label="destroyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="10115" end="10123" title="frigates" label="frigates"/>
<link wikidata="Q177218" start="10133" end="10137" title="P-15 Termit" label="Styx"/>
<link wikidata="Q653260" start="10158" end="10180" title="depth-charge projector" label="depth-charge projector"/>
<link wikidata="Q719226" start="10305" end="10322" title="fast-attack craft" label="fast-attack craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050818" start="10402" end="10413" title="air support" label="air support"/>
<link wikidata="Q240313" start="10496" end="10505" title="Artillery battery" label="batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746790" start="10671" end="10699" title="Green-water navy" label="off-shore defensive strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622314" start="10719" end="10741" title="Blue-water navy" label="out-of-area operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16597" start="10807" end="10818" title="Jiang Zemin" label="Jiang Zemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864602" start="11405" end="11452" title="Type 052 destroyer" label="&amp;quot;Luhu&amp;quot;-class guided missile destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355774" start="11477" end="11524" title="Type 051 destroyer" label="&amp;quot;Luda&amp;quot;-class guided missile destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q59095" start="11531" end="11537" title="Zhuhai" label="Zhuhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510364" start="11553" end="11572" title="Fusu class replenishment ship" label="replenishment oiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669602" start="11754" end="11766" title="Pearl Harbor Naval Base" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q743898" start="11771" end="11780" title="Naval Base San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q6191490" start="11820" end="11832" title="Jiang (rank)" label="Vice Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864602" start="11899" end="11946" title="Type 052 destroyer" label="&amp;quot;Luhu&amp;quot;-class guided missile destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q162986" start="11975" end="11994" title="replenishment oiler" label="replenishment oiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="12207" end="12224" title="Alexandria, Egypt" label="Alexandria, Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12226" end="12231" title="Aksis" label="Aksis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525" start="12241" end="12260" title="Sevastopol, Ukraine" label="Sevastopol, Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="12262" end="12277" title="Piraeus, Greece" label="Piraeus, Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="12279" end="12285" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43463" start="12297" end="12314" title="Fortaleza, Brazil" label="Fortaleza, Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q43509" start="12316" end="12334" title="Guayaquil, Ecuador" label="Guayaquil, Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q105037" start="12336" end="12348" title="Callao, Peru" label="Callao, Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q130800" start="12354" end="12361" title="Papeete" label="Papeete"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="12365" end="12381" title="French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217406" start="12446" end="12452" title="French Navy" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q952444" start="12498" end="12511" title="Peruvian Navy" label="Peruvian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8044204" start="12628" end="12635" title="Xiao (rank)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087406" start="13210" end="13253" title="Type 052C destroyer" label="guided missile destroyer &amp;quot;Haikou&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866276" start="13270" end="13312" title="Type 052B destroyer" label="guided missile destroyer &amp;quot;Wuhan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6121963" start="13334" end="13355" title="Qiandaohu class replenishment ship" label="&amp;quot;Weishanhu&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q41837" start="13363" end="13375" title="Gulf of Aden" label="Gulf of Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q214451" start="13394" end="13416" title="Piracy in Somalia" label="anti-piracy operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165604" start="13456" end="13478" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Special Operations Forces" label="Chinese Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q549276" start="13600" end="13608" title="flotilla" label="flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q41837" start="13652" end="13664" title="Gulf of Aden" label="Gulf of Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q41837" start="13691" end="13703" title="Gulf of Aden" label="Gulf of Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137047" start="13775" end="13797" title="Hainan Island incident" label="Hainan Island incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q151229" start="13801" end="13825" title="Chinese submarine 361" label="major submarine accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q333386" start="13874" end="13886" title="Military Sealift Command" label="MSC-operated"/>
<link wikidata="Q24841837" start="14178" end="14190" title="Chairman of the Central Military Commission (China)" label="CMC chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15029" start="14192" end="14201" title="Hu Jintao" label="Hu Jintao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332500" start="14554" end="14569" title="Zubr-class LCAC" label="Zubr-class LCAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q29460" start="14885" end="14900" title="Senkaku Islands" label="Senkaku Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q837282" start="15113" end="15128" title="North Sea Fleet" label="North Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165355" start="15154" end="15175" title="Russian Pacific Fleet" label="Russian Pacific Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q13986250" start="15194" end="15208" title="Joint Sea 2013" label="Joint Sea 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q494927" start="15248" end="15267" title="Peter the Great Bay" label="Peter the Great Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q27092" start="15275" end="15287" title="Sea of Japan" label="Sea of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19362030" start="15448" end="15465" title="aftermath of the 2014–15 Yemeni coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="violent aftermath"/>
<link wikidata="Q18145759" start="15471" end="15487" title="2014–15 Yemeni coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682450" start="15509" end="15539" title="2015 military intervention in Yemen" label="international bombing campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686631" start="15661" end="15669" title="Southern Yemen offensive (2015)" label="besieged"/>
<link wikidata="Q131694" start="15683" end="15687" title="Aden" label="Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="15720" end="15727" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15953" end="15964" title="Exercise RIMPAC#RIMPAC 2014" label="RIMPAC 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q16498924" start="16488" end="16496" title="Yin Zhuo" label="Yin Zhuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070425" start="16679" end="16694" title="Zhang Zhaozhong (military official)" label="Zhang Zhaozhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810315" start="16911" end="16920" title="Peace Ark" label="Peace Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="17760" end="17776" title="RAND Corporation" label="RAND Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q837282" start="18488" end="18503" title="North Sea Fleet" label="North Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q37960" start="18518" end="18528" title="Yellow Sea" label="Yellow Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q170322" start="18550" end="18557" title="Qingdao" label="Qingdao"/>
<link wikidata="Q838163" start="18575" end="18589" title="East Sea Fleet" label="East Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q45341" start="18604" end="18618" title="East China Sea" label="East China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q42780" start="18640" end="18646" title="Ningbo" label="Ningbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587645" start="18664" end="18679" title="South Sea Fleet" label="South Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="18694" end="18709" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q59144" start="18731" end="18740" title="Zhanjiang" label="Zhanjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914532" start="18860" end="18875" title="surface combatant" label="surface warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q757554" start="19076" end="19083" title="nuclear submarine" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="19088" end="19113" title="diesel-electric submarine" label="diesel-electric submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688521" start="19169" end="19225" title="permanent members of the United Nations Security Council" label="permanent members of the United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q683570" start="19265" end="19292" title="ballistic missile submarine" label="ballistic missile submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138347" start="19490" end="19505" title="coastal defence and fortification" label="coastal defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q506894" start="19639" end="19647" title="littoral" label="littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q646740" start="19672" end="19690" title="landing operation" label="amphibious landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380335" start="19695" end="19706" title="Airstrike" label="air attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="19800" end="19810" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="19886" end="19903" title="Sino-Soviet split" label="Sino-Soviet split"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358497" start="19927" end="19969" title="Project National Glory" label="KMT&amp;#x27;s plans to recapture the Mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="20057" end="20063" title="Soviet" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q131630594" start="20124" end="20148" title="fall of the Soviet Union" label="fall of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509344" start="20441" end="20457" title="power projection" label="power projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454212" start="20486" end="20504" title="first island chain" label="first island chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151954" start="20571" end="20575" title="HY-2" label="HY-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q17334365" start="20577" end="20582" title="YJ-82" label="YJ-82"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073356" start="20587" end="20592" title="C-602" label="C-602"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898583" start="20789" end="20796" title="marines" label="marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="20818" end="20833" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587645" start="20843" end="20858" title="South Sea Fleet" label="South Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567147" start="20914" end="20936" title="rapid deployment force" label="rapid deployment force"/>
<link wikidata="Q348120" start="20959" end="20977" title="amphibious warfare" label="amphibious warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q939087" start="20995" end="21006" title="air assault" label="air assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875869" start="21023" end="21032" title="beachhead" label="beachhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q290942" start="21148" end="21169" title="QBZ-95" label="Type 95 assault rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="21188" end="21198" title="small arms" label="small arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q474698" start="21311" end="21321" title="amphibious vehicle" label="amphibious"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="21322" end="21347" title="armoured fighting vehicle" label="armoured fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q875583" start="21371" end="21381" title="light tank" label="light tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q777379" start="21395" end="21402" title="Type 63 (tank)" label="Type 63"/>
<link wikidata="Q745798" start="21404" end="21419" title="assault gun" label="assault vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21433" end="21439" title="Type 05 amphibious fighting vehicle#Variants" label="ZTD-05"/>
<link wikidata="Q202825" start="21444" end="21447" title="infantry fighting vehicle" label="IFV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21457" end="21463" title="Type 05 amphibious fighting vehicle#Variants" label="ZBD-05"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543102" start="21466" end="21476" title="military helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q511450" start="21479" end="21494" title="naval artillery" label="naval artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="21496" end="21509" title="anti-aircraft" label="anti-aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="21541" end="21563" title="surface-to-air missile" label="surface-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682252" start="21756" end="21775" title="expeditionary warfare" label="expeditionary force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="21791" end="21795" title="United States Marine Corps" label="USMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="21800" end="21813" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898464" start="21906" end="21920" title="naval aviation" label="naval aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q607832" start="22041" end="22080" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="22092" end="22108" title="fighter aircraft" label="fighter aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q170877" start="22110" end="22116" title="bomber" label="bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q208187" start="22119" end="22134" title="attack aircraft" label="attack aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q142804" start="22136" end="22142" title="tanker (aircraft)" label="tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041792" start="22145" end="22159" title="reconnaissance aircraft" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q161341" start="22160" end="22182" title="airborne early warning and control" label="early warning aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4406823" start="22184" end="22211" title="electronic warfare aircraft" label="electronic warfare aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q658414" start="22213" end="22237" title="maritime patrol aircraft" label="maritime patrol aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445518" start="22239" end="22257" title="military transport aircraft" label="transport aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="22262" end="22272" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q695850" start="22357" end="22365" title="air base" label="air base"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889134" start="22445" end="22463" title="modernization of the People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="mass modernization"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="22599" end="22615" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q129200" start="22623" end="22631" title="Chinese aircraft carrier Liaoning" label="Liaoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261534" start="22682" end="22695" title="carrier-based aircraft" label="carrier-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434110" start="22752" end="22772" title="carrier battle group" label="carrier battle group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622314" start="22781" end="22791" title="blue water navy" label="blue water"/>
<link wikidata="Q74881" start="22862" end="22868" title="Dalian" label="Dalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q170322" start="22870" end="22877" title="Qingdao" label="Qingdao"/>
<link wikidata="Q75379" start="22879" end="22884" title="Huludao" label="Jinxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q997623" start="22886" end="22892" title="Jiyuan" label="Jiyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q371640" start="22894" end="22901" title="Laiyang" label="Laiyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q289051" start="22903" end="22911" title="Jiaoxian" label="Jiaoxian"/>
<link wikidata="Q58576" start="22913" end="22920" title="Xingtai" label="Xingtai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198229" start="22922" end="22929" title="Laishan" label="Laishan"/>
<link wikidata="Q324293" start="22931" end="22937" title="Anyang" label="Anyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q72945" start="22939" end="22947" title="Changzhi" label="Changzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392206" start="22949" end="22959" title="Liangxiang" label="Liangxiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152171" start="22964" end="22977" title="Shanhaiguan District" label="Shan Hai Guan"/>
<link wikidata="Q925293" start="22996" end="23003" title="Danyang, Jiangsu" label="Danyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157663" start="23005" end="23012" title="Daishan" label="Daishan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156638" start="23024" end="23031" title="Dachang" label="Dachang"/>
<link wikidata="Q42780" start="23034" end="23040" title="Ningbo" label="Ningbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371456" start="23042" end="23048" title="Luqiao District" label="Luqiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209298" start="23050" end="23057" title="Feidong" label="Feidong"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23062" end="23073" title="Shitangqiao" label="Shitangqiao"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23093" end="23098" title="Foluo" label="Foluo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189823" start="23100" end="23106" title="Haikou" label="Haikou"/>
<link wikidata="Q944615" start="23108" end="23116" title="Lingshui Li Autonomous County" label="Lingshui"/>
<link wikidata="Q319804" start="23118" end="23123" title="Sanya" label="Sanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q963782" start="23125" end="23132" title="Guiping" label="Guiping"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23134" end="23143" title="Jialaishi" label="Jialaishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q266014" start="23148" end="23156" title="Yongzhou" label="Lingling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172005" start="23292" end="23309" title="China Coast Guard" label="China Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440398" start="23407" end="23433" title="People&amp;#x27;s Armed Police" label="People&amp;#x27;s Armed Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099772" start="23638" end="23663" title="China Marine Surveillance" label="China Marine Surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531667" start="23671" end="23704" title="General Administration of Customs" label="General Administration of Customs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23720" end="23749" title="Maritime law enforcement agencies in China#Fisheries Law Enforcement Command" label="China Fishery Law Enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q125867348" start="23760" end="23776" title="maritime militia" label="maritime militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q331795" start="24034" end="24046" title="patrol craft" label="patrol craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q645629" start="24325" end="24335" title="Harbin Z-9" label="Harbin Z-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q658414" start="24355" end="24379" title="maritime patrol aircraft" label="maritime patrol aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584925" start="24393" end="24404" title="Harbin Y-12" label="Harbin Y-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="24557" end="24563" title="Hainan" label="Hainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187401" start="24714" end="24756" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Ground Force" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Ground Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q607832" start="24758" end="24767" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364097" start="24776" end="24788" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Rocket Force" label="Rocket Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186449" start="25063" end="25070" title="Type 07" label="Type 07"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379090" start="25197" end="25210" title="enlisted rank" label="enlisted rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="25297" end="25317" title="commissioned officer" label="commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q158950" start="25359" end="25383" title="non-commissioned officer" label="non-commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379090" start="25389" end="25407" title="Enlisted rank" label="enlisted personnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966145" start="25426" end="25439" title="Xiao Jinguang" label="Xiao Jinguang"/>
<link wikidata="Q699398" start="25472" end="25478" title="Ye Fei" label="Ye Fei"/>
<link wikidata="Q602876" start="25510" end="25521" title="Liu Huaqing" label="Liu Huaqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8299833" start="25553" end="25568" title="Zhang Lianzhong" label="Zhang Lianzhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380928" start="25602" end="25614" title="Shi Yunsheng" label="Shi Yunsheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q8314276" start="25645" end="25657" title="Zhang Dingfa" label="Zhang Dingfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q717014" start="25686" end="25696" title="Wu Shengli" label="Wu Shengli"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332903" start="25728" end="25740" title="Shen Jinlong" label="Shen Jinlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995154" start="25775" end="25783" title="Dong Jun" label="Dong Jun"/>
<link wikidata="Q85353319" start="25819" end="25831" title="Hu Zhongming" label="Hu Zhongming"/>
<link wikidata="Q127031" start="26169" end="26182" title="Taiwan Strait" label="Taiwan Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="26190" end="26205" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622314" start="26308" end="26323" title="blue water navy" label="blue water navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097982" start="26325" end="26341" title="Robert D. Kaplan" label="Robert D. Kaplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131630594" start="26367" end="26395" title="collapse of the Soviet Union" label="collapse of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q757554" start="26541" end="26548" title="nuclear submarine" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q331367" start="26549" end="26563" title="submarine base" label="submarine base"/>
<link wikidata="Q319804" start="26569" end="26574" title="Sanya" label="Sanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203377" start="26611" end="26629" title="Type 094 submarine" label="Type 094 submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="26650" end="26669" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27046" end="27056" title="Qian Lihua" label="Qian Lihua"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="27151" end="27168" title="aircraft carriers" label="aircraft carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q215664" start="27789" end="27796" title="Spratly Islands" label="Spratly"/>
<link wikidata="Q274388" start="27801" end="27808" title="Paracel Islands" label="Paracel"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="27847" end="27877" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q129200" start="28506" end="28526" title="Chinese aircraft carrier Liaoning" label="&amp;quot;Liaoning&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q115620" start="28644" end="28655" title="Shenyang J-15" label="J15 fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q24174815" start="28808" end="28833" title="Type 002 aircraft carrier" label="Type 002 aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q24174815" start="29017" end="29037" title="Type 002 aircraft carrier" label="&amp;quot;Shandong&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q425558" start="29267" end="29273" title="DF-21D" label="DF-21D"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="29325" end="29341" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q15729915" start="29477" end="29495" title="Type 055 destroyer" label="Type 055 destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q104791127" start="29517" end="29537" title="Chinese destroyer Nanchang (101)" label="&amp;quot;Nanchang&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q229770" start="29674" end="29697" title="Zumwalt-class destroyer" label="Zumwalt-class destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="29915" end="29922" title="US Navy" label="US Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139864" start="29936" end="29968" title="List of countries with warships" label="second largest navy in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="30048" end="30066" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914532" start="30105" end="30122" title="surface combatant" label="surface combatant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914532" start="30195" end="30207" title="surface ship" label="surface ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="30213" end="30222" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="30245" end="30263" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q643532" start="30842" end="30860" title="anti-ship missiles" label="anti-ship missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q902885" start="31314" end="31337" title="Spratly Islands dispute" label="Spratly Islands dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078001" start="31343" end="31362" title="territorial dispute" label="territorial dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q215664" start="31389" end="31404" title="Spratly Islands" label="Spratly Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="31440" end="31455" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q175767" start="31820" end="31827" title="Johnson South Reef Skirmish" label="clashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927337" start="31833" end="31851" title="Johnson South Reef" label="Johnson South Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100793" start="31957" end="31965" title="Chinese frigate Dongguan" label="Dongguan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="33042" end="33057" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940257" start="33189" end="33216" title="Carrier Strike Group Eleven" label="Carrier Strike Group Eleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q484950" start="33224" end="33242" title="U.S. Seventh Fleet" label="U.S. Seventh Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q192526" start="33281" end="33304" title="Senkaku Islands dispute" label="Senkaku Islands dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065592" start="33352" end="33371" title="Desert island" label="uninhabited islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q29460" start="33414" end="33429" title="Senkaku Islands" label="Senkaku Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q29460" start="33444" end="33461" title="Senkaku Islands" label="Tiaoyutai Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q55526" start="33499" end="33544" title="United States Civil Administration of the Ryukyu Islands" label="period of administration by the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q49969" start="34471" end="34487" title="Itsunori Onodera" label="Itsunori Onodera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878284" start="34523" end="34553" title="Missile lock-on" label="locked weapons-targeting radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299294" start="34634" end="34659" title="Type 053H3 frigate" label="Jiangwei II class frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q837282" start="34931" end="34946" title="North Sea Fleet" label="North Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q170322" start="34961" end="34968" title="Qingdao" label="Qingdao"/>
<link wikidata="Q356359" start="35487" end="35498" title="Indian Navy" label="Indian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q93318" start="36104" end="36107" title="Nautical mile" label="nmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q111677" start="36116" end="36121" title="Rizal, Palawan" label="Rizal"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="36170" end="36173" title="Exclusive economic zone" label="EEZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="36315" end="36320" title="Association of Southeast Asian Nations" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850" start="36342" end="36362" title="Phnom Penh, Cambodia" label="Phnom Penh, Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q214451" start="36684" end="36698" title="Piracy in Somalia" label="Somali pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087406" start="36732" end="36741" title="052C" label="Type 052C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866276" start="36757" end="36766" title="052B" label="Type 052B"/>
<link wikidata="Q23198555" start="37030" end="37072" title="Shared Awareness and Deconfliction (SHADE)" label="Shared Awareness and Deconfliction (SHADE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333" start="37296" end="37304" title="Zheng He" label="Zheng He"/>
<link wikidata="Q699127" start="37312" end="37323" title="Treasure voyages" label="expeditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q81545" start="37521" end="37542" title="2011 Libyan Civil War" label="2011 Libyan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37714" end="37728" title="South Yemen insurgency#2015" label="Yemen conflict"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37765" end="37820" title="Anti-piracy measures in Somalia#Vessels in operation" label="frigates carrying out anti-piracy operations in Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q380682" start="39758" end="39763" title="Aegis Combat System" label="Aegis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622819" start="40047" end="40071" title="Underwater firearm" label="underwater assault rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q296296" start="40148" end="40151" title="APS underwater rifle" label="APS"/>
<link wikidata="Q875724" start="40222" end="40229" title="railgun" label="railgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860651" start="40306" end="40336" title="Type 072III-class landing ship" label="Type 072III-class landing ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q18654288" start="40337" end="40360" title="Haiyang Shan" label="&amp;quot;Haiyangshan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="40762" end="40778" title="Aleutian islands" label="Aleutian islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q48359" start="40812" end="40830" title="Straits of Malacca" label="Straits of Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q15729915" start="41159" end="41167" title="Type 055 destroyer" label="Type 055"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866276" start="41250" end="41259" title="Type 052B destroyer" label="Type 052B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087406" start="41261" end="41270" title="Type 052C destroyer" label="Type 052C"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492255" start="41272" end="41281" title="Type 052D destroyer" label="Type 052D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147284" start="41286" end="41295" title="Type 051C destroyer" label="Type 051C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063228" start="41354" end="41382" title="Sovremenny class destroyer" label="&amp;quot;Sovremenny&amp;quot; class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185553" start="41467" end="41475" title="Type 093 submarine" label="Type 093"/>
<link wikidata="Q3679175" start="41477" end="41485" title="Type 095 submarine" label="Type 095"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203377" start="41487" end="41495" title="Type 094 submarine" label="Type 094"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860661" start="41497" end="41505" title="Type 096 submarine" label="Type 096"/>
<link wikidata="Q55520" start="41549" end="41565" title="Kilo class submarine" label="&amp;quot;Kilo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q130443882" start="41570" end="41586" title="Type 041 submarine" label="&amp;quot;Yuan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q129200" start="41616" end="41624" title="Chinese aircraft carrier Liaoning" label="Type 001"/>
<link wikidata="Q24174815" start="41626" end="41634" title="Type 002 aircraft carrier" label="Type 002"/>
<link wikidata="Q29654179" start="41639" end="41647" title="Type 003 aircraft carrier" label="Type 003"/>
<link wikidata="Q29647022" start="41675" end="41683" title="Type 075 landing helicopter dock" label="Type 075"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599585" start="41723" end="41731" title="Type 071 amphibious transport dock" label="Type 071"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864602" start="41884" end="41900" title="Type 052 destroyer" label="&amp;quot;Luhu&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299294" start="41902" end="41925" title="Type 053H3 frigate" label="&amp;quot;Jiangwei II&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q860225" start="41930" end="41950" title="Type 054A frigate" label="&amp;quot;Jiangkai&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260674" start="41972" end="41992" title="Type 056 corvette" label="&amp;quot;Jiangdao&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860640" start="42037" end="42056" title="Type 037-II class missile boat" label="&amp;quot;Houjian&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860640" start="42058" end="42076" title="Type 037-IG class missile boat" label="&amp;quot;Houxin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316407" start="42081" end="42099" title="Houbei class missile boat" label="&amp;quot;Houbei&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323715" start="42203" end="42219" title="Type 039 submarine" label="&amp;quot;Song&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q683570" start="42882" end="42909" title="ballistic missile submarine" label="ballistic missile submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203377" start="42915" end="42923" title="Type 094 submarine" label="Type 094"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185553" start="42932" end="42940" title="Type 093 submarine" label="Type 093"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="43211" end="43241" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641732" start="43709" end="43764" title="60th anniversary of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="60th anniversary of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073356" start="43770" end="43775" title="C-602" label="YJ-62"/>
<link wikidata="Q856042" start="44085" end="44092" title="CATOBAR" label="CATOBAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q580533" start="44145" end="44151" title="Gwadar" label="Gwadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693574" start="44346" end="44368" title="Chinese naval base in Djibouti" label="naval base in Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661746" start="44479" end="44491" title="arsenal ship" label="arsenal ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q66192369" start="44561" end="44604" title="People&amp;#x27;s Armed Forces Maritime Militia" label="People&amp;#x27;s Armed Forces Maritime Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q849062" start="44876" end="44910" title="Chinese aircraft carrier programme" label="Chinese aircraft carrier programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172005" start="44913" end="44930" title="China Coast Guard" label="China Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018771" start="44933" end="44953" title="Dalian Naval Academy" label="Dalian Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498108" start="44956" end="45011" title="List of ships of the People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy" label="List of ships of the People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28416022" start="45014" end="45053" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy Band" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628042" start="45056" end="45117" title="Political Commissar of the People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy" label="Political Commissar of the People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628025" start="45120" end="45182" title="Political Department of the People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy" label="Political Department of the People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Navy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24921" wikidata="Q436719" url="?curid=24921" title="Patrick Macnee">
<text>Daniel Patrick Macnee (6 February 1922 – 25 June 2015) was a British-American actor best known for his breakthrough role as secret agent John Steed in the television series &quot;The Avengers&quot; (1961–1969). Starting out as the assistant to David Keel (Ian Hendry), he became the lead when Hendry left after the first series, and was subsequently partnered with a succession of female assistants. He later reprised the role in &quot;The New Avengers&quot; (1976–1977).

Born in London as the eldest son of socialite Dorothea Macnee, Macnee served in the Royal Navy during the Second World War before starting his career as an actor in Canadian television. He appeared in numerous television series up until 2001, including the &quot;Twilight Zone&quot; episode &quot;Judgement Night&quot; (1959); &quot;Columbo&quot;; &quot;Magnum, P.I.&quot;; &quot;Hart to Hart&quot;; &quot;Murder, She Wrote&quot;; &quot;The Love Boat&quot;; and &quot;Frasier&quot;. In 1984, he was the subject of the British television series &quot;This Is Your Life&quot;.

Macnee also appeared in Oasis&#x27;s music video for &quot;Don&#x27;t Look Back in Anger&quot; (1996). He and &quot;Avengers&quot; co-star Honor Blackman had a UK Top 10 hit in 1990 when their 1964 song &quot;Kinky Boots&quot; received renewed interest from being played on BBC Radio One.

Macnee&#x27;s notable film roles include young Jacob Marley in &quot;Scrooge&quot; (1951), Sir Denis Eton-Hogg in &quot;This Is Spinal Tap&quot; (1984), and Sir Godfrey Tibbett in &quot;A View to a Kill&quot; (1985). He is one of the few actors to have played both Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson in different productions.

==Early life and career==
The elder of two sons, Daniel Patrick Macnee was born in Paddington, London, England, on 6 February 1922; to Daniel Macnee (1878–1952) and British socialite Dorothea Mabel Macnee (née Henry) (1896–1984). His father, who was a grandson of the Scottish artist Sir Daniel Macnee, trained race horses in Lambourn, and was known for his dress sense; he had served as an officer in the Yorkshire Dragoons in the First World War. His maternal grandmother was Frances Alice Hastings (1870–1945), who was the daughter of Vice-Admiral George Fowler Hastings and granddaughter of The 12th Earl of Huntingdon. His younger brother James, known as Jimmy, was born five years later. Macnee saw himself as a Scot.

Macnee&#x27;s parents separated after his mother came out as a lesbian. His father later moved to India, and his mother began to live with her wealthy partner, Evelyn Spottiswoode, whose money came from the Dewar&#x27;s whisky business. Macnee referred to her in his autobiography as &quot;Uncle Evelyn&quot;, and she helped pay for his schooling. He was educated at Summer Fields School and Eton College, where he was a member of the Officer Training Corps and was one of the guard of honour for King George V at St George&#x27;s Chapel in 1936. He was later expelled from Eton for selling pornography and being a bookmaker for his fellow students.

Macnee studied acting at the Webber Douglas Academy of Dramatic Art, but shortly before he was to perform in his first West End leading role, which would have had him acting alongside Vivien Leigh, he was called up for the Royal Navy. He joined as an ordinary seaman in October 1942 and was commissioned a sub-lieutenant in June 1943, becoming a navigator on Motor Torpedo Boats in the English Channel and North Sea. Reassigned as first lieutenant on a second MTB, Macnee caught bronchitis just before D-Day; while he was recuperating in hospital, his boat and crew were lost in action. Two of the crew received the Distinguished Service Medal. He left the Royal Navy in 1946 as a lieutenant.

Macnee nurtured his acting career in Canada early on, but he also appeared as an uncredited extra in the British films &quot;Pygmalion&quot; (1938), &quot;The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp&quot; (1943) and Laurence Olivier&#x27;s &quot;Hamlet&quot; (1948), as well as some live TV dramas for the BBC, before graduating to credited roles in such films as &quot;Scrooge&quot; (US: &quot;A Christmas Carol&quot;, 1951), as young Jacob Marley; the Gene Kelly vehicle &quot;Les Girls&quot; (1957), as an Old Bailey barrister; and the war film &quot;The Battle of the River Plate&quot; (1956). Between these occasional movie roles, Macnee spent the better part of the 1950s working in dozens of small roles in American and Canadian television and theatre, including an appearance in an episode of &quot;One Step Beyond&quot; (&quot;Night of April 14th&quot;) and &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; (&quot;Judgment Night&quot;) in 1959. Disappointed in his limited career development, in the late 1950s Macnee was daily smoking 80 cigarettes and drinking a bottle of whisky.

In the early 1960&#x27;s before his career-making role in &quot;The Avengers&quot;, Macnee took a break from acting and served as one of the London-based producers for the classic documentary series &quot;The Valiant Years&quot;, based on the Second World War memoirs of Winston Churchill.

==&quot;The Avengers&quot;==

While working in London on the Churchill series, Macnee was offered the role in &quot;The Avengers&quot; (1961–69), (originally intended to be known as &quot;Jonathan Steed&quot;), for which he became best known. The series was conceived as a vehicle for Ian Hendry, who played the lead role of Dr. David Keel in a sequel to an earlier series, &quot;Police Surgeon&quot; (1960), while John Steed was his assistant. Macnee, though, became the lead after Hendry&#x27;s departure at the end of the first series. Macnee played opposite a succession of glamorous female partners: Honor Blackman, Diana Rigg and Linda Thorson. Of the 161 completed episodes, Macnee appeared in all but two, both from the first series.

Although Macnee evolved in the role as the series progressed, the key elements of Steed&#x27;s persona and appearance were present from the beginning: the slightly mysterious demeanour and, increasingly, the light, suave, flirting tone with ladies (and always with his female partners). Finally, from the episodes with Blackman onwards, the trademark bowler hat and umbrella completed the image. Although it was traditionally associated with London &quot;city gents&quot;, the ensemble of suit, umbrella and bowler had developed in the post-war years as mufti for ex-servicemen attending Armistice Day ceremonies. Steed&#x27;s sartorial style may also have been drawn from Macnee&#x27;s father. Macnee, alongside designer Pierre Cardin, adapted the look into a style all his own, and he went on to design several outfits himself for Steed based on the same basic theme. Steed was also the central character of &quot;The New Avengers&quot; (1976–77), in which he was teamed with agents named Purdey (Joanna Lumley) and Mike Gambit (Gareth Hunt).

Macnee insisted on, and was proud of, almost never carrying a gun in the original series; when asked why, he explained, &quot;I&#x27;d just come out of a World War in which I&#x27;d seen most of my friends blown to bits.&quot; Lumley later said she did most of the gun-slinging in &quot;The New Avengers&quot; for the same reason.

When asked in June 1982 which &quot;Avengers&quot; female lead was his favourite, Macnee declined to give a specific answer. &quot;Well, I&#x27;d rather not say. To do so would invite trouble,&quot; he told &quot;TV Week&quot; magazine. Macnee did provide his evaluation of the female leads. Of Honor Blackman he said, &quot;She was wonderful, presenting the concept of a strong-willed, independent and liberated woman just as that sort of woman was beginning to emerge in society.&quot; Diana Rigg was &quot;One of the world&#x27;s great actresses. A superb comedienne. I&#x27;m convinced that one day she&#x27;ll be Dame Diana&quot; (his prediction came true in 1994). Linda Thorson was &quot;one of the sexiest women alive&quot; while Joanna Lumley was &quot;superb in the role of Purdey. An actress who is only now realising her immense potential.&quot;

Macnee co-wrote two original novels based upon &quot;The Avengers&quot; during the 1960s, titled &quot;Dead Duck&quot; and &quot;Deadline&quot;. He hosted the documentary &quot;The Avengers: The Journey Back&quot; (1998), directed by Clyde Lucas.

For the critically lambasted film version of &quot;The Avengers&quot; (1998), he lent his voice in a cameo as Invisible Jones. The character John Steed was taken over by Ralph Fiennes.

==Later roles==

Macnee&#x27;s other significant roles included playing Sir Godfrey Tibbett opposite Roger Moore in the James Bond film &quot;A View to a Kill&quot; (1985); as Major Crossley in &quot;The Sea Wolves&quot; (again with Moore); guest roles in &quot;Encounter&quot;; &quot;Alias Smith and Jones&quot; (for Glen A. Larson); &quot;Magnum, P.I.&quot;; &quot;Hart to Hart&quot;; &quot;Murder, She Wrote&quot; and &quot;The Love Boat&quot;. Although his best known role was heroic, many of his television appearances were as villains; among them were his roles of both the demonic Count Iblis and his provision of the character voice of the Cylons&#x27; Imperious Leader in &quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot;, also for Glen A. Larson, for which he also supplied the show&#x27;s introductory voiceover. He also presented the American paranormal series &quot;Mysteries, Magic and Miracles&quot;. Macnee appeared on Broadway as the star of Anthony Shaffer&#x27;s mystery &quot;Sleuth&quot; in 1972–73. 

Macnee reunited with Diana Rigg in her short-lived sitcom &quot;Diana&quot; (1973) in a single episode. Other television appearances include a guest appearance on &quot;Columbo&quot; in the episode &quot;Troubled Waters&quot; (1975); and playing Major Vickers in &quot;For the Term of his Natural Life&quot; (1983). He had recurring roles in the crime series &quot;Gavilan&quot; with Robert Urich and in the short-lived satire on big business, &quot;Empire&quot; (1984), as Dr. Calvin Cromwell. Macnee was known for narrating various James Bond Documentaries on Special Edition DVD. He also narrated the documentary &quot;Ian Fleming: 007&#x27;s Creator&quot; (2000).

Macnee featured prominently in two editions of the long-running British television series &quot;This Is Your Life&quot;: in 1978, when he and host Eamonn Andrews, both dressed as Steed, surprised Ian Hendry, and in 1984 when he was the edition&#x27;s unsuspecting subject. Therefore, he also voiced the narrator in the Audrey Wood VHS adaptation of &quot;The Little Mouse, the Red Ripe Strawberry, and the Big Hungry Bear&quot;.

Macnee also appeared in several cult films: in &quot;The Howling&quot; (1981), as Dr. George Waggner (named whimsically after the director of &quot;The Wolf Man&quot;, 1941) and as Sir Denis Eton-Hogg in the rockumentary comedy &quot;This Is Spinal Tap&quot; (1984). He played Dr. Stark in &quot;The Creature Wasn&#x27;t Nice&quot; (1981), also called &quot;Spaceship&quot; and &quot;Naked Space&quot;. Macnee played the role of actor David Mathews in the television movie &quot;Rehearsal for Murder&quot; (1982), which starred Robert Preston and Lynn Redgrave. The movie was from a script written by &quot;Columbo&quot; co-creators Richard Levinson and William Link. He replaced Leo G. Carroll&#x27;s character as the head of U.N.C.L.E. as Sir John Raleigh in &quot;Return of the Man from U.N.C.L.E.&quot; (1983), produced by Michael Sloan. He was featured in the science fiction television movie &quot;Super Force&quot; (1990) as E. B. Hungerford (the subsequent series featured Macnee&#x27;s voiceover as part of a computer simulation of his character), as a supporting character in the parody film &quot;Lobster Man from Mars&quot; (1989) as Professor Plocostomos and in the television film &quot;The Return of Sam McCloud&quot; (1989) as Tom Jamison. He made an appearance in &quot;Frasier&quot; (2001), and several episodes of the American sci-fi series &quot;Nightman&quot; as Dr. Walton, a psychiatrist who advised the main character. Macnee appeared in two episodes of the series &quot;Kung Fu: The Legend Continues&quot; (1993–94) and was a retired agent in a handful of instalments of &quot;Spy Game&quot; (1997–98).

Macnee made numerous TV commercials including one around 1990 for Swiss Chalet, the Canadian restaurant chain, and a year or so before, a commercial for the Sterling Motor Car Company. Over the James Bond theme, the car duels with a motorcycle assailant at high speed through mountainous territory, ultimately eludes the foe, and reaches its destination. Macnee steps out of the car and greets viewers with a smile, saying &quot;I suppose you were expecting someone else&quot;. Macnee was the narrator for several &quot;behind-the-scenes&quot; featurettes for the James Bond series of DVDs and recorded numerous audio books, including the releases of many novels by Jack Higgins. He also recorded the children&#x27;s books &quot;The Musical Life of Gustav Mole&quot; and its sequel, &quot;The Lost Music (Gustav Mole&#x27;s War on Noise),&quot; both written by Michael Twinn.

Macnee featured in two pop videos: as Steed in original &quot;Avengers&quot; footage in The Pretenders&#x27; video for their song &quot;Don&#x27;t Get Me Wrong&quot; (1986) and in the promotion for Oasis&#x27; video &quot;Don&#x27;t Look Back in Anger&quot; (1996), as the band&#x27;s driver, a role similar to that which he played in the James Bond film &quot;A View to a Kill&quot; (1985). In 1990, his recording with his &quot;Avengers&quot; co-star Honor Blackman, called &quot;Kinky Boots&quot; (1964), reached the UK Singles Chart after being played on Simon Mayo&#x27;s BBC Radio One breakfast show.

===Sherlock Holmes and Doctor Watson===
Macnee appeared in &quot;Magnum, P.I.&quot; (1984) as a retired British agent who suffered from the delusion that he was Sherlock Holmes, in a season four episode titled &quot;Holmes Is Where the Heart Is&quot;. He played both Holmes and Dr. Watson on several occasions. He played Watson three times: once alongside Roger Moore&#x27;s Sherlock Holmes in the television film &quot;Sherlock Holmes in New York&quot; (1976), and twice with Christopher Lee, first in &quot;Sherlock Holmes and the Leading Lady&quot; (1991), and then in &quot;Incident at Victoria Falls&quot; (1992). He played Holmes in another television film &quot;The Hound of London&quot; (1993), along with the Canadian television film &quot;Sherlock Holmes: The Case of the Temporal Nexus&quot; (1996). He is thus one of only a small number of actors to have portrayed both Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson on screen.

==Personal life==
Macnee married his first wife Barbara Douglas (1921–2012) in 1942. They had two children, Rupert and Jenny, and a grandson, Christopher (&quot;Kit&quot;). After they were divorced in 1956, his second marriage (1965–1969) was to actress Katherine Woodville. From 1973 to 1991, Macnee owned a home in the Deep Well neighborhood of Palm Springs, California. His third marriage was to Baba Majos de Nagyzsenye, daughter of opera singer Ella Némethy. It lasted from 1988 until her death in 2007. Macnee became a United States citizen in 1959. He dictated his autobiography, which he titled &quot;Blind in One Ear: The Avenger Returns&quot; (1988), to Marie Cameron. Later in life, Macnee was an enthusiastic naturist.

==Death==
On 25 June 2015, Macnee died at Rancho Mirage, California, his home for the previous four decades, at the age of 93. Tributes were paid by co-stars Roger Moore and Nicola Bryant, and by fellow &quot;Avengers&quot; leads Diana Rigg and Linda Thorson.

==Filmography==
:For credit listings reference

===Film===
===Television===
=== Theatre ===
===Documentaries===
* &quot;Real Ghost Stories: The Dead and the Restless&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Real Ghost Stories: The Wild West of the Dead&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Real Ghost Stories: Spirits, Graveyards &amp; Ghostbusters&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Real Ghost Stories: The Poltergeists&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Real Ghost Stories: The London Underworld &amp; Beyond&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Unexplained Mysteries: Nostradamus&quot; (1999 Front Row Entertainment, Inc.)
* &quot;Unexplained Mysteries: Out of Body Experience&quot; (1999 Front Row Entertainment, Inc.)
* &quot;Unexplained Mysteries: Haunted Historic Sites&quot; (1999 Front Row Entertainment, Inc.)
* &quot;Unexplained Mysteries: Miracle Healings&quot; (2000 Front Row Entertainment, Inc.)
* &quot;Unexplained Mysteries: World of Satanism&quot; (2000 Front Row Entertainment, Inc.)
* &quot;Unexplained Mysteries: Jack The Ripper&quot; (2001 Front Row Entertainment, Inc.)
* &quot;Unexplained Mysteries: Cryonics&quot; (2001 Front Row Entertainment, Inc.)
* &quot;Ian Fleming: 007&#x27;s Creator&quot; (2000)
* &quot;The Spirit of Diana&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Unlocking DaVinci&#x27;s Code&quot; (2004)
* &quot;The Witnessing of Angels&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Real Ghost Stories: Hollywood Ghosts&quot; (2010)
;Notes
===Music videos===
* The Pretenders – &quot;Don&#x27;t Get Me Wrong&quot; (1986) (Steed in original &quot;Avengers&quot; footage)
* Oasis – &quot;Don&#x27;t Look Back in Anger&quot; (1996)

==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* Avengers: The Journey Back
* Patrick Macnee at TV.com 
* Patrick Macnee on This Is Your Life</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q436719" start="0" end="21" title="Patrick Macnee" label="Daniel Patrick Macnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959682" start="103" end="120" title="breakthrough role" label="breakthrough role"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809628" start="137" end="147" title="John Steed" label="John Steed"/>
<link wikidata="Q113700" start="179" end="191" title="The Avengers (TV series)" label="The Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287512" start="256" end="266" title="Ian Hendry" label="Ian Hendry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722688" start="436" end="452" title="The New Avengers (TV series)" label="The New Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q27956871" start="519" end="534" title="Dorothea Macnee" label="Dorothea Macnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q125323663" start="557" end="595" title="Royal Navy during the Second World War" label="Royal Navy during the Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="736" end="749" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629777" start="770" end="785" title="Judgment Night (The Twilight Zone)" label="Judgement Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q371207" start="806" end="813" title="Columbo" label="Columbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q254689" start="827" end="839" title="Magnum, P.I." label="Magnum, P.I."/>
<link wikidata="Q1541739" start="853" end="865" title="Hart to Hart" label="Hart to Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q833322" start="879" end="896" title="Murder, She Wrote" label="Murder, She Wrote"/>
<link wikidata="Q181998" start="910" end="923" title="The Love Boat" label="The Love Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q209282" start="941" end="948" title="Frasier" label="Frasier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249607" start="1023" end="1040" title="This Is Your Life (British TV series)" label="This Is Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q382890" start="1073" end="1078" title="Oasis (band)" label="Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070349" start="1108" end="1137" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Look Back in Anger" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Look Back in Anger"/>
<link wikidata="Q232840" start="1188" end="1202" title="Honor Blackman" label="Honor Blackman"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="1209" end="1218" title="UK Top 10" label="UK Top 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413944" start="1258" end="1269" title="Kinky Boots (song)" label="Kinky Boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="1323" end="1336" title="BBC Radio One" label="BBC Radio One"/>
<link wikidata="Q657403" start="1386" end="1398" title="Jacob Marley" label="Jacob Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058952" start="1408" end="1415" title="Scrooge (1951 film)" label="Scrooge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810384" start="1459" end="1477" title="This Is Spinal Tap" label="This Is Spinal Tap"/>
<link wikidata="Q332368" start="1525" end="1541" title="A View to a Kill" label="A View to a Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="1604" end="1619" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q187349" start="1624" end="1634" title="Dr. Watson" label="Dr. Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q124230" start="1745" end="1755" title="Paddington" label="Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q27956871" start="1845" end="1866" title="Dorothea Macnee" label="Dorothea Mabel Macnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161629" start="1946" end="1963" title="Daniel Macnee" label="Sir Daniel Macnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273355" start="1988" end="1996" title="Lambourn" label="Lambourn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270053" start="2068" end="2086" title="Yorkshire Dragoons" label="Yorkshire Dragoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2094" end="2109" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902790" start="2200" end="2212" title="Vice-Admiral (Royal Navy)" label="Vice-Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539395" start="2213" end="2235" title="George Fowler Hastings" label="George Fowler Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q16230372" start="2257" end="2284" title="Hans Francis Hastings, 12th Earl of Huntingdon" label="The 12th Earl of Huntingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208099" start="2436" end="2444" title="coming out" label="came out"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076217" start="2594" end="2606" title="Dewar&amp;#x27;s" label="Dewar&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637318" start="2754" end="2774" title="Summer Fields School" label="Summer Fields School"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="2779" end="2791" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q10607900" start="2822" end="2844" title="Officer Training Corps" label="Officer Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060409" start="2864" end="2879" title="guard of honour" label="guard of honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="2884" end="2897" title="King George V" label="King George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449634" start="2901" end="2924" title="St George&amp;#x27;s Chapel" label="St George&amp;#x27;s Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q664702" start="3002" end="3011" title="bookmaker" label="bookmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q927627" start="3067" end="3105" title="Webber Douglas Academy of Dramatic Art" label="Webber Douglas Academy of Dramatic Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q129429" start="3222" end="3234" title="Vivien Leigh" label="Vivien Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="3261" end="3271" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3289" end="3304" title="Ordinary seaman (rating)#United Kingdom" label="ordinary seaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q10918728" start="3344" end="3358" title="sub-lieutenant" label="sub-lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630695" start="3397" end="3416" title="Motor Torpedo Boats" label="Motor Torpedo Boats"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="3424" end="3439" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="3444" end="3453" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q173022" start="3517" end="3527" title="bronchitis" label="bronchitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="3540" end="3545" title="Normandy landings" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483675" start="3654" end="3681" title="Distinguished Service Medal (United Kingdom)" label="Distinguished Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196539" start="3857" end="3866" title="Pygmalion (1938 film)" label="Pygmalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319302" start="3887" end="3922" title="The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp" label="The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="3940" end="3956" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q27178" start="3970" end="3976" title="Hamlet (1948 film)" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058952" start="4094" end="4101" title="Scrooge (1951 film)" label="Scrooge"/>
<link wikidata="Q73089" start="4178" end="4188" title="Gene Kelly" label="Gene Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q942086" start="4203" end="4212" title="Les Girls" label="Les Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194829" start="4233" end="4243" title="Old Bailey" label="Old Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q492861" start="4278" end="4307" title="The Battle of the River Plate (film)" label="The Battle of the River Plate"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4531" end="4546" title="Alcoa Presents: One Step Beyond" label="One Step Beyond"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="4597" end="4614" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629777" start="4628" end="4642" title="Judgment Night (The Twilight Zone)" label="Judgment Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q113700" start="4862" end="4874" title="The Avengers (TV series)" label="The Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771926" start="5003" end="5020" title="The Valiant Years" label="The Valiant Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="5069" end="5086" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q113700" start="5205" end="5217" title="The Avengers (TV series)" label="The Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287512" start="5374" end="5384" title="Ian Hendry" label="Ian Hendry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907268" start="5469" end="5483" title="Police Surgeon (UK TV series)" label="Police Surgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809628" start="5504" end="5514" title="John Steed" label="John Steed"/>
<link wikidata="Q232840" start="5694" end="5708" title="Honor Blackman" label="Honor Blackman"/>
<link wikidata="Q232876" start="5710" end="5720" title="Diana Rigg" label="Diana Rigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q289268" start="5725" end="5738" title="Linda Thorson" label="Linda Thorson"/>
<link wikidata="Q650570" start="6183" end="6193" title="bowler hat" label="bowler hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201472" start="6368" end="6376" title="post-war" label="post-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q10310064" start="6386" end="6391" title="mufti (dress)" label="mufti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597183" start="6420" end="6433" title="Armistice Day" label="Armistice Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q299211" start="6554" end="6567" title="Pierre Cardin" label="Pierre Cardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722688" start="6748" end="6764" title="The New Avengers (TV series)" label="The New Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q254886" start="6831" end="6844" title="Joanna Lumley" label="Joanna Lumley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494195" start="6863" end="6874" title="Gareth Hunt" label="Gareth Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672446" start="7423" end="7430" title="TV Week" label="TV Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q494985" start="8368" end="8380" title="The Avengers (1998 film)" label="The Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q28493" start="8487" end="8500" title="Ralph Fiennes" label="Ralph Fiennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q134333" start="8604" end="8615" title="Roger Moore" label="Roger Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q151472" start="8623" end="8633" title="James Bond (film series)" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q332368" start="8645" end="8661" title="A View to a Kill" label="A View to a Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q672968" start="8703" end="8717" title="The Sea Wolves" label="The Sea Wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532061" start="8765" end="8774" title="Encounter (1958 TV series)" label="Encounter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095958" start="8788" end="8809" title="Alias Smith and Jones" label="Alias Smith and Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q604524" start="8821" end="8835" title="Glen A. Larson" label="Glen A. Larson"/>
<link wikidata="Q254689" start="8844" end="8856" title="Magnum, P.I." label="Magnum, P.I."/>
<link wikidata="Q1541739" start="8870" end="8882" title="Hart to Hart" label="Hart to Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q833322" start="8896" end="8913" title="Murder, She Wrote" label="Murder, She Wrote"/>
<link wikidata="Q181998" start="8930" end="8943" title="The Love Boat" label="The Love Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367132" start="9190" end="9210" title="Battlestar Galactica (1978 TV series)" label="Battlestar Galactica"/>
<link wikidata="Q332102" start="9341" end="9351" title="paranormal" label="paranormal"/>
<link wikidata="Q573997" start="9445" end="9460" title="Anthony Shaffer (writer)" label="Anthony Shaffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540177" start="9482" end="9488" title="Sleuth (play)" label="Sleuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q232876" start="9530" end="9540" title="Diana Rigg" label="Diana Rigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271072" start="9573" end="9578" title="Diana (U.S. TV series)" label="Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q371207" start="9678" end="9685" title="Columbo" label="Columbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467145" start="9778" end="9810" title="For the Term of His Natural Life (miniseries)" label="For the Term of his Natural Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q253090" start="9893" end="9905" title="Robert Urich" label="Robert Urich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249607" start="10274" end="10291" title="This Is Your Life (British TV series)" label="This Is Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778021" start="10325" end="10339" title="Eamonn Andrews" label="Eamonn Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287512" start="10374" end="10384" title="Ian Hendry" label="Ian Hendry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820195" start="10497" end="10508" title="Audrey Wood" label="Audrey Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="10640" end="10649" title="cult film" label="cult film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170554" start="10661" end="10672" title="The Howling (film)" label="The Howling"/>
<link wikidata="Q431873" start="10756" end="10768" title="The Wolf Man (1941 film)" label="The Wolf Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810384" start="10842" end="10860" title="This Is Spinal Tap" label="This Is Spinal Tap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455791" start="10904" end="10933" title="The Creature Wasn&amp;#x27;t Nice" label="The Creature Wasn&amp;#x27;t Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111523" start="11087" end="11107" title="Rehearsal for Murder" label="Rehearsal for Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q451811" start="11136" end="11150" title="Robert Preston (actor)" label="Robert Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q156552" start="11155" end="11168" title="Lynn Redgrave" label="Lynn Redgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q919192" start="11288" end="11302" title="Leo G. Carroll" label="Leo G. Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760454" start="11375" end="11408" title="Return of the Man from U.N.C.L.E." label="Return of the Man from U.N.C.L.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q3504185" start="11512" end="11523" title="Super Force" label="Super Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961913" start="11716" end="11737" title="Lobster Man from Mars" label="Lobster Man from Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q209282" start="11895" end="11902" title="Frasier" label="Frasier"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12103" end="12132" title="Kung Fu: The Legend Continues" label="Kung Fu: The Legend Continues"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178241" start="12210" end="12218" title="Spy Game (TV series)" label="Spy Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372909" start="12303" end="12315" title="Swiss Chalet" label="Swiss Chalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611354" start="12394" end="12420" title="Sterling (marque)" label="Sterling Motor Car Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q433708" start="12903" end="12915" title="Jack Higgins" label="Jack Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q667389" start="13202" end="13216" title="Pretenders (band)" label="The Pretenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242256" start="13250" end="13273" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Get Me Wrong" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Get Me Wrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q382890" start="13312" end="13317" title="Oasis (band)" label="Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070349" start="13336" end="13365" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Look Back in Anger" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Look Back in Anger"/>
<link wikidata="Q332368" start="13475" end="13491" title="A View to a Kill" label="A View to a Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q232840" start="13567" end="13581" title="Honor Blackman" label="Honor Blackman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413944" start="13596" end="13607" title="Kinky Boots (song)" label="Kinky Boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="13634" end="13650" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q382557" start="13673" end="13683" title="Simon Mayo" label="Simon Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="13691" end="13704" title="BBC Radio One" label="BBC Radio One"/>
<link wikidata="Q254689" start="13787" end="13799" title="Magnum, P.I." label="Magnum, P.I."/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="13883" end="13898" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q187349" start="14000" end="14010" title="Dr. Watson" label="Dr. Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q134333" start="14078" end="14089" title="Roger Moore" label="Roger Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q201913" start="14142" end="14169" title="Sherlock Holmes in New York" label="Sherlock Holmes in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q180338" start="14199" end="14214" title="Christopher Lee" label="Christopher Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481952" start="14231" end="14267" title="Sherlock Holmes and the Leading Lady" label="Sherlock Holmes and the Leading Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380266" start="14300" end="14326" title="Incident at Victoria Falls" label="Incident at Victoria Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205732" start="14391" end="14410" title="The Hound of London" label="The Hound of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376578" start="14901" end="14920" title="Katherine Woodville (actress)" label="Katherine Woodville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14994" end="15018" title="Palm Springs, California#Neighborhoods" label="Palm Springs, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q20684958" start="15097" end="15109" title="Ella Némethy" label="Ella Némethy"/>
<link wikidata="Q152311" start="15368" end="15376" title="Naturism" label="naturist"/>
<link wikidata="Q134333" start="15537" end="15548" title="Roger Moore" label="Roger Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028968" start="15553" end="15566" title="Nicola Bryant" label="Nicola Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q232876" start="15609" end="15619" title="Diana Rigg" label="Diana Rigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q289268" start="15624" end="15637" title="Linda Thorson" label="Linda Thorson"/>
<link wikidata="Q667389" start="17013" end="17027" title="Pretenders (band)" label="The Pretenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242256" start="17036" end="17059" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Get Me Wrong" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Get Me Wrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q382890" start="17124" end="17129" title="Oasis (band)" label="Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070349" start="17138" end="17167" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Look Back in Anger" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Look Back in Anger"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24922" wikidata="Q16389880" url="?curid=24922" title="List of Polish proverbs">
<text></text><links>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24927" wikidata="Q956501" url="?curid=24927" title="Pembroke College, Cambridge">
<text>Pembroke College (officially &quot;The Master, Fellows and Scholars of the College or Hall of Valence-Mary&quot;) is a constituent college of the University of Cambridge, England. The college is the third-oldest college of the university and has over 700 students and fellows. It is one of the university&#x27;s larger colleges, with buildings from almost every century since its founding, as well as extensive gardens. Its members are termed &quot;Valencians&quot;. The college&#x27;s current master is Chris Smith, Baron Smith of Finsbury.

Pembroke has a level of academic performance among the highest of all the Cambridge colleges; in 2013, 2014, 2016, and 2018 Pembroke was placed second in the Tompkins Table. Pembroke contains the first chapel designed by Sir Christopher Wren and is one of only six Cambridge colleges to have educated a British prime minister, in Pembroke&#x27;s case William Pitt the Younger. The college library, with a Victorian neo-gothic clock tower, has an original copy of the first encyclopaedia to contain printed diagrams.

==History==

Marie de St Pol, Countess of Pembroke (1303–1377), a member of the de Châtillon family of France, founded Pembroke College, Cambridge. On Christmas Eve 1347, Edward III granted Marie de St Pol, widow of the Earl of Pembroke, the licence for the foundation of a new educational establishment in the young university at Cambridge. The &quot;Hall of Valence Mary&quot; (&quot;Custos &amp; Scolares Aule Valence Marie in Cantebrigg&#x27;&quot;), as it was originally known, was thus founded to house a body of students and fellows. The statutes were notable in that they both gave preference to students born in France who had already studied elsewhere in England, and that they required students to report fellow students if they indulged in excessive drinking or visited disreputable houses.

The college was later renamed Pembroke Hall, and finally became Pembroke College in 1856.

Marie was closely involved with College affairs in the 30 years until her death and burial at Denny Abbey, to the north of Cambridge, in 1377. She seems to have been something of a disciplinarian: the original Foundation documents had strict penalties for drunkenness and lechery, required that all students&#x27; debts were settled within two weeks of the end of term, and gave strict limits on numbers at graduation parties.

In 2015, the college received a bequest of £34 million from the estate of American inventor and Pembroke alumnus Ray Dolby, thought to be the largest single donation to a college in the history of Cambridge University.

==Buildings==

===Old Court===

The first buildings comprised a single court (now called Old Court) containing all the component parts of a college – chapel, hall, kitchen and buttery, master&#x27;s lodgings, students&#x27; rooms – and the statutes provided for a manciple, a cook, a barber and a laundress. Both the founding of the college and the building of the city&#x27;s first college Chapel (1355) required the grant of a papal bull.

The original court was the university&#x27;s smallest at only by , but was enlarged to its current size in the nineteenth century by demolishing the south range.

The college&#x27;s gatehouse is the oldest in Cambridge.

===Chapel===
The original Chapel now forms the Old Library and has a striking seventeenth-century plaster ceiling, designed by Henry Doogood, showing birds flying overhead. Around the Civil War, one of Pembroke&#x27;s fellows and Chaplain to the future Charles I, Matthew Wren, was imprisoned by Oliver Cromwell. On his release after eighteen years, he fulfilled a promise by hiring his nephew Christopher Wren to build a great Chapel in his former college. The resulting Chapel was consecrated on St Matthew&#x27;s Day, 1665, and the eastern end was extended by George Gilbert Scott in 1880, when it was consecrated on the Feast of the Annunciation.

===Expansion===
An increase in membership over the last 150 years saw a corresponding increase in building activity. The Hall was rebuilt in 1875–1876 to designs by Alfred Waterhouse after he had declared the medieval Hall unsafe. As well as the Hall, Waterhouse designed a new range of rooms, Red Buildings (1871–1872), in French Renaissance style, designed a new Master&#x27;s Lodge on the site of Paschal Yard (1873, later to become N staircase), pulled down the old Lodge and the south range of Old Court to open a vista to the chapel, and finally designed a new Library (1877–1878) in the continental Gothic style. The construction of the new library was undertaken by Rattee and Kett.

Waterhouse was dismissed as architect in 1878 and succeeded by George Gilbert Scott, who, after extending the chapel, provided additional accommodation with the construction of New Court in 1881, with letters on a series of shields along the string course above the first floor spelling out the text from Psalm 127:1, (&quot;Except the Lord build the house, their labour is but vain that build it&quot;).

Building work continued into the 20th century with W. D. Caröe as architect. He added Pitt Building (M staircase) between Ivy Court and Waterhouse&#x27;s Lodge, and extended New Court with the construction of O staircase on the other side of the Lodge. He linked his two buildings with an arched stone screen, Caröe Bridge, along Pembroke Street in a late Baroque style, the principal function of which was to act as a bridge by which undergraduates might cross the Master&#x27;s forecourt at first-floor level from Pitt Building to New Court without leaving the college or trespassing in what was then the Fellows&#x27; Garden.

In 1926, as the Fellows had become increasingly disenchanted with Waterhouse&#x27;s Hall, Maurice Webb was brought in to remove the open roof, put in a flat ceiling and add two storeys of sets above. The wall between the Hall and the Fellows&#x27; Parlour was taken down, and the latter made into a High Table dais. A new Senior Parlour was then created on the ground floor of Hitcham Building. The remodelling work was completed in 1949 when Murray Easton replaced the Gothic tracery of the windows with a simpler design in the style of the medieval Hall.
In 1933 Maurice Webb built a new Master&#x27;s Lodge in the south-east corner of the College gardens, on land acquired from Peterhouse in 1861. Following the war, further accommodation was created with the construction in 1957 of Orchard Building, so called because it stands on part of the Foundress&#x27;s orchard. Finally, in a move to accommodate the majority of junior members on the College site rather than in hostels in the town, in the 1990s Eric Parry designed a new range of buildings on the site of the Master&#x27;s Lodge, with a new Lodge at the west end. &quot;Foundress Court&quot; was opened in 1997 in celebration of the college&#x27;s 650th Anniversary. In 2001 the Library was extended to the east and modified internally.

In 2017, Pembroke College launched a new campaign of extension called the &quot;Time and The Place&quot; (or the Mill Lane project), on the other side of Trumpington Street. The project is to enlarge the size of the college by a third, with new social spaces, rooms and offices.

===Gardens===

Pembroke&#x27;s enclosed grounds include garden areas. Highlights include &quot;The Orchard&quot; (a patch of semi-wild ground in the centre of the college), an impressive row of Plane Trees and a bowling green, re-turfed in 1996, which is reputed to be among the oldest in continual use in Europe.

==Gallery==
==Coat of arms==

The arms of Pembroke College were officially recorded in 1684. The formal blazon combines the arms of De Valence (bars), dimidiated with the arms of St. Pol (vair). It is described as :
:&quot;Barry of ten argent and azure, an orle of five martlets gules dimidiated with paly vair and gules, on a chief Or a label of five points throughout azure.&quot;

== Traditions ==
Pembroke holds Formal Hall 4 evenings a week depending on their qualifications: a separate Hall is held for BA students. Students of the college must wear gowns and arrive on time for Latin Grace, which starts the dinner. Like many Cambridge colleges, Pembroke also has an annual May Ball.

According to popular legends, Pembroke is inhabited by ghosts occupying the Ivy Court.

== Student life ==

Pembroke College has both graduate and undergraduate students, termed Valencians, after the college&#x27;s original name, and its recreational rooms named as &quot;parlours&quot; rather than the more standard &quot;combination room&quot;. The undergraduate student body is represented by the Junior Parlour Committee (JPC). The graduate community is represented by the Graduate Parlour Committee (GPC). In March 2016, the Junior Parlour Committee was featured in national newspapers after it cancelled the theme of an &quot;Around The World in 80 Days&quot; dance party.

There are many sports and societies organised by members of the college. Amongst the most established are Pembroke College Boat Club and the Pembroke Players, the college&#x27;s dramatic society which has been made famous by alumni including Peter Cook, Eric Idle, Tim Brooke-Taylor, Clive James and Bill Oddie, and is now in its 67th year. Pembroke College Association Football Club (PCAFC) and Women&#x27;s Association Football Club (PCWAFC) compete separately in collegiate competitions. Chrembroke Hockey Club (PCHC) compete jointly with Christ&#x27;s College, and Pirton RUFC, the rugby union team, are merged with Girton College.

Female undergraduates were first admitted to the college in 1984.

==International programmes==

Pembroke is the only Cambridge college to have an International Programmes Department, providing opportunities for international students to spend a semester (mid-January to mid-June), or part of the summer, in Cambridge. The Spring Semester Programme is a competitive programme for academically outstanding students who wish to follow a regular Cambridge degree course as fully matriculated members of the University. There are around thirty places each year.

In the summer the college offers the eight-week Pembroke Cambridge Summer Programme. As well as the academic content, trips are made to locales such as London, and the programme has a series of formal halls and events such as croquet matches and punting on the River Cam. This is also the programme for which the prestigious Thouron Prize is awarded, fully supporting nine American undergraduates from Harvard, Yale, and UPenn. In addition, there is the Pembroke College, Cambridge 1976 Scholarship, awarded to three outstanding undergraduates from the University of California.
== People associated with Pembroke ==



==Institutions named after the college==

Pembroke College in Brown University, the former women&#x27;s college at Brown University in the United States, was named for the principal building on the women&#x27;s campus, Pembroke Hall, which was itself named in honour of the Pembroke College (Cambridge) alumnus Roger Williams, a co-founder of Rhode Island.

In 1865 Pembroke College, Cambridge donated land for the formation of the Suffolk memorial to Prince Albert. The land at Framlingham in the county of Suffolk was used to build a school, The Albert Memorial College. The school today is known as Framlingham College and one of its seven houses is named Pembroke House in recognition of the contribution Pembroke College has made to the school.

In 1981, a decade after the merger of Pembroke College into Brown University, the Pembroke Center for Teaching and Research on Women there was named in honour of Pembroke College and the history of women&#x27;s efforts to gain access to higher education.

==See also==

*:Category:Fellows of Pembroke College, Cambridge
*List of organ scholars

== References ==
== External links ==

* Pembroke College website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q956501" start="0" end="16" title="Pembroke College, Cambridge" label="Pembroke College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055028" start="119" end="138" title="Colleges of the University of Cambridge" label="constituent college"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="146" end="169" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="171" end="178" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="268" end="274" title="fellow" label="fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q333264" start="504" end="540" title="Chris Smith, Baron Smith of Finsbury" label="Chris Smith, Baron Smith of Finsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441207" start="701" end="715" title="Tompkins Table" label="Tompkins Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="768" end="784" title="Christopher Wren" label="Christopher Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q19587207" start="804" end="807" title="List of Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom by education" label="six"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="894" end="918" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="William Pitt the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6655820" start="1073" end="1088" title="Marie de St Pol" label="Marie de St Pol"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="1231" end="1241" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247422" start="1280" end="1296" title="Aymer de Valence, 2nd Earl of Pembroke" label="Earl of Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q732263" start="2049" end="2060" title="Denny Abbey" label="Denny Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354261" start="2496" end="2505" title="Ray Dolby" label="Ray Dolby"/>
<link wikidata="Q309250" start="2674" end="2679" title="courtyard" label="court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747650" start="2867" end="2875" title="manciple" label="manciple"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="3032" end="3042" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="3450" end="3459" title="English Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="3519" end="3528" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299824" start="3530" end="3542" title="Matthew Wren" label="Matthew Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="3562" end="3577" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="3660" end="3676" title="Christopher Wren" label="Christopher Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q681007" start="3829" end="3849" title="George Gilbert Scott" label="George Gilbert Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q339830" start="4083" end="4100" title="Alfred Waterhouse" label="Alfred Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q48988358" start="4592" end="4607" title="Rattee and Kett" label="Rattee and Kett"/>
<link wikidata="Q681007" start="4673" end="4693" title="George Gilbert Scott" label="George Gilbert Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q15490414" start="5067" end="5078" title="W. D. Caroe" label="W. D. Caröe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265855" start="5346" end="5361" title="Pembroke Street, Cambridge" label="Pembroke Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="5372" end="5379" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793529" start="5736" end="5748" title="Maurice Webb (architect)" label="Maurice Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345521" start="6023" end="6030" title="Robert Hitcham" label="Hitcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793529" start="6211" end="6223" title="Maurice Webb (architect)" label="Maurice Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q650068" start="6327" end="6337" title="Peterhouse, Cambridge" label="Peterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999937" start="6654" end="6664" title="Eric Parry" label="Eric Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q163025" start="7421" end="7432" title="Platanus" label="Plane Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q895453" start="7439" end="7452" title="bowling green" label="bowling green"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="7646" end="7652" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469948" start="7958" end="7969" title="Formal (university)" label="Formal Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668249" start="8127" end="8138" title="Grace (prayer)" label="Latin Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853147" start="8223" end="8231" title="May Ball" label="May Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161948" start="9020" end="9046" title="Pembroke College Boat Club (Cambridge)" label="Pembroke College Boat Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161977" start="9055" end="9071" title="Pembroke Players" label="Pembroke Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q525970" start="9156" end="9166" title="Peter Cook" label="Peter Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q210741" start="9168" end="9177" title="Eric Idle" label="Eric Idle"/>
<link wikidata="Q914201" start="9179" end="9196" title="Tim Brooke-Taylor" label="Tim Brooke-Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979432" start="9198" end="9209" title="Clive James" label="Clive James"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407976" start="9214" end="9224" title="Bill Oddie" label="Bill Oddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q714717" start="9456" end="9477" title="Christ&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="Christ&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q797846" start="9534" end="9548" title="Girton College, Cambridge" label="Girton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="10262" end="10268" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q193387" start="10336" end="10343" title="croquet" label="croquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q572738" start="10356" end="10363" title="Punt (boat)" label="punting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797032" start="10435" end="10448" title="Thouron Prize" label="Thouron Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="10512" end="10519" title="Harvard" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="10521" end="10525" title="Yale" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="10531" end="10536" title="UPenn" label="UPenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="10663" end="10687" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161950" start="10772" end="10808" title="Pembroke College in Brown University" label="Pembroke College in Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660535" start="10821" end="10841" title="women&amp;#x27;s college" label="women&amp;#x27;s college"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="10845" end="10861" title="Brown University" label="Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q391591" start="11041" end="11055" title="Roger Williams" label="Roger Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="11073" end="11085" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q152245" start="11182" end="11195" title="Albert, Prince Consort" label="Prince Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478036" start="11332" end="11351" title="Framlingham College" label="Framlingham College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161946" start="11563" end="11613" title="Pembroke Center for Teaching and Research on Women" label="Pembroke Center for Teaching and Research on Women"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11752" end="11800" title=":Category:Fellows of Pembroke College, Cambridge" label=":Category:Fellows of Pembroke College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11802" end="11824" title="List of Organ Scholars at British Universities and Colleges#Pembroke College, Cambridge" label="List of organ scholars"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24928" wikidata="Q863912" url="?curid=24928" title="Prime ideal">
<text>In algebra, a prime ideal is a subset of a ring that shares many important properties of a prime number in the ring of integers. The prime ideals for the integers are the sets that contain all the multiples of a given prime number, together with the zero ideal.

Primitive ideals are prime, and prime ideals are both primary and semiprime.

==Prime ideals for commutative rings==

===Definition===
An ideal of a commutative ring is prime if it has the following two properties:

* If and are two elements of such that their product is an element of , then is in or is in ,
* is not the whole ring .

This generalizes the following property of prime numbers, known as Euclid&#x27;s lemma: if is a prime number and if divides a product of two integers, then divides or divides . We can therefore say

:A positive integer is a prime number if and only if formula_1 is a prime ideal in formula_2

===Examples===

* A simple example: In the ring formula_3 the subset of even numbers is a prime ideal.
* Given an integral domain formula_4, any prime element formula_5 generates a principal prime ideal formula_6. For example, take an irreducible polynomial formula_7 in a polynomial ring formula_8 over some field formula_9. Eisenstein&#x27;s criterion for integral domains (hence UFDs) can be effective for determining if an element in a polynomial ring is irreducible.
* If denotes the ring formula_10 of polynomials in two variables with complex coefficients, then the ideal generated by the polynomial is a prime ideal (see elliptic curve).
* In the ring formula_11 of all polynomials with integer coefficients, the ideal generated by and is a prime ideal. The ideal consists of all polynomials constructed by taking times an element of formula_11 and adding it to times another polynomial in formula_11 (which converts the constant coefficient in the latter polynomial into a linear coefficient). Therefore, the resultant ideal consists of all those polynomials whose constant coefficient is even.
* In any ring , a maximal ideal is an ideal that is maximal in the set of all proper ideals of , i.e. is contained in exactly two ideals of , namely itself and the whole ring . Every maximal ideal is in fact prime. In a principal ideal domain every nonzero prime ideal is maximal, but this is not true in general. For the UFD Hilbert&#x27;s Nullstellensatz states that every maximal ideal is of the form formula_14
* If is a smooth manifold, is the ring of smooth real functions on , and is a point in , then the set of all smooth functions with forms a prime ideal (even a maximal ideal) in .

=== Non-examples ===
* Consider the composition of the following two quotients
::formula_15
:Although the first two rings are integral domains (in fact the first is a UFD) the last is not an integral domain since it is isomorphic to
::formula_16
:since formula_17 factors into formula_18, which implies the existence of zero divisors in the quotient ring, preventing it from being isomorphic to formula_19 and instead to non-integral domain formula_20 (by the Chinese remainder theorem).
:This shows that the ideal formula_21 is not prime. (See the first property listed below.)

* Another non-example is the ideal formula_22 since we have
::formula_23 
:but neither formula_24 nor formula_25 are elements of the ideal.

===Properties===
* An ideal in the ring (with unity) is prime if and only if the factor ring is an integral domain. In particular, a commutative ring (with unity) is an integral domain if and only if is a prime ideal. (The zero ring has no prime ideals, because the ideal (0) is the whole ring.)
* An ideal is prime if and only if its set-theoretic complement is multiplicatively closed.
* Every nonzero ring contains at least one prime ideal (in fact it contains at least one maximal ideal), which is a direct consequence of Krull&#x27;s theorem.
* More generally, if is any multiplicatively closed set in , then a lemma essentially due to Krull shows that there exists an ideal of maximal with respect to being disjoint from , and moreover the ideal must be prime. This can be further generalized to noncommutative rings (see below). In the case we have Krull&#x27;s theorem, and this recovers the maximal ideals of . Another prototypical m-system is the set, of all positive powers of a non-nilpotent element.
* The preimage of a prime ideal under a ring homomorphism is a prime ideal. The analogous fact is not always true for maximal ideals, which is one reason algebraic geometers define the spectrum of a ring to be its set of prime rather than maximal ideals; one wants a homomorphism of rings to give a map between their spectra.
* The set of all prime ideals (called the spectrum of a ring) contains minimal elements (called minimal prime ideals). Geometrically, these correspond to irreducible components of the spectrum.
* The sum of two prime ideals is not necessarily prime. For an example, consider the ring formula_26 with prime ideals and (the ideals generated by and respectively). Their sum however is not prime: but its two factors are not. Alternatively, the quotient ring has zero divisors so it is not an integral domain and thus cannot be prime. 
* Not every ideal which cannot be factored into two ideals is a prime ideal; e.g. formula_27 cannot be factored but is not prime.
* In a commutative ring with at least two elements, if every proper ideal is prime, then the ring is a field. (If the ideal is prime, then the ring is an integral domain. If is any non-zero element of and the ideal is prime, then it contains and then is invertible.)
* A nonzero principal ideal is prime if and only if it is generated by a prime element. In a UFD, every nonzero prime ideal contains a prime element.

===Uses===
One use of prime ideals occurs in algebraic geometry, where varieties are defined as the zero sets of ideals in polynomial rings. It turns out that the irreducible varieties correspond to prime ideals. In the modern abstract approach, one starts with an arbitrary commutative ring and turns the set of its prime ideals, also called its spectrum, into a topological space and can thus define generalizations of varieties called schemes, which find applications not only in geometry, but also in number theory.

The introduction of prime ideals in algebraic number theory was a major step forward: it was realized that the important property of unique factorisation expressed in the fundamental theorem of arithmetic does not hold in every ring of algebraic integers, but a substitute was found when Richard Dedekind replaced elements by ideals and prime elements by prime ideals; see Dedekind domain.

==Prime ideals for noncommutative rings==
The notion of a prime ideal can be generalized to noncommutative rings by using the commutative definition &quot;ideal-wise&quot;. Wolfgang Krull advanced this idea in 1928. The following content can be found in texts such as Goodearl&#x27;s and Lam&#x27;s. If is a (possibly noncommutative) ring and is a proper ideal of , we say that is prime if for any two ideals and of :

* If the product of ideals is contained in , then at least one of and is contained in .

It can be shown that this definition is equivalent to the commutative one in commutative rings. It is readily verified that if an ideal of a noncommutative ring satisfies the commutative definition of prime, then it also satisfies the noncommutative version. An ideal satisfying the commutative definition of prime is sometimes called a completely prime ideal to distinguish it from other merely prime ideals in the ring. Completely prime ideals are prime ideals, but the converse is not true. For example, the zero ideal in the ring of matrices over a field is a prime ideal, but it is not completely prime.

This is close to the historical point of view of ideals as ideal numbers, as for the ring formula_28 &quot; is contained in &quot; is another way of saying &quot; divides &quot;, and the unit ideal represents unity.

Equivalent formulations of the ideal being prime include the following properties:
* For all and in , implies or .
* For any two &quot;right&quot; ideals of , implies or .
* For any two &quot;left&quot; ideals of , implies or .
* For any elements and of , if , then or .

Prime ideals in commutative rings are characterized by having multiplicatively closed complements in , and with slight modification, a similar characterization can be formulated for prime ideals in noncommutative rings. A nonempty subset is called an m-system if for any and in , there exists in such that is in . The following item can then be added to the list of equivalent conditions above:

* The complement is an m-system.

===Examples===
* Any primitive ideal is prime.
* As with commutative rings, maximal ideals are prime, and also prime ideals contain minimal prime ideals.
* A ring is a prime ring if and only if the zero ideal is a prime ideal, and moreover a ring is a domain if and only if the zero ideal is a completely prime ideal.
* Another fact from commutative theory echoed in noncommutative theory is that if is a nonzero -module, and is a maximal element in the poset of annihilator ideals of submodules of , then is prime.

==Important facts==
*Prime avoidance lemma. If is a commutative ring, and is a subring (possibly without unity), and is a collection of ideals of with at most two members not prime, then if is not contained in any , it is also not contained in the union of . In particular, could be an ideal of .
* If is any m-system in , then a lemma essentially due to Krull shows that there exists an ideal of maximal with respect to being disjoint from , and moreover the ideal must be prime (the primality can be proved as follows: if formula_29, then there exist elements formula_30 such that formula_31 by the maximal property of . Now, if formula_32, then formula_33, which is a contradiction). In the case we have Krull&#x27;s theorem, and this recovers the maximal ideals of . Another prototypical m-system is the set, of all positive powers of a non-nilpotent element.
* For a prime ideal , the complement has another property beyond being an m-system. If &quot;xy&quot; is in , then both and must be in , since is an ideal. A set that contains the divisors of its elements is called saturated.
* For a commutative ring , there is a kind of converse for the previous statement: If is any nonempty saturated and multiplicatively closed subset of , the complement is a union of prime ideals of .
*The intersection of members of a descending chain of prime ideals is a prime ideal, and in a commutative ring the union of members of an ascending chain of prime ideals is a prime ideal. With Zorn&#x27;s Lemma, these observations imply that the poset of prime ideals of a commutative ring (partially ordered by inclusion) has maximal and minimal elements.

==Connection to maximality==
Prime ideals can frequently be produced as maximal elements of certain collections of ideals. For example:
* An ideal maximal with respect to having empty intersection with a fixed m-system is prime.
* An ideal maximal among annihilators of submodules of a fixed -module is prime.
* In a commutative ring, an ideal maximal with respect to being non-principal is prime.
* In a commutative ring, an ideal maximal with respect to being not countably generated is prime.

==See also==
*Radical ideal
*Maximal ideal
*Dedekind–Kummer theorem
*Residue field

==References==
==Further reading==
*
*
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3968" start="3" end="10" title="algebra" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q863912" start="14" end="25" title="Prime ideal" label="prime ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="31" end="37" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="43" end="47" title="ring (mathematics)" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="91" end="103" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="119" end="127" title="Integer#Algebraic properties" label="integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055293" start="197" end="206" title="multiple (mathematics)" label="multiples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468740" start="250" end="260" title="zero ideal" label="zero ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243577" start="263" end="278" title="Primitive ideal" label="Primitive ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142699" start="317" end="324" title="primary ideal" label="primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269249" start="329" end="338" title="semiprime ideal" label="semiprime"/>
<link wikidata="Q44649" start="401" end="406" title="ideal (ring theory)" label="ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q858656" start="412" end="428" title="commutative ring" label="commutative ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q206793" start="667" end="686" title="Euclid&amp;#x27;s lemma" label="Euclid&amp;#x27;s lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q50708" start="716" end="723" title="divides" label="divides"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="741" end="748" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="837" end="851" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q230967" start="965" end="969" title="parity (mathematics)" label="even"/>
<link wikidata="Q628792" start="1007" end="1022" title="integral domain" label="integral domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q240651" start="1038" end="1051" title="prime element" label="prime element"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143969" start="1074" end="1083" title="principal ideal domain" label="principal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="1202" end="1207" title="field (mathematics)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057416" start="1219" end="1246" title="Eisenstein&amp;#x27;s criterion" label="Eisenstein&amp;#x27;s criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052579" start="1275" end="1279" title="Unique factorization domain" label="UFDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455652" start="1333" end="1348" title="polynomial ring" label="polynomial ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476663" start="1352" end="1363" title="irreducible polynomial" label="irreducible"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="1401" end="1411" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="1435" end="1442" title="complex number" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q50700" start="1443" end="1454" title="coefficient" label="coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q268493" start="1522" end="1536" title="elliptic curve" label="elliptic curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203540" start="2015" end="2028" title="maximal ideal" label="maximal ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475294" start="2049" end="2056" title="maximal element" label="maximal"/>
<link wikidata="Q44649" start="2075" end="2087" title="proper ideal" label="proper ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="2102" end="2114" title="subset" label="contained in"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143969" start="2217" end="2239" title="principal ideal domain" label="principal ideal domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068976" start="2323" end="2353" title="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s Nullstellensatz" label="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s Nullstellensatz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2422" end="2437" title="Manifold#Differentiable manifolds" label="smooth manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="2461" end="2465" title="real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q244761" start="2628" end="2639" title="function composition" label="composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q619436" start="2661" end="2670" title="quotient ring" label="quotients"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194212" start="2811" end="2821" title="ring homomorphism" label="isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q828111" start="2912" end="2925" title="Zero_divisor" label="zero divisors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3052" end="3077" title="Chinese_remainder_theorem#Statement" label="Chinese remainder theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="3359" end="3364" title="unital ring" label="unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q619436" start="3394" end="3405" title="factor ring" label="factor ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q628792" start="3412" end="3427" title="integral domain" label="integral domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652969" start="3536" end="3545" title="zero ring" label="zero ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q242767" start="3662" end="3672" title="complement (set theory)" label="complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917823" start="3676" end="3699" title="multiplicatively closed set" label="multiplicatively closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397775" start="3839" end="3859" title="Krull&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Krull&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q215382" start="4026" end="4034" title="disjoint sets" label="disjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397775" start="4169" end="4189" title="Krull&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Krull&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q840023" start="4307" end="4316" title="nilpotent" label="nilpotent"/>
<link wikidata="Q860623" start="4332" end="4340" title="preimage" label="preimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194212" start="4366" end="4383" title="ring homomorphism" label="ring homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203540" start="4444" end="4457" title="maximal ideal" label="maximal ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154351" start="4511" end="4529" title="spectrum of a ring" label="spectrum of a ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154351" start="4694" end="4712" title="spectrum of a ring" label="spectrum of a ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098959" start="4748" end="4767" title="minimal prime ideal" label="minimal prime ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q828111" start="5111" end="5123" title="zero divisor" label="zero divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q118084" start="5568" end="5578" title="unit (ring theory)" label="invertible"/>
<link wikidata="Q240651" start="5654" end="5667" title="prime element" label="prime element"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="5777" end="5795" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154351" start="6079" end="6087" title="spectrum of a ring" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="6096" end="6113" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155772" start="6170" end="6177" title="scheme (mathematics)" label="schemes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="6215" end="6223" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="6237" end="6250" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q613048" start="6289" end="6312" title="algebraic number theory" label="algebraic number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q670235" start="6424" end="6457" title="fundamental theorem of arithmetic" label="fundamental theorem of arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q646245" start="6489" end="6506" title="algebraic integer" label="algebraic integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q76556" start="6541" end="6557" title="Richard Dedekind" label="Richard Dedekind"/>
<link wikidata="Q254347" start="6626" end="6641" title="Dedekind domain" label="Dedekind domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q65185" start="6817" end="6831" title="Wolfgang Krull" label="Wolfgang Krull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375963" start="7624" end="7632" title="converse (logic)" label="converse"/>
<link wikidata="Q44337" start="7689" end="7697" title="matrix (mathematics)" label="matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137087" start="7821" end="7833" title="ideal number" label="ideal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q242767" start="8337" end="8348" title="complement (set theory)" label="complements"/>
<link wikidata="Q226183" start="8473" end="8481" title="empty set" label="nonempty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243577" start="8702" end="8717" title="primitive ideal" label="primitive ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q386597" start="8849" end="8859" title="prime ring" label="prime ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q628792" start="8933" end="8939" title="integral domain" label="domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q18848" start="9095" end="9101" title="module (mathematics)" label="module"/>
<link wikidata="Q474715" start="9135" end="9140" title="poset" label="poset"/>
<link wikidata="Q567083" start="9144" end="9155" title="Annihilator (ring theory)" label="annihilator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229333" start="9219" end="9240" title="Prime avoidance lemma" label="Prime avoidance lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q929536" start="9277" end="9284" title="subring" label="subring"/>
<link wikidata="Q185359" start="9446" end="9451" title="union (set theory)" label="union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11538" start="9700" end="9706" title="mathematical proof" label="proved"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397775" start="9905" end="9925" title="Krull&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Krull&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q840023" start="10043" end="10052" title="nilpotent" label="nilpotent"/>
<link wikidata="Q185837" start="10492" end="10504" title="intersection (set theory)" label="intersection"/>
<link wikidata="Q290810" start="10680" end="10697" title="Zorn&amp;#x27;s Lemma" label="Zorn&amp;#x27;s Lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q567083" start="11099" end="11111" title="Annihilator (ring theory)" label="annihilators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199022" start="11356" end="11369" title="Radical ideal" label="Radical ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203540" start="11371" end="11384" title="Maximal ideal" label="Maximal ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q110313202" start="11386" end="11409" title="Dedekind–Kummer theorem" label="Dedekind–Kummer theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315530" start="11411" end="11424" title="Residue field" label="Residue field"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="24929" wikidata="Q1136902" url="?curid=24929" title="PC-FX">
<text>The is a 32-bit home video game console co-developed by NEC and Hudson Soft. Released in December 1994, it is based on the NEC V810 CPU and CD-ROM, and was intended as the successor to the PC Engine (known overseas as the TurboGrafx-16). Unlike its predecessor, the PC-FX was only released in Japan.

Its form factor is like that of a tower PC, intended to be similarly upgradeable. The PC-FX was uncompelling in the marketplace due to lack of a 3D polygon-based graphics chip, high price, and limited developer support and is considered a commercial failure. It was discontinued in February 1998 and NEC subsequently exited the home video game console business.

==History==
In 1987, NEC partnered with game publisher Hudson Soft to create the PC Engine, released internationally as the TurboGrafx-16. The PC Engine was successful in Japan, but the TG-16 struggled in overseas markets.

The success of the PC Engine created a strong relationship between NEC and Hudson, who began work on a true successor (as opposed to the SuperGrafx, an upgraded PC Engine that had been released the year before to low sales and was already discontinued) as early as 1990. The companies designed a prototype system known as &quot;Tetsujin&quot; (&quot;Iron Man&quot;), a 32-bit console with full-screen video playback, 2 megabytes of RAM, and CD-ROM. NEC designed the console itself based on its previous experience with electronics, and Hudson provided the necessary custom chipset and co-processors. The prototype was announced in 1992 and presented to companies that expressed interest. To demonstrate the system&#x27;s capabilities, Hudson created a version of &quot;Star Soldier&quot; displaying 3D objects over pre-rendered backdrops. When this presentation garnered considerable support, NEC and Hudson began to move forward with the project.

The Tetsujin was originally set to be released in 1992, but the lack of completed games pushed the launch date to early 1993, which was also skipped. Publications speculated that the PC Engine&#x27;s continued success in the market made NEC and Hudson reluctant to release a succeeding platform. The release of technologically-superior consoles in late 1993, such as the Atari Jaguar and 3DO Interactive Multiplayer, made the Tetsujin&#x27;s hardware look more dated by comparison. Publications grew skeptical on how well it would perform in the market due to its inferior hardware and the amount of competing platforms. While NEC and Hudson knew that the system&#x27;s technology was unimpressive, time constraints prevented them from designing a new one from scratch. Instead, the system was redesigned to resemble a PC tower with slots that allowed for future modules to increase its capabilities. Very little of the hardware itself was changed from the Tetsujin prototype, although it upgraded to a new 32-bit V-810 RISC CPU. The system was renamed to the PC-FX, the &quot;PC&quot; believed to be a nod to the PC Engine brand. Unusual for a fifth generation console, the PC-FX does not have a polygon graphics processor. NEC&#x27;s reasoning for this was that polygon processors of the time were relatively low-powered, resulting in figures having a blocky appearance, and that it would be better for games to use pre-rendered polygon graphics instead.

The PC-FX was announced in late 1993 and showcased at the 1994 Tokyo Toy Show in June. Presented alongside several competing systems—the PlayStation, Sega Saturn, Neo Geo CD, and Bandai Playdia—its PC tower design was met with ridicule from commentators. Hudson demonstrated &quot;FX Fighter&quot;, a full-motion video fighting game created in response to Sega&#x27;s &quot;Virtua Fighter&quot;, to showcase the system&#x27;s capabilities. Its smooth-shaded polygonal visuals were met with praise from publications, which contributed to the anticipated launch of the console. The system&#x27;s target audience was roughly five years older than that of the PC Engine, in hopes that PC Engine fans would be brought over to the successor console. The console was launched in Japan on 23 December 1994 at the price of ¥49,800. In an interview roughly a year before the system launch, a representative stated that NEC had all but ruled out a release outside Japan, concluding that it would most likely sell poorly overseas due to its high price.

The PC-FX was discontinued in early 1998 with only 300,000 units sold.

==Technical specifications==
The PC-FX uses CD-ROMs as its storage medium, following on from the expansion released for its HuCard based predecessor. The game controller is virtually identical to a DUO-RX controller, but the rapid fire switches have been replaced with mode A/B switches. Peripherals include a PC-FX mouse, which is supported by strategy games like &quot;Farland Story FX&quot; and &quot;Power DoLLS FX&quot;.

The PC-FX uses the HuC6270 and HuC6271 graphic chips, and is able to decompress 30 JPEG pictures per second while playing digitally recorded audio, essentially a form of Motion JPEG. This gives the PC-FX superior full motion video quality over all other fifth generation consoles.

The PC-FX&#x27;s computer-like form factor was unusual for consoles at the time. It stands upright like a tower computer while other contemporary consoles lay flat, and it has three expansion ports. Similar to the 3DO, it features a built in power supply.

The PC-FX includes an HU 62 series 32-bit system board, an LSI chip, and a 32-bit V-810 RISC CPU. The system can display 16.77 million colors (the same amount as the PlayStation).

Unusual for a fifth generation console, the PC-FX does not have a polygon graphics processor. NEC&#x27;s reasoning for this was that polygon processors of the time were relatively low-powered, resulting in figures having a blocky appearance, and that it would be better for games to use pre-rendered polygon graphics instead.

==PC-FX GA==

NEC also released the PC-FX GA (&quot;game accelerator&quot;) expansion cards for PC-9800 and DOS/V computers, allowing those computers to play PC-FX games. The PC-9800 version is a combination of two cards, while the DOS/V variant uses a single ISA card. Both cards integrate an additional 3D chipset (Kubota/Hudson HuC6273) over the regular PC-FX. Unlike most computer graphics accelerators of the time, (as well as arguably the most comparable device to it, the Creative Labs 3DO Blaster) the PC-FX GA outputs over a separate video connection rather than from the PC&#x27;s interface itself. This makes use of the card somewhat cumbersome, as games are still booted using the DOS prompt, and therefore requiring one to use either a second monitor or an input switcher. The relatively high price of the card, coupled with the state of the PC-FX itself, resulted in the card selling poorly, below even the sales of the dedicated PC-FX unit. The card has since become highly sought after by vintage PC hardware collectors due to its scarcity.

==Library==
The library consists of 62 games. The launch games were &quot;Graduation 2: Neo Generation FX&quot;, &quot;Battle Heat&quot;, and &quot;Team Innocent&quot; on 23 December 1994 and the final game released was &quot;First Kiss Story&quot; on 24 April 1998. The system and all games were only released in Japan. A number of demo discs were released with publications which allow the user to play the disc in a CD-equipped PC Engine or the PC-FX.

NEC directed Hudson Soft, continuing their partnership over the PC Engine, to develop only games based on popular anime franchises and using prerendered animated footage. Though this policy played to the hardware&#x27;s strengths, it barred Hudson Soft from bringing successful PC Engine series such as &quot;Bomberman&quot; and &quot;Bonk&quot; to the PC-FX.

==Reception==
Shortly after the PC-FX launched, &quot;Famitsu&quot; awarded the console an 18 out of 40, one point lower than the score it gave the PlayStation. A writer for &quot;Ultimate Future Games&quot; in April 1995 said the PC-FX had impressively competitive hardware, but its game library relied largely on animation over gameplay, so readers should &quot;[not] expect much just yet&quot;. &quot;Game Criticism&quot; writers believed the system was troubled by a weak software lineup and a lack of innovation and creativity from NEC, and served as an unsuitable and inferior follow-up to the PC Engine.

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="9" end="15" title="32-bit" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q17589470" start="16" end="39" title="home video game console" label="home video game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q219203" start="56" end="59" title="NEC" label="NEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049502" start="64" end="75" title="Hudson Soft" label="Hudson Soft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123" end="131" title="NEC V60#The V800 series" label="NEC V810"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="132" end="135" title="CPU" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="140" end="146" title="CD-ROM" label="CD-ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057377" start="222" end="235" title="TurboGrafx-16" label="TurboGrafx-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148887" start="305" end="316" title="Computer form factor" label="form factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q115384238" start="335" end="343" title="Computer tower" label="tower PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q37555" start="449" end="456" title="polygon" label="polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121708" start="540" end="558" title="commercial failure" label="commercial failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049502" start="719" end="730" title="Hudson Soft" label="Hudson Soft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057377" start="788" end="801" title="TurboGrafx-16" label="TurboGrafx-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q202375" start="1025" end="1035" title="SuperGrafx" label="SuperGrafx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756741" start="1657" end="1669" title="Star Soldier (video game)" label="Star Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q650601" start="2208" end="2220" title="Atari Jaguar" label="Atari Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q229429" start="2225" end="2252" title="3DO Interactive Multiplayer" label="3DO Interactive Multiplayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3975" start="2656" end="2664" title="Computer case" label="PC tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239264" start="3255" end="3267" title="pre-rendered" label="pre-rendered"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703883" start="3458" end="3468" title="Neo Geo CD" label="Neo Geo CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198088" start="3474" end="3488" title="Bandai Playdia" label="Bandai Playdia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060660" start="3669" end="3683" title="Virtua Fighter (video game)" label="Virtua Fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604680" start="3889" end="3904" title="target audience" label="target audience"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="4453" end="4459" title="CD-ROM" label="CD-ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190785" start="4533" end="4539" title="HuCard" label="HuCard"/>
<link wikidata="Q865422" start="4563" end="4578" title="game controller" label="game controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q866171" start="4813" end="4827" title="Power DoLLS" label="Power DoLLS FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928901" start="4855" end="4862" title="HuC6270" label="HuC6270"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4867" end="4874" title="HuC6271" label="HuC6271"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195" start="4919" end="4923" title="JPEG" label="JPEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q850954" start="5006" end="5017" title="Motion JPEG" label="Motion JPEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473699" start="5049" end="5066" title="full motion video" label="full motion video"/>
<link wikidata="Q229429" start="5332" end="5335" title="3DO Interactive Multiplayer" label="3DO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321" start="5417" end="5429" title="system board" label="system board"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="5463" end="5467" title="RISC" label="RISC"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="5541" end="5552" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239264" start="5843" end="5855" title="pre-rendered" label="pre-rendered"/>
<link wikidata="Q477016" start="6362" end="6375" title="Creative Labs" label="Creative Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636267" start="6376" end="6387" title="3DO Blaster" label="3DO Blaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023663" start="6991" end="7002" title="launch game" label="launch game"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7089" end="7102" title="Team Innocent" label="Team Innocent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003101" start="7167" end="7183" title="First Kiss Story" label="First Kiss Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049502" start="7410" end="7421" title="Hudson Soft" label="Hudson Soft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="7511" end="7516" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444160" start="7706" end="7715" title="Bomberman" label="Bomberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678170" start="7732" end="7736" title="Bonk (video game series)" label="Bonk"/>
<link wikidata="Q591573" start="7812" end="7819" title="Famitsu" label="Famitsu"/>
</links>
</doc>
