<doc id="27318" wikidata="Q334" url="?curid=27318" title="Singapore">
<text>Singapore, officially the Republic of Singapore, is an island country and city-state in Southeast Asia. The country&#x27;s territory comprises one main island, 63 satellite islands and islets, and one outlying islet. It is about one degree of latitude () north of the equator, off the southern tip of the Malay Peninsula, bordering the Strait of Malacca to the west, the Singapore Strait to the south along with the Riau Islands in Indonesia, the South China Sea to the east, and the Straits of Johor along with the State of Johor in Malaysia to the north.

In its early history, Singapore was a maritime emporium known as &quot;Temasek&quot; and subsequently a major constituent part of several successive thalassocratic empires. Its contemporary era began in 1819, when Stamford Raffles established Singapore as an entrepôt trading post of the British Empire. In 1867, Singapore came under the direct control of Britain as part of the Straits Settlements. During World War II, Singapore was occupied by Japan in 1942 and returned to British control as a Crown colony following Japan&#x27;s surrender in 1945. Singapore gained self-governance in 1959 and, in 1963, became part of the new federation of Malaysia, alongside Malaya, North Borneo, and Sarawak. Ideological differences led to Singapore&#x27;s expulsion from the federation two years later; Singapore became an independent sovereign country in 1965. After early years of turbulence and despite lacking natural resources and a hinterland, the nation rapidly developed to become one of the Four Asian Tigers.

As a highly developed country, it has one of the highest PPP-adjusted GDP per capita. It is also identified as a tax haven. Singapore is the only country in Asia with a AAA sovereign credit rating from all major rating agencies. It is a major aviation, financial, and maritime shipping hub and has consistently been ranked as one of the most expensive cities to live in for expatriates and foreign workers. Singapore ranks highly in key social indicators: education, healthcare, quality of life, personal safety, infrastructure, and housing, with a home-ownership rate of 88 percent. Singaporeans enjoy one of the longest life expectancies, fastest Internet connection speeds, lowest infant mortality rates, and lowest levels of corruption in the world. It has the third highest population density of any country, although there are numerous green and recreational spaces as a result of urban planning. With a multicultural population and in recognition of the cultural identities of the major ethnic groups within the nation, Singapore has four official languages: English, Malay, Mandarin, and Tamil. English is the common language, with exclusive use in numerous public services. Multi-racialism is enshrined in the constitution and continues to shape national policies.

Singapore is a parliamentary republic and its legal system is based on common law. While the country is &quot;de jure&quot; a multi-party democracy with free elections, the government under the People&#x27;s Action Party (PAP) wields widespread control and political dominance. One of the five founding members of ASEAN, Singapore is also the headquarters of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Secretariat, the Pacific Economic Cooperation Council Secretariat, and is the host city of many international conferences and events. Singapore is also a member of the United Nations, the World Trade Organization, the East Asia Summit, the Non-Aligned Movement, and the Commonwealth of Nations.

== Name and etymology ==

The English name of &quot;Singapore&quot; is an anglicisation of the native Malay name for the country, (), which was in turn derived from the Sanskrit word for &#x27;lion city&#x27; (; ; Brahmi: ; literally &quot;lion city&quot;; means &#x27;lion&#x27;, means &#x27;city&#x27; or &#x27;fortress&#x27;). Pulau Ujong was one of the earliest references to Singapore Island, which corresponds to a Chinese account from the third century referred to a place as &quot;Pú Luó Zhōng&quot; (), a transcription of the Malay name for &#x27;island at the end of a peninsula&#x27;. Early references to the name Temasek (or Tumasik) are found in the Nagarakretagama, a Javanese eulogy written in 1365, and a Vietnamese source from the same time period. The name possibly means &quot;Sea Town&quot;, being derived from the Malay , meaning &#x27;sea&#x27; or &#x27;lake&#x27;. The Chinese traveller Wang Dayuan visited a place around 1330 named &quot;Danmaxi&quot; () or &quot;Tam ma siak&quot;, depending on pronunciation; this may be a transcription of Temasek, alternatively, it may be a combination of the Malay meaning &#x27;land&#x27; and Chinese meaning &#x27;tin&#x27;, which was traded on the island.

Variations of the name were used for a number of cities throughout the region prior to the establishment of the Kingdom of Singapura. In Hindu–Buddhist culture, lions were associated with power and protection, which may explain the attraction of such a name. The name &quot;Singapura&quot; supplanted Temasek sometime before the 15th century, after the establishment of the Kingdom of Singapura on the island by a fleeing Sumatran &quot;Raja&quot; (prince) from Palembang. However, the precise time and reason for the name change is unknown. The semi-historical Malay Annals state that Temasek was christened &quot;Singapura&quot; by Sang Nila Utama, a 13th-century Sumatran &quot;Raja&quot; from Palembang. The Annals state that Sang Nila Utama encountered a strange beast on the island that he took to be a lion. Seeing this as an omen, he established the town of &quot;Singapura&quot; where he encountered the beast. The second hypothesis, drawn from Portuguese sources, postulates that this mythical story is based on the real life Parameswara of Palembang. Parameswara declared independence from Majapahit and mounted a Lion Throne. After then being driven into exile by the Javanese, he usurped control over Temasek. He may have rechristened the area as &quot;Singapura&quot;, recalling the throne he had been driven from.

Under Japanese occupation, Singapore was renamed , meaning &#x27;light of the south&#x27;. Singapore is sometimes referred to by the nickname the &quot;Garden City&quot;, in reference to its parks and tree-lined streets. Another informal name, the &quot;Little Red Dot&quot;, was adopted after an article in the &quot;Asian Wall Street Journal&quot; of 4 August 1998 said that Indonesian President B. J. Habibie referred to Singapore as a red dot on a map.

== History ==
=== Ancient Singapore ===

In 1299, according to the &quot;Malay Annals&quot;, the Kingdom of Singapura was founded on the island by Sang Nila Utama. Although the historicity of the accounts as given in the &quot;Malay Annals&quot; is the subject of academic debates, it is nevertheless known from various documents that Singapore in the 14th century, then known as Temasek, was a trading port under the influence of both the Majapahit Empire and the Siamese kingdoms, and was a part of the Indosphere. These Indianised kingdoms were characterised by surprising resilience, political integrity and administrative stability. Historical sources also indicate that around the end of the 14th century, its ruler Parameswara was attacked by either the Majapahit or the Siamese, forcing him to move to Malacca where he founded the Sultanate of Malacca. Archaeological evidence suggests that the main settlement on Fort Canning Hill was abandoned around this time, although a small trading settlement continued in Singapore for some time afterwards. In 1613, Portuguese raiders burned down the settlement, and the island faded into obscurity for the next two centuries. By then, Singapore was nominally part of the Johor Sultanate. The wider maritime region and much trade was under Dutch control for the following period after the 1641 Dutch conquest of Malacca.

=== British colonisation ===
The British governor Stamford Raffles arrived in Singapore on 28 January 1819 and soon recognised the island as a natural choice for the new port. The island was then nominally ruled by Tengku Abdul Rahman, the Sultan of Johor, who was controlled by the Dutch and the Bugis. However, the Sultanate was weakened by factional division: Abdul Rahman, the Temenggong of Johor to Tengku Abdul Rahman, as well as his officials, were loyal to the Sultan&#x27;s elder brother Tengku Long, who was living in exile in Penyengat Island, Riau Islands. With the Temenggong&#x27;s help, Raffles managed to smuggle Tengku Long back into Singapore. Raffles offered to recognise Tengku Long as the rightful Sultan of Johor, under the title of Sultan Hussein, as well as provide him with a yearly payment of $5000 and another $3000 to the Temenggong; in return, Sultan Hussein would grant the British the right to establish a trading post on Singapore. The Treaty of Singapore was signed on 6 February 1819.
In 1824, a further treaty with the Sultan led to the entire island becoming a part of the British Empire. In 1826, Singapore became part of the Straits Settlements, then under the jurisdiction of British India. Singapore became the regional capital in 1836. Prior to Raffles&#x27; arrival, there were only about a thousand people living on the island, mostly indigenous Malays along with a handful of Chinese. By 1860 the population had swelled to over 80,000, more than half being Chinese. Many of these early immigrants came to work on the pepper and gambier plantations. In 1867, the Straits Settlements were separated from British India, coming under the direct control of Britain. Later, in the 1890s, when the rubber industry became established in Malaya and Singapore, the island became a global centre for rubber sorting and export.
Singapore was not greatly affected by the First World War (1914–18), as the conflict did not spread to Southeast Asia. The only significant event during the war was the 1915 Singapore Mutiny by Muslim sepoys from British India, who were garrisoned in Singapore. After hearing rumours that they were to be sent to fight the Ottoman Empire, a Muslim state, the soldiers rebelled, killing their officers and several British civilians before the mutiny was suppressed by non-Muslim troops arriving from Johore and Burma.

After World War I, the British built the large Singapore Naval Base as part of the defensive Singapore strategy. Originally announced in 1921, the construction of the base proceeded at a slow pace until the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1931. Costing $60 million and not fully completed in 1938, it was nonetheless the largest dry dock in the world, the third-largest floating dock, and had enough fuel tanks to support the entire British navy for six months. The base was defended by heavy naval guns stationed at Fort Siloso, Fort Canning and Labrador, as well as a Royal Air Force airfield at Tengah Air Base. Winston Churchill touted it as the &quot;Gibraltar of the East&quot;, and military discussions often referred to the base as simply &quot;East of Suez&quot;. However, the British Home Fleet was stationed in Europe, and the British could not afford to build a second fleet to protect their interests in Asia. The plan was for the Home Fleet to sail quickly to Singapore in the event of an emergency. As a consequence, after World War II broke out in 1939, the fleet was fully occupied with defending Britain, leaving Singapore vulnerable to Japanese invasion.

=== Japanese occupation ===
During the Pacific War, the Japanese invasion of Malaya culminated in the Battle of Singapore. When the British force of 60,000 troops surrendered on 15 February 1942, British prime minister Winston Churchill called the defeat &quot;the worst disaster and largest capitulation in British history&quot;. British and Empire losses during the fighting for Singapore were heavy, with a total of nearly 85,000 personnel captured. About 5,000 were killed or wounded, of which Australians made up the majority. Japanese casualties during the fighting in Singapore amounted to 1,714 killed and 3,378 wounded. The occupation was to become a major turning point in the histories of several nations, including those of Japan, Britain, and Singapore. Japanese newspapers triumphantly declared the victory as deciding the general situation of the war. Between 5,000 and 25,000 ethnic Chinese people were killed in the subsequent Sook Ching massacre. British forces had planned to liberate Singapore in 1945/1946; however, the war ended before these operations could be carried out.

=== Post-war period ===
After the Japanese surrender to the Allies on 15 August 1945, Singapore fell into a brief state of violence and disorder; looting and revenge-killing were widespread. British, Australian, and Indian troops led by Lord Louis Mountbatten returned to Singapore to receive the formal surrender of Japanese forces in the region from General Seishirō Itagaki on behalf of General Hisaichi Terauchi on 12 September 1945. Meanwhile, Tomoyuki Yamashita was tried by a US military commission for war crimes, but not for crimes committed by his troops in Malaya or Singapore. He was convicted and hanged in the Philippines on 23 February 1946.

Much of the infrastructure in Singapore had been destroyed during the war, including those needed to supply utilities. A shortage of food led to malnutrition, disease, and rampant crime and violence. A series of strikes in 1947 caused massive stoppages in public transport and other services. However, by late 1947 the economy began to recover, facilitated by a growing international demand for tin and rubber. The failure of Britain to successfully defend its colony against the Japanese changed its image in the eyes of Singaporeans. British Military Administration ended on 1 April 1946, and Singapore became a separate Crown Colony. In July 1947, separate Executive and Legislative Councils were established and the election of six members of the Legislative Council was scheduled for the following year.

During the 1950s, Chinese communists, with strong ties to the trade unions and Chinese schools, waged a guerrilla war against the government, leading to the Malayan Emergency. The 1954 National Service riots, Hock Lee bus riots, and Chinese middle schools riots in Singapore were all linked to these events. David Marshall, pro-independence leader of the Labour Front, won Singapore&#x27;s first general election in 1955. He led a delegation to London, and Britain rejected his demand for complete self-rule. He resigned and was replaced by Lim Yew Hock in 1956, and after further negotiations Britain agreed to grant Singapore full internal self-government for all matters except defence and foreign affairs on 3 June 1959. Days before, in the 30 May 1959 election, the People&#x27;s Action Party (PAP) won a landslide victory. Governor Sir William Allmond Codrington Goode served as the first Yang di-Pertuan Negara (Head of State).

=== Within Malaysia ===
PAP leaders believed that Singapore&#x27;s future lay with Malaya, due to strong ties between the two. It was thought that reuniting with Malaya would benefit the economy by creating a common market, alleviating ongoing unemployment woes in Singapore. However, a sizeable left-wing faction of the PAP was strongly opposed to the merger, fearing a loss of influence, and hence formed the Barisan Sosialis, after being kicked out from the PAP. The ruling party of Malaya, United Malays National Organisation (UMNO), was staunchly anti-communist, and it was suspected UMNO would support the non-communist factions of PAP. UMNO, initially sceptical of the idea of a merger due to distrust of the PAP government and concern that the large ethnic Chinese population in Singapore would alter the racial balance in Malaya on which their political power base depended, became supportive of the idea of the merger due to joint fear of a communist takeover.

On 27 May 1961, Malaya&#x27;s prime minister, Tunku Abdul Rahman, made a surprise proposal for a new Federation called Malaysia, which would unite the current and former British possessions in the region: the Federation of Malaya, Singapore, Brunei, North Borneo, and Sarawak. UMNO leaders believed that the additional Malay population in the Bornean territories would balance Singapore&#x27;s Chinese population. The British government, for its part, believed that the merger would prevent Singapore from becoming a haven for communism. To obtain a mandate for a merger, the PAP held a referendum on the merger. This referendum included a choice of different terms for a merger with Malaysia and had no option for avoiding merger altogether. On 16 September 1963, Singapore joined with Malaya, the North Borneo, and Sarawak to form the new Federation of Malaysia under the terms of the Malaysia Agreement. Under this Agreement, Singapore had a relatively high level of autonomy compared to the other states of Malaysia.

Indonesia opposed the formation of Malaysia due to its own claims over Borneo and launched &quot;Konfrontasi&quot; (&quot;Confrontation&quot; in Indonesian) in response to the formation of Malaysia. On 10 March 1965, a bomb planted by Indonesian saboteurs on a mezzanine floor of MacDonald House exploded, killing three people and injuring 33 others. It was the deadliest of at least 42 bomb incidents which occurred during the confrontation. Two members of the Indonesian Marine Corps, Osman bin Haji Mohamed Ali and Harun bin Said, were eventually convicted and executed for the crime. The explosion caused US$250,000 () in damages to MacDonald House.

Even after the merger, the Singaporean government and the Malaysian central government disagreed on many political and economic issues. Despite an agreement to establish a common market, Singapore continued to face restrictions when trading with the rest of Malaysia. In retaliation, Singapore did not extend to Sabah and Sarawak the full extent of the loans agreed to for economic development of the two eastern states. Talks soon broke down, and abusive speeches and writing became rife on both sides. This led to communal strife in Singapore, culminating in the 1964 race riots. On 7 August 1965, Malaysian prime minister Tunku Abdul Rahman, seeing no alternative to avoid further bloodshed (and with the help of secret negotiations by PAP leaders, as revealed in 2015) advised the Parliament of Malaysia that it should vote to expel Singapore from Malaysia. On 9 August 1965, the Malaysian Parliament voted 126 to 0 to move a bill to amend the constitution, expelling Singapore from Malaysia, which left Singapore as a newly independent country.

=== Republic of Singapore ===

After being expelled from Malaysia, Singapore became independent as the Republic of Singapore on 9 August 1965, with Lee Kuan Yew and Yusof bin Ishak as the first prime minister and president respectively. In 1967, the country co-founded the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). Race riots broke out once more in 1969. Lee Kuan Yew&#x27;s emphasis on rapid economic growth, support for business entrepreneurship, and limitations on internal democracy shaped Singapore&#x27;s policies for the next half-century. Economic growth continued throughout the 1980s, with the unemployment rate falling to 3% and real GDP growth averaging at about 8% up until 1999. During the 1980s, Singapore began to shift towards high-tech industries, such as the wafer fabrication sector, in order to remain competitive as neighbouring countries began manufacturing with cheaper labour. Singapore Changi Airport was opened in 1981 and Singapore Airlines was formed. The Port of Singapore became one of the world&#x27;s busiest ports and the service and tourism industries also grew immensely during this period.

The PAP has remained in power since independence. Some activists and opposition politicians see the government&#x27;s strict regulation of political and media activities as an infringement on political rights. In response, Singapore has seen several significant political changes, such as the introduction of the non-constituency members of parliament in 1984 to allow up to three losing candidates from opposition parties to be appointed as MPs. Group representation constituencies (GRCs) were introduced in 1988 to create multi-seat electoral divisions, intended to ensure minority representation in parliament. Nominated members of parliament were introduced in 1990 to allow non-elected non-partisan MPs. The constitution was amended in 1991 to provide for an elected president who has veto power in the use of past reserves and appointments to certain public offices.

In 1990, Goh Chok Tong succeeded Lee and became Singapore&#x27;s second prime minister. During Goh&#x27;s tenure, the country went through the 1997 Asian financial crisis and the 2003 SARS outbreak. In 2004, Lee Hsien Loong, the eldest son of Lee Kuan Yew, became the country&#x27;s third prime minister. Lee Hsien Loong&#x27;s tenure included the 2007–2008 financial crisis, the resolution of a dispute over land ownership at Tanjong Pagar railway station between Singapore and Malaysia, the introduction of the two integrated resorts (IRs), located at the Marina Bay Sands and Resorts World Sentosa, and the COVID-19 pandemic. The PAP suffered its worst ever electoral results in 2011, winning just 60% of votes, amidst debate over issues including the influx of foreign workers and the high cost of living. On 23 March 2015, Lee Kuan Yew died, and a one-week period of public mourning was observed nationwide. Subsequently, the PAP regained its dominance in Parliament through the September general election, receiving 69.9% of the popular vote, although this remained lower than the 2001 tally of 75.3% and the 1968 tally of 86.7%. The 2020 election held in July saw the PAP drop to 61% of the vote, while the Workers&#x27; Party took 10 of the 93 seats, the highest number ever won by another party.
On 15 May 2024, Lawrence Wong became Singapore&#x27;s fourth Prime Minister; he is the first prime minister born after independence.

== Government and politics ==

Singapore is a parliamentary republic based on the Westminster system. The Constitution of Singapore is the supreme law of the country, establishing the structure and responsibility of governance. The President is the head of state. The governance of Singapore is separated into three branches:
* Executive: The executive consists of the cabinet, led by the prime minister, and the Attorney General&#x27;s Chambers led by the Attorney-General. The cabinet is collectively responsible for all government policies and the day-to-day administration of the affairs of state. It is typically composed of members of the Singapore Parliament. The prime minister is appointed by the President, and the ministers in the cabinet and the attorney-general are appointed by the president, acting on the advice and consent of the prime minister. The prime minister is the effective head of the executive branch of government.
* Legislature: The Singapore Parliament is unicameral and, together with the president, comprises the legislature. Members of Parliament (MP) consist of elected, non-constituency, and nominated members. The majority of MPs are elected into parliament at a general election. The Singapore Parliament is collectively responsible for enacting the laws governing the state. The president holds limited discretionary powers of oversight over the government. The president&#x27;s veto powers are further subject to parliamentary overruling.
* Judiciary: The judiciary&#x27;s function is to independently administer justice and is headed by the Chief Justice. The judges and judicial commissioners are appointed by the president on the advice of the prime minister. The Supreme Court and State Courts adjudicates in civil disputes between persons, convicts or acquits accused persons in criminal prosecutions, and interprets laws to decide on its constitutionality. Any law or provision of a law found to be unconstitutional can be struck down by the Supreme Court.

The president is directly elected by popular vote for a renewable six-year term. Requirements for this position, which were enacted by the PAP government, are extremely stringent, such that only a handful of people qualify for the candidacy. These qualifications include that a candidate needs to be a person at least 45 years of age who is no longer a member of a political party, to either have held public office for at least 3 years in a number of specific public service leadership roles, or to have 3 years experience as chief executive of a fully profitable private sector company with at least S$500 million in shareholders&#x27; equity, be a resident in Singapore for at least 10 years, not have a criminal record, and more. Candidates must also &quot;satisfy&quot; the Presidential Elections Committee (PEC) that he or she is a person of integrity, good character and reputation.

From 2017, the Constitution requires that presidential elections be &quot;reserved&quot; for a racial community if no one from that ethnic group has been elected to the presidency in the five most recent terms. Only members of that community may qualify as candidates in a reserved presidential election. In the 2017 presidential election, this combination of stringent requirements and a reserved election that required the candidate to be of the 13% Malay ethnic group led to the PEC approving a single candidate for the presidency; Halimah Yacob, considered part of the Malay community, won in an uncontested election. She also became Singapore&#x27;s first female president.

Members of Parliament (MPs) are elected at least every five years (or sooner with a snap election). The 14th and current Parliament has 103 members; 93 were directly elected from the 31 constituencies, nine are nonpartisan nominated members appointed by the president, and three are non-constituency members from opposition parties who were not elected in the last general election but appointed to the legislature to increase opposition party representation. In group representation constituencies (GRCs), political parties assemble teams of candidates to contest elections. At least one MP in a GRC must be of an ethnic minority background. All elections are held using first-past-the-post voting. MPs host weekly political surgeries, called &quot;Meet-the-People Sessions&quot;, where they help constituents resolve personal issues which can be related to housing, financial assistance, and immigration.

The People&#x27;s Action Party occupies a dominant position in Singaporean politics, having won large parliamentary majorities in every election since self-governance was granted in 1959. The PAP, self-described as pragmatic, have a syncretic ideology combining free-market principles, civil nationalism, and welfarism. Despite promulgating restrictions on civil liberties, Singapore under the PAP has seen consistent economic growth and political stability. The most represented and popular opposition party is the centre-left Workers&#x27; Party, which holds 8 seats in Parliament.

The long-standing hegemony of the People&#x27;s Action Party has led to Singapore being described by academics as an illiberal democracy, or a soft-authoritarian state in which the PAP faces little to no feasible political competition to its rule of the country. The multi-party democratic process of Singapore has been described as &quot;minimal&quot; in comparison to the state&#x27;s focus on economic development and social order. According to Gordon P. Means, professor emeritus of political science at McMaster University, Singapore reinvented the &quot;benevolent&quot; yet &quot;highly authoritarian&quot; colonial system of governance inherited from Britain rather than forging a full democracy. A conservative ideology of &quot;Asian values&quot; evolved to replace British rule, based on &quot;communal loyalty, distrust of government, and avoidance of individual or collective responsibility for wider public interests&quot;, with less regard for human rights in the nascent Western sense. The fact that &quot;neither the public nor elites had experience with democracy&quot; helped create Singapore&#x27;s political culture, as dominated by status-focused hierarchies committed to economic development. The legacy of Asian values and the limited political culture within Singapore has led to the country being described as &quot;classic illustration of soft authoritarianism&quot;, and &quot;profoundly illiberal&quot;.

The judicial system is based on English common law, continuing the legal tradition established during British rule and with substantial local differences. Criminal law is based on the Indian Penal Code originally intended for British India, and was at the time as a crown colony also adopted by the British colonial authorities in Singapore and remains the basis of the criminal code in the country with a few exceptions, amendments and repeals since it came into force. Trial by jury was abolished in 1970. Singapore is known for its strict laws and conservative stances on crime; both corporal punishment (by caning) and capital punishment (by hanging) are retained and commonly used as legal penalties.

The right to freedom of speech and association is guaranteed by Article 14(1) of the Constitution of Singapore, although there are provisions in the subsequent subsection that regulate them. The government has restricted freedom of speech and freedom of the press as well as some civil and political rights. In 2023, Singapore was ranked 129th out of 180 nations by Reporters Without Borders on the global Press Freedom Index. Freedom House ranks Singapore as &quot;partly free&quot; in its &quot;Freedom in the World&quot; report, and the Economist Intelligence Unit ranks Singapore as a &quot;flawed democracy&quot;, the second freest rank of four, in its &quot;Democracy Index&quot;. All public gatherings of five or more people require police permits, and protests may legally be held only at the Speakers&#x27; Corner.

In the Corruption Perceptions Index, which ranks countries by &quot;perceived levels of public sector corruption&quot;, Singapore has consistently ranked as one of the least corrupt countries in the world, in spite of being illiberal. Singapore&#x27;s unique combination of a strong, soft authoritarian government with an emphasis on meritocracy is known as the &quot;Singapore model&quot;, and is regarded as a key factor behind Singapore&#x27;s political stability, economic growth, and harmonious social order. In 2021, the World Justice Project&#x27;s Rule of Law Index ranked Singapore as 17th overall among the world&#x27;s 193 countries for adherence to the rule of law. Singapore ranked high on the factors of order and security (#3), absence of corruption (#3), regulatory enforcement (#4), civil justice (#8), and criminal justice (#7), and ranked significantly lower on factors of open government (#34), constraints on government powers (#32), and fundamental rights (#38).

=== Foreign relations ===
Singapore&#x27;s stated foreign policy priority is maintaining security in Southeast Asia and surrounding territories. An underlying principle is political and economic stability in the region. It has diplomatic relations with more than 180 sovereign states.

As one of the five founding members of ASEAN, Singapore is a strong supporter of the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA) and the ASEAN Investment Area (AIA); it is also the host of the APEC Secretariat. Singapore is also a founding member of The Forum of Small States (FOSS), a voluntary and informal grouping at the UN.

Singapore maintains membership in other regional organisations, such as Asia–Europe Meeting, the Forum for East Asia-Latin American Cooperation, the Indian Ocean Rim Association, and the East Asia Summit. It is also a member of the Non-Aligned Movement, the United Nations and the Commonwealth. While Singapore is not a formal member of the G20, it has been invited to participate in G20 processes in most years since 2010. Singapore is also the location of the Pacific Economic Cooperation Council (PECC) Secretariat.

In general, bilateral relations with other ASEAN members are strong; however, disagreements have arisen, and relations with neighbouring Malaysia and Indonesia have sometimes been strained. Malaysia and Singapore have clashed over the delivery of fresh water to Singapore, and access by the Singapore Armed Forces to Malaysian airspace. Border issues exist with Malaysia and Indonesia, and both have banned the sale of marine sand to Singapore over disputes about Singapore&#x27;s land reclamation. Some previous disputes, such as the Pedra Branca dispute, have been resolved by the International Court of Justice. Piracy in the Strait of Malacca has been a cause of concern for all three countries. Close economic ties exist with Brunei, and the two share a pegged currency value, through a Currency Interchangeability Agreement between the two countries which makes both Brunei dollar and Singapore dollar banknotes and coins legal tender in either country.

The first diplomatic contact with China was made in the 1970s, with full diplomatic relations established in the 1990s. China has been Singapore&#x27;s largest trading partner since 2013, after surpassing Malaysia. Singapore and the United States share a long-standing close relationship, in particular in defence, the economy, health, and education. Singapore has also increased co-operation with ASEAN members and China to strengthen regional security and fight terrorism, and participated in ASEAN&#x27;s first joint maritime exercise with China in 2018. It has also given support to the US-led coalition to fight terrorism, with bilateral co-operation in counter-terrorism and counter-proliferation initiatives, and joint military exercises.

As Singapore has diplomatic relations with both the United States and North Korea, and was one of the few countries that have relationships with both countries, in June 2018, it hosted a historic summit between US President Donald Trump and North Korean leader Kim Jong-un, the first-ever meeting between the sitting leaders of the two nations. It also hosted the Ma–Xi meeting in 2015, the first meeting between the political leaders of the two sides of the Taiwan Strait since the end of the Chinese Civil War in 1950.

=== Military ===
The Singaporean military, arguably the most technologically advanced in Southeast Asia, consists of the Army, the Navy, the Air Force and the Digital and Intelligence Service. It is seen as the guarantor of the country&#x27;s independence, translating into Singapore culture, involving all citizens in the country&#x27;s defence. The government spent 2.7% of the country&#x27;s GDP on the military in 2024, the highest in the region.

After its independence, Singapore had only two infantry regiments commanded by British officers. Considered too small to provide effective security for the new country, the development of its military forces became a priority. In addition, in October 1971, Britain pulled its military out of Singapore, leaving behind only a small British, Australian and New Zealand force as a token military presence. A great deal of initial support came from Israel, a country unrecognised by Singapore&#x27;s neighbouring Muslim-majority nations of Malaysia and Indonesia. The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) commanders were tasked by the Singapore Government to create the Singapore Armed Forces (SAF) from scratch, and Israeli instructors were brought in to train Singaporean soldiers. Military courses were conducted according to the IDF&#x27;s format, and Singapore adopted a system of conscription and reserve service based on the Israeli model. Singapore still maintains strong security ties with Israel and is one of the biggest buyers of Israeli arms and weapons systems, with one recent example being the MATADOR anti-tank weapon.

The SAF is being developed to respond to a wide range of issues in both conventional and unconventional warfare. The Defence Science and Technology Agency (DSTA) is responsible for procuring resources for the military. The geographic restrictions of Singapore mean that the SAF must plan to fully repulse an attack, as they cannot fall back and re-group. The small size of the population has also affected the way the SAF has been designed, with a small active force and a large number of reserves.
Singapore has conscription for all able-bodied males at age 18, except those with a criminal record or who can prove that their loss would bring hardship to their families. Males who have yet to complete pre-university education, are awarded the Public Service Commission (PSC) scholarship, or are pursuing a local medical degree can opt to defer their draft. Though not required to perform military service, the number of women in the SAF has been increasing: since 1989 they have been allowed to fill military vocations formerly reserved for men. Before induction into a specific branch of the armed forces, recruits undergo at least nine weeks of basic military training.

Because of the scarcity of open land on the main island, training involving activities such as live firing and amphibious warfare are often carried out on smaller islands, typically barred to civilian access. However, large-scale drills, considered too dangerous to be performed in the country, have been performed in other countries such as Brunei, Indonesia, Thailand and the United States. In general, military exercises are held with foreign forces once or twice per week. Due to airspace and land constraints, the Republic of Singapore Air Force (RSAF) maintains a number of overseas bases in Australia, the United States, and France. The RSAF&#x27;s 130 Squadron is based in RAAF Base Pearce, Western Australia, and its 126 Squadron is based in the Oakey Army Aviation Centre, Queensland. The RSAF has one squadron—the 150 Squadron—based in Cazaux Air Base in southern France. The RSAF&#x27;s overseas detachments in the United States are: Luke Air Force Base in Arizona, Marana in Arizona, Mountain Home Air Force Base in Idaho, and Andersen Air Force Base in Guam.

The SAF has sent forces to assist in operations outside the country, in areas such as Iraq, and Afghanistan, in both military and civilian roles. In the region, they have helped to stabilise East Timor and have provided aid to Aceh in Indonesia following the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami. Since 2009, the Republic of Singapore Navy (RSN) has deployed ships to the Gulf of Aden to aid in countering piracy efforts as part of Task Force 151. The SAF also helped in relief efforts during Hurricane Katrina, and Typhoon Haiyan. Singapore is part of the Five Power Defence Arrangements (FPDA), a military alliance with Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom. According to the 2024 Global Peace Index, Singapore is the 5th most peaceful country in the world.

=== Human rights ===
Capital punishment is a legal and enforced penalty in Singapore. The country is one of four in the developed world to retain the death penalty, along with the United States, Japan and Taiwan. Particularly, its use against drug trafficking has been a source of contention with non-governmental organisations such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch. The government has responded that it has &quot;no doubts&quot; that it is the right policy and that there is &quot;clear evidence&quot; of serious deterrence, and that the law should be looked at upon in the wider context of &quot;saving lives&quot;, particularly citizens. In 2004, Amnesty International claimed that some legal provisions of the Singapore system for the death penalty conflict with &quot;the right to be presumed innocent until proven guilty&quot;. The government has disputed Amnesty&#x27;s claims, stating that their &quot;position on abolition of the death penalty is by no means uncontested internationally&quot; and that the report contains &quot;grave errors of facts and misrepresentations&quot;.

From 1938 to 2023, sexual relations between men were technically illegal under Section 377A of the Penal Code, first introduced during British colonial rule. During the last few decades, this law was mostly unenforced and pressure to repeal it increased as homosexuality became more accepted by Singaporean society. Meanwhile, sexual relations between women had always been legal. In 2022, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong announced that Singapore would repeal 377A, effectively decriminalising homosexual behaviour. Nevertheless, he added that the repeal will not affect the recognition of &quot;traditional familial and societal norms,&quot; including how marriage is defined, leaving the legal status of same-sex marriage unchanged for the time, although the possibility of civil unions was not officially ruled out. Lee described this as a compromise between the conservative (and often religious) and progressive elements of Singaporean society to prevent further political fracturing. The law was officially repealed on 3 January 2023.

Pink Dot SG, an event held in support of the LGBT community, has drawn thousands of people annually since 2009 with increasing attendance. According to a survey conducted by the Institute of Policy Studies in 2019, Singaporean society has become more liberal on LGBT rights. In the survey, more than 20% of people said that sexual relations between adults of the same sex were not wrong at all or not wrong most of the time, up from 10% in 2013. The survey found that 27% felt the same way about same-sex marriage (an increase from 15% in 2013) and 30% did so about same-sex couples adopting a child (an increase from 24% in 2013). In 2021, six Singaporeans protested for improved trans protections in the educational system outside the Ministry of Education headquarters at Buona Vista.

Pimps often traffic women from neighbouring countries such as China, Malaysia and Vietnam at their brothels as well as rented apartments and hostels for higher profit margins when they get a cut from customers. In response, amendments were made to the Women&#x27;s Charter by the government in 2019 to legislate more serious punishments for traffickers, including imprisonment of up to seven years and a fine of S$100,000.

== Economy ==
Singapore has a highly developed market economy, based historically on extended entrepôt trade. Along with Hong Kong, South Korea, and Taiwan, Singapore is one of the Four Asian Tigers, and has surpassed its peers in terms of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita. Between 1965 and 1995, growth rates averaged around 6 per cent per annum, transforming the living standards of the population.

The Singaporean economy is regarded as free, innovative,
dynamic and business-friendly. For several years, Singapore has been one of the few countries with a AAA credit rating from the big three, and the only Asian country to achieve this rating. Singapore attracts a large amount of foreign investment as a result of its location, skilled workforce, low tax rates, advanced infrastructure and zero-tolerance against corruption. It was the world&#x27;s 4th most competitive economy in 2023, according to the International Institute for Management Development&#x27;s World Competitiveness Ranking of 64 countries, with the highest GDP (PPP) per capita. Roughly 44 percent of the Singaporean workforce is made up of non-Singaporeans. Despite market freedom, Singapore&#x27;s government operations have a significant stake in the economy, contributing 22% of the GDP. The city is a popular location for conferences and events.

The currency of Singapore is the Singapore dollar (SGD or S$), issued by the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS). It has been interchangeable with the Brunei dollar at par value since 1967. MAS manages its monetary policy by allowing the Singapore dollar exchange rate to rise or fall within an undisclosed trading band. This is different from most central banks, which use interest rates to manage policy. Singapore has the world&#x27;s eleventh largest foreign reserves, and one of the highest net international investment position per capita.

Singapore has been identified as a tax haven for the wealthy due to its low tax rates on personal income and tax exemptions on foreign-based income and capital gains. Individuals such as Australian millionaire retailer Brett Blundy and multi-billionaire Facebook co-founder Eduardo Saverin are two examples of wealthy individuals who have settled in Singapore. In 2009, Singapore was removed from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) &quot;liste grise&quot; of tax havens, and ranked fourth on the Tax Justice Network&#x27;s 2015 Financial Secrecy Index of the world&#x27;s off-shore financial service providers, banking one-eighth of the world&#x27;s offshore capital, while &quot;providing numerous tax avoidance and evasion opportunities&quot;. In August 2016, &quot;The Straits Times&quot; reported that Indonesia had decided to create tax havens on two islands near Singapore to bring Indonesian capital back into the tax base. In October 2016, the Monetary Authority of Singapore admonished and fined UBS and DBS and withdrew Falcon Private Bank&#x27;s banking licence for their alleged role in the Malaysian Sovereign Fund scandal.

In 2016, Singapore was rated the world&#x27;s most expensive city for the third consecutive year by the Economist Intelligence Unit, and this remained true in 2018. The government provides numerous assistance programmes to the homeless and needy through the Ministry of Social and Family Development, so acute poverty is rare. Some of the programmes include providing financial assistance to needy households, providing free medical care at government hospitals, and paying for children&#x27;s tuition. Other benefits include compensation for gym fees to encourage citizens to exercise, up to S$166,000 as a baby bonus for each citizen, heavily subsidised healthcare, financial aid for the disabled, the provision of reduced-cost laptops for poor students, rebates for costs such as public transport and utility bills, and more. As of 2018 Singapore&#x27;s ranking in the Human Development Index is 9th in the world, with an HDI value of 0.935.

== Geography ==


Singapore consists of 63 islands, including the main island, Pulau Ujong. There are two man-made connections to Johor, Malaysia: the Johor–Singapore Causeway in the north and the Tuas Second Link in the west. Jurong Island, Pulau Tekong, Pulau Ubin and Sentosa are the largest of Singapore&#x27;s smaller islands. The highest natural point is Bukit Timah Hill at . Under British rule, Christmas Island and the Cocos Islands were part of Singapore, and both were transferred to Australia in 1957. Pedra Branca is the nation&#x27;s easternmost point.

Land reclamation projects have increased Singapore&#x27;s land area from in the 1960s to by 2015, an increase of some 22% (130 km2). The country is projected to reclaim another . Some projects involve merging smaller islands through land reclamation to form larger, more functional and habitable islands, as has been done with Jurong Island. The type of sand used in reclamation is found in rivers and beaches, rather than deserts, and is in great demand worldwide. In 2010 Singapore imported almost 15 million tons of sand for its projects, the demand being such that Indonesia, Malaysia, and Vietnam have all restricted or barred the export of sand to Singapore in recent years. As a result, in 2016 Singapore switched to using polders for reclamation, in which an area is enclosed and then pumped dry.

=== Nature ===


Singapore&#x27;s urbanisation means that it has lost 95% of its historical forests, and now over half of the naturally occurring fauna and flora in Singapore is present in nature reserves, such as the Bukit Timah Nature Reserve and the Sungei Buloh Wetland Reserve, which comprise only 0.25% of Singapore&#x27;s land area. In 1967, to combat this decline in natural space, the government introduced the vision of making Singapore a &quot;garden city&quot;, aiming to improve quality of life. Since then, nearly 10% of Singapore&#x27;s land has been set aside for parks and nature reserves. The government has created plans to preserve the country&#x27;s remaining wildlife. Singapore&#x27;s well known gardens include the Singapore Botanic Gardens, a 165-year-old tropical garden and Singapore&#x27;s first UNESCO World Heritage Site.

=== Climate ===
Singapore has a tropical rainforest climate (Köppen: &quot;Af&quot;) with no distinctive seasons, uniform temperature and pressure, high humidity, and abundant rainfall. Temperatures usually range from . While temperature does not vary greatly throughout the year, there is a wetter monsoon season from November to February.

From July to October, there is often haze caused by bush fires in neighbouring Indonesia, usually from the island of Sumatra. Singapore follows the GMT+8 time zone, one hour ahead of the typical zone for its geographical location. This causes the sun to rise and set particularly late during February, where the sun rises at 7:15 am and sets around 7:20 pm. During July, the sun sets at around 7:15 pm. The earliest the sun rises and sets is in late October and early November when the sun rises at 6:46 am and sets at 6:50 pm.

Singapore recognises that climate change and rising sea levels in the decades ahead will have major implications for its low-lying coastline. It estimates that the nation will need to spend $100 billion over the course of the next century to address the issue. In its 2020 budget, the government set aside an initial $5 billion towards a Coastline and Flood Protection Fund. Singapore is the first country in Southeast Asia to levy a carbon tax on its largest carbon-emitting corporations producing more than 25,000 tons of carbon dioxide per year, at $5 per ton.

To reduce the country&#x27;s dependence on fossil fuels, it has ramped up deployment of solar panels on rooftops and vertical surfaces of buildings, and other initiatives like building one of the world&#x27;s largest floating solar farms at Tengeh Reservoir in Tuas.

=== Water supply ===

Singapore considers water a national security issue and the government has sought to emphasise conservation. Water access is universal and of high quality, though the country is projected to face significant water-stress by 2040. To circumvent this, the Public Utilities Board has implemented the &quot;four national taps&quot; strategy – water imported from neighbouring Malaysia, urban rainwater catchments, reclaimed water (NEWater) and seawater desalination. Singapore&#x27;s approach does not rely only on physical infrastructure; it also emphasises proper legislation and enforcement, water pricing, public education as well as research and development. Singapore has declared that it will be water self-sufficient by the time its 1961 long-term water supply agreement with Malaysia expires in 2061. However, according to official forecasts, water demand in Singapore is expected to double from per day between 2010 and 2060. The increase is expected to come primarily from non-domestic water use, which accounted for 55% of water demand in 2010 and is expected to account for 70% of demand in 2060. By that time, water demand is expected to be met by reclaimed water at the tune of 50% and by desalination accounting for 30%, compared to only 20% supplied by internal catchments.

Singapore is expanding its recycling system and intends to spend S$10 billion (US$7.4 billion) in water treatment infrastructure upgrades. The Ulu Pandan wastewater treatment was specially built to test advanced used-water treatment processes before full deployment and won the &quot;Water/Wastewater Project of the Year Award&quot; at the 2018 Global Water Awards in Paris, France. Operation started in 2017 and was jointly developed by PUB and the Black &amp; Veatch + AECOM Joint Venture.

=== Virtual Singapore ===

Virtual Singapore is a 3D digital replica of Singapore, which is used by the Government of Singapore, Singapore Land Authority, and many more companies to plan for industrial changes. It is also used for disaster management.

== Transport ==
=== Land ===

Singapore&#x27;s public transport network is shaped up with trains (consisting of the MRT and LRT systems), buses and taxis. There are currently six MRT lines (North–South MRT line, East–West MRT line, North East MRT line, Circle MRT line, Downtown MRT line and Thomson–East Coast MRT line), three LRT lines serving the neighbourhoods of Bukit Panjang and Choa Chu Kang (Bukit Panjang LRT line), Sengkang (Sengkang LRT line) and Punggol (Punggol LRT line), covering around 241 km (150 mi) in total, and more than 300 bus routes in operation. Taxis are a popular form of transport as the fares are relatively affordable when compared to many other developed countries, whilst cars in Singapore are the most expensive to own worldwide.
Singapore has a road system covering , which includes of expressways. The Singapore Area Licensing Scheme, implemented in 1975, became the world&#x27;s first congestion pricing scheme, and included other complementary measures such as stringent car ownership quotas and improvements in mass transit. Upgraded in 1998 and renamed Electronic Road Pricing (ERP), the system introduced electronic toll collection, electronic detection, and video surveillance technology. A satellite-based system was due to replace the physical gantries by 2020, but has been delayed until 2026 due to global shortages in the supply of semiconductors. As Singapore is a small island with a high population density, the number of private cars on the road is restricted with a pre-set car population quota, to curb pollution and congestion. Car buyers must pay for Additional Registration Fees (ARF) duties of either 100%, 140%, 180% or 220% of the vehicle&#x27;s Open Market Value (OMV), and bid for a Singaporean Certificate of Entitlement (COE) (that varies twice a month in supply based on the number of car registrations and de-registrations), which allows the car to be driven on the road for maximum period of 10 years. Car prices are generally significantly higher in Singapore than in other English-speaking countries. As with most Commonwealth countries, vehicles on the road and people walking on the streets keep to the left (left-hand traffic).
The Johor–Singapore Causeway (connecting Singapore with Johor Bahru, Malaysia) is the busiest international land border crossing in the world, whereby approximately 350,000 travellers cross the border checkpoints of both Woodlands Checkpoint and Sultan Iskandar Building daily (with an annual total of 128 million travellers). The Land Transport Authority (LTA) is responsible for all land transport-related infrastructure and operations in Singapore.

=== Air ===

Singapore is a major international transport hub in Asia, serving some of the busiest sea and air trade routes. Changi Airport is an aviation centre for Southeast Asia and a stopover on Qantas&#x27; Kangaroo Route between Sydney and London. There are two civilian airports in Singapore, Changi Airport and Seletar Airport. The Changi Airport hosts a network of over 100 airlines connecting Singapore to some 300 cities in about 70 countries and territories worldwide. It has been rated one of the best international airports by international travel magazines, including being rated as the world&#x27;s best airport for the first time in 2006 by Skytrax. It also had three of the ten busiest international air routes in the world in 2023: the busiest between Kuala Lumpur–Singapore, seventh busiest between Jakarta–Singapore, and ninth busiest between Bangkok Suvarnahbumi–Singapore.

Singapore Airlines, which is the flag carrier of Singapore, has been regarded as a 5-star airline by Skytrax and been in the world top 10 list of airlines for multiple consecutive years. It held the title of the World&#x27;s Best Airline by Skytrax in 2023. It won this title 12 times. Its hub, Changi Airport had also been rated as the world&#x27;s best airport from 2013 to 2020 before being superseded by Hamad International Airport in Doha. It reclaimed this title in 2023 before being superseded once more in 2024.

=== Sea ===

The Port of Singapore, managed by port operators PSA International and Jurong Port, was the world&#x27;s second-busiest port in 2019 in terms of shipping tonnage handled, at 2.85 billion gross tons (GT), and in terms of containerised traffic, at 37.2 million twenty-foot equivalent units (TEUs). It is also the world&#x27;s second-busiest, behind Shanghai, in terms of cargo tonnage with 626 million tons handled. In addition, the port is the world&#x27;s busiest for transshipment traffic and the world&#x27;s biggest ship refuelling centre.

== Industry sectors ==
Singapore is the world&#x27;s 3rd-largest foreign exchange centre, 6th-largest financial centre, 2nd-largest casino gambling market, 3rd-largest oil-refining and trading centre, largest oil-rig producer and hub for ship repair services, and largest logistics hub. The economy is diversified, with its top contributors being financial services, manufacturing, and oil-refining. Its main exports are refined petroleum, integrated circuits, and computers, which constituted 27% of the country&#x27;s GDP in 2010. Other significant sectors include electronics, chemicals, mechanical engineering, and biomedical sciences. Singapore was ranked 4th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024 and 7th in 2022. In 2019, there were more than 60 semiconductor companies in Singapore, which together constituted 11% of the global market share. The semiconductor industry alone contributes around 7% of Singapore&#x27;s GDP.

Singapore&#x27;s largest companies are in the telecommunications, banking, transportation, and manufacturing sectors, many of which started as state-run statutory corporations and have since been publicly listed on the Singapore Exchange. Such companies include Singapore Telecommunications (Singtel), Singapore Technologies Engineering, Keppel Corporation, Oversea-Chinese Banking Corporation (OCBC), Development Bank of Singapore (DBS), and United Overseas Bank (UOB). In 2011, amidst the global financial crisis, OCBC, DBS and UOB were ranked by &quot;Bloomberg Businessweek&quot; as the world&#x27;s 1st, 5th, and 6th strongest banks in the world, respectively. It is home to the headquarters of 3 &quot;Fortune&quot; Global 500 companies, the highest in the region.

The nation&#x27;s best known global companies include Singapore Airlines, Changi Airport, and the Port of Singapore, all of which are among the most-awarded in their respective fields. Singapore Airlines was ranked as Asia&#x27;s most-admired company, and the world&#x27;s 19th most-admired company in 2015 by &quot;Fortune&quot;″s annual &quot;50 most admired companies in the world&quot; industry surveys. Other awards it has received include the US-based &quot;Travel + Leisure&quot;″s Best International Airline award, which it has won for 20 consecutive years. Changi Airport connects over 100 airlines to more than 300 cities. The strategic international air hub has more than 480 World&#x27;s Best Airport awards , and is known as the most-awarded airport in the world. Over ten free-trade agreements have been signed with other countries and regions. Singapore is the second-largest foreign investor in India. It is the 14th largest exporter and the 15th largest importer in the world.

=== Tourism ===

Tourism is a major industry and contributor to the Singaporean economy, attracting 13.6 million international tourists in 2023, more than double Singapore&#x27;s total population. Tourism contributed directly to about 3% of Singapore&#x27;s GPD, on average, in the 10 years before 2023, excluding the Covid-19 pandemic years. Altogether, the sector generated approximately 8.6% of Singapore&#x27;s employment in 2016.

In 2015, Lonely Planet and &quot;The New York Times&quot; listed Singapore as their top and 6th-best world destinations to visit, respectively. Well-known landmarks include the Merlion, the Esplanade, Marina Bay Sands, Gardens by the Bay, Jewel Changi Airport, CHIJMES, National Gallery Singapore, the Singapore Flyer, the Orchard Road shopping belt, the resort island of Sentosa, and the Singapore Botanic Gardens, Singapore&#x27;s first UNESCO World Heritage Site, all located in southern and eastern Singapore.

The Singapore Tourism Board (STB) is the statutory board under the Ministry of Trade and Industry which is tasked with the promotion of the country&#x27;s tourism industry. In August 2017 the STB and the Economic Development Board (EDB) unveiled a unified brand, Singapore – Passion Made Possible, to market Singapore internationally for tourism and business purposes. The Orchard Road district, which contains multi-storey shopping centres and hotels, can be considered the centre of shopping and tourism in Singapore. Other popular tourist attractions include the Singapore Zoo, River Wonders, Bird Paradise and Night Safari (located in Northern Singapore). The Singapore Zoo has embraced the open zoo concept whereby animals are kept in enclosures, separated from visitors by hidden dry or wet moats, instead of caging the animals, and the River Wonders has 300 species of animals, including numerous endangered species. Singapore promotes itself as a medical tourism hub, with about 200,000 foreigners seeking medical care there each year. Singapore medical services aim to serve at least one million foreign patients annually and generate US$3 billion in revenue.

== Demographics ==

As of mid-2023, the estimated population of Singapore was 5,917,600, of whom 3,610,700 (61.6%) were citizens and the remaining 2,306,900 (38.4%) were either permanent residents (522,300) or international students, foreign workers, or dependants (1,644,500). The overall population increased 5% from the prior year, driven largely by foreign workers. This proportion is largely unchanged from the 2010 census.

The 2020 census reported that about 74.3% of residents were of Chinese descent, 13.5% of Malay descent, 9.0% of Indian descent, and 3.2% of other descent (such as Eurasian); this proportion was virtually identical to the 2010 census, with slight increases among Chinese and Malay (0.2% and 0.1% respectively) and minor decreases in Indian and others (0.2% and 0.1%). Prior to 2010, each person could register as a member of only one race, by default that of his or her father; therefore, mixed-race persons were solely grouped under their father&#x27;s race in government censuses. From 2010 onward, people may register using a multi-racial classification, in which they may choose one primary race and one secondary race, but no more than two.

Like other developed countries in Asia, Singapore experienced a rapid decline in its total fertility rate (TFR) beginning in the 1980s. Since 2010, its TFR has largely plateaued at 1.1 children per woman, which is among the lowest in the world and well below the 2.1 needed to replace the population. Consequently, the median age of Singaporean residents is among the highest in the world, at 42.8 in 2022 compared to 39.6 ten years earlier. Starting in 2001, the government introduced a series of programs to increase fertility, including paid maternity leave, childcare subsidies, tax relief and rebates, one-time cash gifts, and grants for companies that implement flexible work arrangements; nevertheless, live births have continued to decline, hitting a record low in 2022. Singapore&#x27;s immigration policy is designed to alleviate the decline and maintain its working-age population.

91% of resident households (i.e. households headed by a Singapore citizen or permanent resident) own the homes they live in, and the average household size is 3.43 persons (which include dependants who are neither citizens nor permanent residents). However, due to scarcity of land, 78.7% of resident households live in subsidised, high-rise, public housing apartments developed by the Housing and Development Board (HDB). Also, 75.9% of resident households live in properties that are equal to, or larger than, a four-room (i.e. three bedrooms plus one living room) HDB flat or in private housing. Live-in foreign domestic workers are quite common in Singapore, with about 224,500 foreign domestic workers there, as of December 2013.
=== Religion ===

Most major religious denominations are present in Singapore, with the Inter-Religious Organisation, Singapore (IRO) recognising 10 major religions in the city state. A 2014 analysis by the Pew Research Center found Singapore to be the world&#x27;s most religiously diverse nation, with no single religion claiming a majority.

Buddhism is the most widely practised religion, with 31% of residents declaring themselves adherents in the 2020 census. Christianity was the second largest religion at 18.9%, followed by Islam (15.6%), Taoism and Chinese Traditional Beliefs (8.8%) and Hinduism (5.0%). One-fifth of the population had no religious affiliation. The proportion of Christians, Muslims, and the nonreligious slightly increased between 2010 and 2020, while the proportion of Buddhists and Taoists slightly decreased; Hinduism and other faiths remained largely stable in their share of the population.

Singapore hosts monasteries and Dharma centres from all three major traditions of Buddhism: Theravada, Mahayana, and Vajrayana. Most Buddhists in Singapore are Chinese and adhere to the Mahayana tradition, owing to decades of missionary activity from China. However, Thailand&#x27;s Theravada Buddhism has seen growing popularity among the populace (not only the Chinese) during the past decade. Soka Gakkai International, a Japanese Buddhist organisation, is practised by many people in Singapore, and mostly by those of Chinese descent. Tibetan Buddhism has also made slow inroads into the country in recent years.

=== Languages ===

Singapore has four official languages: English, Malay, Mandarin, and Tamil.
English is the lingua franca and the main language used in business, government, law and education. The Constitution of Singapore and all government legislation is written in English, and interpreters are required if a language other than English is used in the Singaporean courts. Statutory corporations conduct their businesses in English, while any official documents written in a non-English official language such as Malay, Mandarin, or Tamil are typically translated into English to be accepted for use.

Malay was designated as a national language by the Singaporean government after independence from Britain in the 1960s to avoid friction with Singapore&#x27;s Malay-speaking neighbours of Malaysia and Indonesia. It has a symbolic, rather than functional purpose. It is used in the national anthem &quot;Majulah Singapura&quot;, in citations of Singaporean orders and decorations and in military commands. Singaporean Malay is officially written in the Latin-based Rumi script, though some Singaporean Malays also learn the Arabic-based Jawi script. Jawi is considered an ethnic script for use on Singaporean identity cards.

Singaporeans are mostly bilingual, typically with English as their common language and their mother-tongue as a second language taught in schools, in order to preserve each individual&#x27;s ethnic identity and values. According to the 2020 census, English was the language most spoken at home, used by 48.3% of the population; Mandarin was next, spoken at home by 29.9%. Nearly half a million speak other ancestral Southern varieties of Chinese, mainly Hokkien, Teochew, and Cantonese, as their home language, although the use of these is declining in favour of Mandarin or just English. Singapore Chinese characters are written using simplified Chinese characters.

Singaporean English is largely based on British English, owing to the country&#x27;s status as a former crown colony. However, forms of English spoken in Singapore range from Standard Singapore English to a colloquial form known as Singlish, which is discouraged by the government as it claims it to be a substandard English creole that handicaps Singaporeans, presenting an obstacle to learning standard English and rendering the speaker incomprehensible to everyone except to another Singlish speaker. Standard Singapore English is fully understandable to all Standard English speakers, while most English-speaking people do not understand Singlish. Nevertheless, Singaporeans have a strong sense of identity and connection to Singlish, whereby the existence of Singlish is recognised as a distinctive cultural marker for many Singaporeans. As such, in recent times, the government has tolerated the diglossia of both Singlish and Standard English (only for those who are fluent in both), whilst continuously reinforcing the importance of Standard English amongst those who speak only Singlish (which is not mutually intelligible with the Standard English of other English-speaking countries).

== Education ==
Education for primary, secondary, and tertiary levels is mostly supported by the state. All institutions, public and private, must be registered with the Ministry of Education (MOE). English is the language of instruction in all public schools, and all subjects are taught and examined in English except for the &quot;mother tongue&quot; language paper. While the term &quot;mother tongue&quot; in general refers to the first language internationally, in Singapore&#x27;s education system, it is used to refer to the second language, as English is the first language. Students who have been abroad for a while, or who struggle with their &quot;Mother Tongue&quot; language, are allowed to take a simpler syllabus or drop the subject.

Education takes place in three stages: primary, secondary, and pre-university education, with the primary education being compulsory. Students begin with six years of primary school, which is made up of a four-year foundation course and a two-year orientation stage. The curriculum is focused on the development of English, the mother tongue, mathematics, and science. Secondary school lasts from four to five years, and is divided between Express, Normal (Academic), and Normal (Technical) streams in each school, depending on a student&#x27;s ability level. The basic coursework breakdown is the same as in the primary level, although classes are much more specialised. Pre-university education takes place at either the 21 Junior Colleges or the Millennia Institute, over a period of two and three years respectively. As alternatives to pre-university education, however, courses are offered in other post-secondary education institutions, including the 5 polytechnics and 3 ITE colleges. Singapore has six public universities, of which the National University of Singapore and Nanyang Technological University are among the top 20 universities in the world.

National examinations are standardised across all schools, with a test taken after each stage. After the first six years of education, students take the Primary School Leaving Examination (PSLE), which determines their placement at secondary school. At the end of the secondary stage, O-Level or N-Level exams are taken; at the end of the following pre-university stage, the GCE A-Level exams are taken. Some schools have a degree of freedom in their curriculum and are known as autonomous schools, for secondary education level and above.

Singapore is also an education hub, with more than 80,000 international students in 2006. 5,000 Malaysian students cross the Johor–Singapore Causeway daily to attend schools in Singapore. In 2009, 20% of all students in Singaporean universities were international students—the maximum cap allowed, a majority from ASEAN, China and India.

Singapore students have excelled in many of the world education benchmarks in maths, science and reading. In 2015, both its primary and secondary students rank first in OECD&#x27;s global school performance rankings across 76 countries—described as the most comprehensive map of education standards. In 2016, Singapore students topped both the Program International Student Assessment (PISA) and the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS). In the 2016 EF English Proficiency Index taken in 72 countries, Singapore placed 6th and has been the only Asian country in the top ten.

== Healthcare ==


Singapore has a generally efficient healthcare system, even though health expenditures are relatively low for developed countries. The World Health Organisation ranks Singapore&#x27;s healthcare system as 6th overall in the world in its World Health Report. Singapore has had the lowest infant mortality rates in the world for the past two decades. In 2019, Singaporeans had the longest life expectancy of any country at 84.8 years. Women can expect to live an average of 87.6 years with 75.8 years in good health. The averages are lower for men. Singapore is ranked 1st on the Global Food Security Index.

As of December 2011 and January 2013, 8,800 foreigners and 5,400 Singaporeans were respectively diagnosed with HIV, but there are fewer than 10 annual deaths from HIV per 100,000 people. Adult obesity is below 10%. There is a high level of immunisation. In 2013, the Economist Intelligence Unit ranked Singapore as having the best quality of life in Asia and sixth overall in the world.

The government&#x27;s healthcare system is based upon the &quot;3M&quot; framework. This has three components: Medifund, which provides a safety net for those not able to otherwise afford healthcare; Medisave, a compulsory national medical savings account system covering about 85% of the population; and Medishield, a government-funded health insurance program. Public hospitals in Singapore have a considerable autonomy in their management decisions, and notionally compete for patients, but remain in government ownership. A subsidy scheme exists for those on low income. In 2008, 32% of healthcare was funded by the government. Healthcare accounts for approximately 3.5% of Singapore&#x27;s GDP.

== Culture ==

Despite its small size, Singapore has a diversity of languages, religions, and cultures. Former prime ministers of Singapore, Lee Kuan Yew and Goh Chok Tong, have stated that Singapore does not fit the traditional description of a nation, calling it a society-in-transition, pointing out the fact that Singaporeans do not all speak the same language, share the same religion, or have the same customs. Singaporeans who speak English as their native language would likely lean toward Western culture (along with either Christian culture or secularism), while those who speak Chinese as their native language mostly lean toward Chinese culture, which has linkages with Chinese folk religion, Buddhism, Taoism and Confucianism. Malay-speaking Singaporeans mostly lean toward Malay culture, which itself is closely linked to Islamic culture. Tamil-speaking Singaporeans mostly lean toward Tamil culture, which itself is mostly linked to Hindu culture. Racial and religious harmony is regarded as a crucial part of Singapore&#x27;s success, and played a part in building a Singaporean identity.

When Singapore became independent from the United Kingdom in 1963, most Singaporean citizens were transient migrant labourers who had no intention of staying permanently. There was also a sizeable minority of middle-class, locally born people—known as Peranakans or Baba-Nyonya-descendants of 15th- and 16th-century Chinese immigrants. With the exception of the Peranakans who pledged their loyalties to Singapore, most of the labourers&#x27; loyalties lay with their respective homelands of Malaya, China and India. After independence, the government began a deliberate process of crafting a uniquely Singaporean identity and culture. Singapore has a reputation as a nanny state. The government also places a heavy emphasis on meritocracy, where one is judged based on one&#x27;s ability.

The national flower of Singapore is the hybrid orchid, Vanda &#x27;Miss Joaquim&#x27;, named in memory of a Singapore-born Armenian woman, who crossbred the flower in her garden at Tanjong Pagar in 1893. Singapore is known as the &quot;Lion City&quot; and many national symbols such as the coat of arms and the lion head symbol make use of a lion. Major religious festivals are public holidays.

=== Arts ===

During the 1990s the National Arts Council was created to spearhead the development of performing arts, along with visual and literary art forms. The National Gallery Singapore is the nation&#x27;s flagship museum with some 8,000 works from Singaporean and other Southeast Asian artists. The Singapore Art Museum focuses on contemporary art from a Southeast Asian perspective. The Red Dot Design Museum celebrates exceptional art and design of objects for everyday life, hosting more than 1,000 items from 50 countries. The lotus-shaped ArtScience Museum hosts touring exhibitions that combine art with the sciences. Other major museums include the Asian Civilisations Museum, the Peranakan Museum, and The Arts House. The Esplanade is Singapore&#x27;s largest performing arts centre. In 2016 alone, it was the site of 5,900 free art and culture events.

Literature of Singapore, or &quot;SingLit&quot;, consists of a collection of literary works by Singaporeans written chiefly in the country&#x27;s four official languages: English, Malay, Mandarin, and Tamil. Singapore is increasingly regarded as having four sub-literatures instead of one. Many significant works have been translated and showcased in publications such as the literary journal &quot;Singa&quot;, published in the 1980s and 1990s with editors including Edwin Thumboo and Koh Buck Song, as well as in multilingual anthologies such as &quot;Rhythms: A Singaporean Millennial Anthology Of Poetry&quot; (2000), in which the poems were all translated three times each. A number of Singaporean writers such as Tan Swie Hian and Kuo Pao Kun have contributed work in more than one language.

Singapore has a diverse music culture that ranges from pop and rock, to folk and classical. Western classical music plays a significant role in the cultural life in Singapore, with the Singapore Symphony Orchestra (SSO) instituted in 1979. Other notable western orchestras in Singapore include Singapore National Youth Orchestra and the community-based Braddell Heights Symphony Orchestra. Many orchestras and ensembles are also found in secondary schools and junior colleges. Various communities have their own distinct ethnic musical traditions: Chinese, Malays, Indians, and Eurasians. With their traditional forms of music and various modern musical styles, the fusion of different forms account for the musical diversity in the country. The nation&#x27;s lively urban musical scene has made it a centre for international performances and festivals in the region. Some of Singapore&#x27;s best known pop singers include Stefanie Sun, JJ Lin, Liang Wern Fook, Taufik Batisah and Dick Lee, who is famous for composing National Day theme songs, including &quot;Home&quot;.

=== Cuisine ===
Singapore&#x27;s diversity of cuisine is touted as a reason to visit the country, due to its combination of convenience, variety, quality, and price. Local food items generally relate to a particular ethnicity – Chinese, Malay and Indian; but the diversity of cuisine has increased further by the hybridisation of different styles (e.g., the Peranakan cuisine, a mix of Chinese and Malay cuisine). In hawker centres, cultural diffusion is exemplified by traditionally Malay hawker stalls also selling Tamil food. Hainanese chicken rice, based on the Hainanese dish Wenchang chicken, is considered Singapore&#x27;s national dish.

The city-state has a burgeoning food scene ranging from hawker centres (open-air), food courts (air-conditioned), coffee shops (open-air with up to a dozen hawker stalls), cafes, fast food, simple kitchens, casual, celebrity and high-end restaurants. Cloud kitchens and food delivery are also on the rise, with 70% of residents ordering from delivery apps at least once a month. Many international celebrity chef restaurants are located within the integrated resorts. Religious dietary strictures exist (Muslims do not eat pork and Hindus do not eat beef), and there is also a significant group of vegetarians. The Singapore Food Festival which celebrates Singapore&#x27;s cuisine is held annually in July.

Prior to the 1980s, street food was sold mainly by immigrants from China, India, and Malaysia to other immigrants seeking a familiar taste. In Singapore, street food has long been associated with hawker centres with communal seating areas. Typically, these centres have a few dozen to hundreds of food stalls, with each specialising in one or more related dishes. While street food can be found in many countries, the variety and reach of centralised hawker centres that serve heritage street food in Singapore is unique. In 2018, there were 114 hawker centres spread across the city centre and heartland housing estates. They are maintained by the National Environment Agency, which also grades each food stall for hygiene. The largest hawker centre is located on the second floor of Chinatown Complex, and contains over 200 stalls. The complex is also home to the cheapest Michelin-starred meal in the world – a plate of soya-sauce chicken rice or noodles for S$2 (US$1.50). Two street food stalls in the city are the first in the world to be awarded a Michelin star, obtaining a single star each.

=== Sport and recreation ===
The development of private sports and recreation clubs began in the 19th century colonial Singapore, with clubs founded during this time including the Cricket Club, the Singapore Recreation Club, the Singapore Swimming Club, and the Hollandse Club. Weightlifter Tan Howe Liang was Singapore&#x27;s first Olympic medalist, winning a silver at the 1960 Rome Games. Singapore hosted the inaugural 2010 Summer Youth Olympics, in which 3,600 athletes from 204 nations competed in 26 sports.

Indoor and water sports are some of the most popular sports in Singapore. At the 2016 Rio Olympics, Joseph Schooling won Singapore&#x27;s first Olympic gold medal, claiming the 100-metre butterfly in a new Olympic record time of 50.39 seconds. Singapore sailors have had success on the international stage, with their Optimist team being considered among the best in the world. Despite its size, the country has dominated swim meets in the Southeast Asia Games. Its men&#x27;s water polo team won the SEA Games gold medal for the 27th time in 2017, continuing Singapore sport&#x27;s longest winning streak. At the 2024 Paris Olympics, Max Maeder won Singapore&#x27;s first Olympic medal in sailing, achieving bronze at the Men&#x27;s Formula Kite on National Day. At 17, he was also Singapore&#x27;s youngest Olympic medalist.

Singapore&#x27;s women&#x27;s table tennis team were silver medalists at the 2008 Beijing Olympics. They became world champions in 2010 when they beat China at the World Team Table Tennis Championships in Russia, breaking China&#x27;s 19-year winning streak. In 2021, Singapore&#x27;s Loh Kean Yew achieved a &quot;World Champion&quot; status when he won a badminton gold at the 2021 BWF World Championships men&#x27;s singles, which is one of the most prestigious badminton tournaments alongside the Summer Olympics badminton tournaments.

Singapore&#x27;s football league, the Singapore Premier League, was launched in 1996 as the S.League and comprises eight clubs, including one foreign team. The Singapore Slingers is one of the inaugural teams in the ASEAN Basketball League, which was founded in October 2009. Kranji Racecourse is run by the Singapore Turf Club and hosts several meetings per week, including international races—notably the Singapore Airlines International Cup.

Singapore began hosting a round of the Formula One World Championship, the Singapore Grand Prix at the Marina Bay Street Circuit in 2008. It was the inaugural F1 night race, and the first F1 street race in Asia. It is considered a signature event on the F1 calendar. ONE Championship was founded in Singapore, a major Mixed Martial Arts (MMA) promotion in Asia.

=== Media ===

Companies linked to the government control much of the domestic media in Singapore. MediaCorp operates most free-to-air television channels and free-to-air radio stations in Singapore. There are a total of six free-to-air TV channels offered by MediaCorp. StarHub TV and Singtel TV also offer IPTV with channels from all around the world. SPH Media Trust, a body with close links to the government, controls most of the newspaper industry in Singapore.

Singapore&#x27;s media industry has sometimes been criticised for being overly regulated and lacking in freedom by human rights groups such as Freedom House. Self-censorship among journalists is said to be common. In 2023, Singapore was ranked 129 on the Press Freedom Index published by Reporters Without Borders, up from 139 the previous year. The Media Development Authority regulates Singaporean media, claiming to balance the demand for choice and protection against offensive and harmful material. Private ownership of TV satellite dishes is banned.

Internet in Singapore is provided by state-owned Singtel, partially state-owned Starhub and M1 Limited as well as some other business internet service providers (ISPs) that offer residential service plans of speeds up to 2 Gbit/s as of spring 2015. Equinix (332 participants) and the Singapore Internet Exchange (70 participants) are Internet exchange points where Internet service providers and Content delivery networks exchange Internet traffic between their networks (autonomous systems) in various locations in Singapore. In the mid-1980s to 1990s, Singaporeans could also use the locally based videotext service Singapore Teleview to communicate with one another. The phrase &quot;Intelligent Island&quot; arose in the 1990s in reference to the island nation&#x27;s early adaptive relationship with the internet.

In 2016, there were an estimated 4.7 million internet users in Singapore, representing 82.5% of the population. The Singapore government does not engage in widespread censoring of the internet, but it maintains a list of one hundred websites—mostly pornographic—that it blocks from home internet access as a &quot;symbolic statement of the Singaporean community&#x27;s stand on harmful and undesirable content on the Internet&quot;. Singapore has the world&#x27;s highest smartphone penetration rates, in surveys by Deloitte and the Google Consumer Barometer—at 89% and 85% of the population respectively in 2014. The overall mobile phone penetration rate is at 148 mobile phone subscribers per 100 people.

== See also ==

* Index of Singapore-related articles
* Foreign relations of Singapore
* Outline of Singapore
== Notes ==

== References ==
=== Citations ===
Attribution

* &quot;This article incorporates public domain text from the websites of the Singapore Department of Statistics, the United States Department of State, the United States Library of Congress and &quot;The World Factbook&quot;.&quot;
== Works cited ==
* 
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==
* Singapore Government Portal
* Singapore Department of Statistics
* Foreign affairs of Singapore, Government of Singapore
* WikiSatellite view of Singapore at WikiMapia
* &quot;Singapore Infopedia&quot; from Singapore&#x27;s National Library Board; numerous well-researched and well-documented essays on key events and important figures, as well as topics regarding culture, architecture, nature, etc.
* Singapore profile from the BBC News</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="0" end="9" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="26" end="47" title="Singapore" label="Republic of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q112099" start="55" end="69" title="island country" label="island country"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="74" end="84" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="88" end="102" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054746" start="147" end="158" title="Singapore Island" label="main island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029267" start="160" end="191" title="List of islands of Singapore" label="63 satellite islands and islets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190558" start="197" end="215" title="Pedra Branca, Singapore" label="one outlying islet"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="233" end="251" title="degree of latitude" label="degree of latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="268" end="275" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="305" end="320" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malay Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q48359" start="336" end="353" title="Strait of Malacca" label="Strait of Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q205655" start="371" end="387" title="Singapore Strait" label="Singapore Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223" start="416" end="428" title="Riau Islands" label="Riau Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="432" end="441" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="447" end="462" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q732132" start="484" end="500" title="Straits of Johor" label="Straits of Johor"/>
<link wikidata="Q183032" start="516" end="530" title="Johor" label="State of Johor"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="534" end="542" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389952" start="565" end="578" title="Early history of Singapore" label="early history"/>
<link wikidata="Q655593" start="605" end="613" title="Emporium (antiquity)" label="emporium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918669" start="629" end="636" title="Temasek" label="Temasek"/>
<link wikidata="Q288587" start="707" end="721" title="thalassocratic" label="thalassocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130327" start="772" end="788" title="Stamford Raffles" label="Stamford Raffles"/>
<link wikidata="Q218739" start="817" end="825" title="entrepôt" label="entrepôt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="846" end="860" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q376178" start="937" end="956" title="Straits Settlements" label="Straits Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="965" end="977" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q715645" start="993" end="1010" title="Japanese occupation of Singapore" label="occupied by Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373718" start="1056" end="1068" title="Colony of Singapore" label="Crown colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="1079" end="1101" title="Surrender of Japan" label="Japan&amp;#x27;s surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448100" start="1128" end="1143" title="Self-governance of Singapore" label="self-governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="1203" end="1211" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479726" start="1223" end="1229" title="Federation of Malaya" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933920" start="1231" end="1243" title="Crown Colony of North Borneo" label="North Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589708" start="1249" end="1256" title="Crown Colony of Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4420038" start="1258" end="1281" title="Singapore in Malaysia" label="Ideological differences"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="1385" end="1402" title="Sovereign state" label="sovereign country"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1433" end="1443" title="History of the Republic of Singapore#1965 to Late 1970s" label="turbulence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354" start="1488" end="1498" title="hinterland" label="hinterland"/>
<link wikidata="Q190918" start="1550" end="1567" title="Four Asian Tigers" label="Four Asian Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="1582" end="1599" title="developed country" label="developed country"/>
<link wikidata="Q207987" start="1619" end="1654" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita" label="highest PPP-adjusted GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="1683" end="1692" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1743" end="1766" title="Credit rating#Sovereign credit ratings" label="sovereign credit rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906536" start="1772" end="1797" title="Big Three (credit rating agencies)" label="all major rating agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811588" start="1813" end="1821" title="Airline hub" label="aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066984" start="1823" end="1832" title="Financial centre" label="financial"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="1838" end="1855" title="Port" label="maritime shipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057274" start="1907" end="1928" title="List of most expensive cities for expatriate employees" label="most expensive cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q476713" start="1944" end="1954" title="expatriate" label="expatriate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10512400" start="1960" end="1974" title="foreign worker" label="foreign worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995015" start="2026" end="2035" title="Education in Singapore" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691309" start="2037" end="2047" title="Healthcare in Singapore" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="2049" end="2064" title="quality of life" label="quality of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q302285" start="2066" end="2081" title="personal safety" label="personal safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="2083" end="2097" title="infrastructure" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790461" start="2103" end="2110" title="public housing in Singapore" label="housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452190" start="2119" end="2138" title="List of countries by home ownership rate" label="home-ownership rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840821" start="2154" end="2166" title="Singaporeans" label="Singaporeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q842790" start="2184" end="2209" title="List of countries by life expectancy" label="longest life expectancies"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097729" start="2211" end="2245" title="List of countries by Internet connection speeds" label="fastest Internet connection speeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373300" start="2247" end="2276" title="List of countries by infant and under-five mortality rates" label="lowest infant mortality rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q210463" start="2282" end="2309" title="Corruption Perceptions Index" label="lowest levels of corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q176310" start="2335" end="2382" title="List of countries and dependencies by population density" label="third highest population density of any country"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="2457" end="2471" title="urban planning" label="urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980106" start="2616" end="2634" title="Languages of Singapore" label="official languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610939" start="2636" end="2643" title="Singaporean English" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="2645" end="2650" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048980" start="2652" end="2660" title="Singaporean Mandarin" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="2666" end="2671" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="2688" end="2703" title="lingua franca" label="common language"/>
<link wikidata="Q161837" start="2736" end="2750" title="public service" label="public service"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="2753" end="2768" title="multiculturalism" label="Multi-racialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278958" start="2825" end="2842" title="Race in Singapore" label="national policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198907" start="2860" end="2882" title="parliamentary republic" label="parliamentary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="2916" end="2926" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="2955" end="2962" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="2971" end="2992" title="multi-party democracy" label="multi-party democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139059" start="2998" end="3012" title="General elections in Singapore" label="free elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589317" start="3018" end="3028" title="Government of Singapore" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q371395" start="3039" end="3065" title="People&amp;#x27;s Action Party" label="People&amp;#x27;s Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439061" start="3102" end="3121" title="dominant-party system" label="political dominance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="3159" end="3164" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q170481" start="3208" end="3241" title="Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation" label="Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11278256" start="3259" end="3295" title="Pacific Economic Cooperation Council" label="Pacific Economic Cooperation Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138613" start="3338" end="3374" title="MICE (Meetings, Incentives, Conferences, Exhibitions) tourism" label="international conferences and events"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3410" end="3424" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="3430" end="3454" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q542549" start="3460" end="3476" title="East Asia Summit" label="East Asia Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="3482" end="3502" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="3512" end="3535" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="3568" end="3575" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q540885" start="3612" end="3625" title="anglicisation" label="anglicisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="3640" end="3645" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="3707" end="3715" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q185083" start="3752" end="3758" title="Brahmi script" label="Brahmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054746" start="3868" end="3879" title="Singapore Island" label="Pulau Ujong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054746" start="4027" end="4039" title="Pulau Ujong" label="Pú Luó Zhōng"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="4073" end="4078" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="4115" end="4126" title="Malay Peninsula" label="a peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918669" start="4163" end="4170" title="Temasek" label="Temasek"/>
<link wikidata="Q49335" start="4201" end="4216" title="Nagarakretagama" label="Nagarakretagama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="4220" end="4228" title="Java (island)" label="Javanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q249697" start="4229" end="4235" title="eulogy" label="eulogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="4259" end="4266" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="4373" end="4378" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501380" start="4430" end="4437" title="Chinese people" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q835720" start="4448" end="4459" title="Wang Dayuan" label="Wang Dayuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918669" start="4604" end="4611" title="Temasek" label="Temasek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="4659" end="4664" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="4694" end="4701" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q27842" start="4872" end="4892" title="Kingdom of Singapura" label="Kingdom of Singapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q4984200" start="4897" end="4919" title="Buddhism and Hinduism" label="Hindu–Buddhist culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918669" start="5061" end="5068" title="Temasek" label="Temasek"/>
<link wikidata="Q27842" start="5134" end="5154" title="Kingdom of Singapura" label="Kingdom of Singapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q684172" start="5197" end="5201" title="Raja" label="Raja"/>
<link wikidata="Q8131" start="5222" end="5231" title="Palembang" label="Palembang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254550" start="5322" end="5334" title="Malay Annals" label="Malay Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918669" start="5346" end="5353" title="Temasek" label="Temasek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521282" start="5394" end="5409" title="Sang Nila Utama" label="Sang Nila Utama"/>
<link wikidata="Q684172" start="5441" end="5445" title="Raja" label="Raja"/>
<link wikidata="Q8131" start="5457" end="5466" title="Palembang" label="Palembang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254550" start="5468" end="5478" title="Malay Annals" label="The Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521282" start="5490" end="5505" title="Sang Nila Utama" label="Sang Nila Utama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5714" end="5732" title="Tomé Pires#The Suma Oriental" label="Portuguese sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363540" start="5796" end="5807" title="Parameswara (king)" label="Parameswara"/>
<link wikidata="Q8131" start="5811" end="5820" title="Palembang" label="Palembang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363540" start="5822" end="5833" title="Parameswara (king)" label="Parameswara"/>
<link wikidata="Q49326" start="5861" end="5870" title="Majapahit" label="Majapahit"/>
<link wikidata="Q49209" start="5940" end="5948" title="Javanese people" label="Javanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918669" start="5974" end="5981" title="Temasek" label="Temasek"/>
<link wikidata="Q715645" start="6096" end="6115" title="Japanese occupation of Singapore" label="Japanese occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16278492" start="6344" end="6358" title="Little red dot" label="Little Red Dot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773316" start="6408" end="6433" title="The Wall Street Journal Asia" label="Asian Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="6467" end="6476" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q76156" start="6488" end="6501" title="B. J. Habibie" label="B. J. Habibie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254550" start="6621" end="6633" title="Malay Annals" label="Malay Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q27842" start="6645" end="6665" title="Kingdom of Singapura" label="Kingdom of Singapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521282" start="6695" end="6710" title="Sang Nila Utama" label="Sang Nila Utama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918669" start="6928" end="6935" title="Temasek" label="Temasek"/>
<link wikidata="Q49326" start="6988" end="6997" title="Majapahit" label="Majapahit"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="7013" end="7020" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Siamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037883" start="7053" end="7063" title="Indosphere" label="Indosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363540" start="7270" end="7281" title="Parameswara (king)" label="Parameswara"/>
<link wikidata="Q49326" start="7309" end="7318" title="Majapahit" label="Majapahit"/>
<link wikidata="Q185221" start="7358" end="7365" title="Malacca" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q46652" start="7387" end="7407" title="Sultanate of Malacca" label="Sultanate of Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438470" start="7470" end="7487" title="Fort Canning Hill" label="Fort Canning Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="7614" end="7624" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150344" start="7770" end="7785" title="Johor Sultanate" label="Johor Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q949314" start="7892" end="7917" title="Dutch Malacca" label="Dutch conquest of Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q130327" start="7970" end="7986" title="Stamford Raffles" label="Stamford Raffles"/>
<link wikidata="Q20447632" start="8135" end="8154" title="Abdul Rahman Muazzam Shah of Johor" label="Tengku Abdul Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112610" start="8160" end="8175" title="Sultan of Johor" label="Sultan of Johor"/>
<link wikidata="Q130654" start="8203" end="8208" title="Dutch Empire" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002570" start="8217" end="8222" title="Bugis" label="Bugis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="8237" end="8246" title="Sultanate" label="Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12522672" start="8283" end="8295" title="Temenggong Abdul Rahman" label="Abdul Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448349" start="8301" end="8320" title="Temenggong of Johor" label="Temenggong of Johor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351216" start="8417" end="8428" title="Hussein Shah of Johor" label="Tengku Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q188863" start="8448" end="8453" title="exile" label="exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374975" start="8457" end="8473" title="Penyengat Island" label="Penyengat Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223" start="8475" end="8487" title="Riau Islands" label="Riau Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351216" start="8675" end="8689" title="Hussein Shah of Johor" label="Sultan Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q116681293" start="8888" end="8907" title="1819 Singapore Treaty" label="Treaty of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="9029" end="9043" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q376178" start="9083" end="9102" title="Straits Settlements" label="Straits Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="9135" end="9148" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="9309" end="9315" title="Malays (ethnic group)" label="Malays"/>
<link wikidata="Q779191" start="9340" end="9347" title="Overseas Chinese" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003039" start="9421" end="9428" title="Chinese Singaporeans" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q910384" start="9492" end="9499" title="Uncaria gambir" label="gambier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="9566" end="9579" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="9616" end="9623" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4420038" start="9693" end="9699" title="Singapore in Malaysia" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="9822" end="9837" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="9883" end="9897" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560078" start="9949" end="9970" title="1915 Singapore Mutiny" label="1915 Singapore Mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="9974" end="9980" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q697185" start="9981" end="9987" title="sepoys" label="sepoys"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="10103" end="10117" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q183032" start="10279" end="10285" title="Johore" label="Johore"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="10290" end="10295" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="10304" end="10315" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926923" start="10345" end="10365" title="Singapore Naval Base" label="Singapore Naval Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q903876" start="10391" end="10409" title="Singapore strategy" label="Singapore strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551794" start="10505" end="10535" title="Japanese invasion of Manchuria" label="Japanese invasion of Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q811177" start="10629" end="10637" title="dry dock" label="dry dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535923" start="10670" end="10683" title="floating dock (jetty)" label="floating dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4419293" start="10817" end="10828" title="Fort Siloso" label="Fort Siloso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438470" start="10830" end="10842" title="Fort Canning" label="Fort Canning"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="10870" end="10885" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2242841" start="10898" end="10913" title="Tengah Air Base" label="Tengah Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="10915" end="10932" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="10956" end="10965" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058776" start="11053" end="11065" title="East of Suez" label="East of Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548213" start="11086" end="11104" title="British Home Fleet" label="British Home Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11338" end="11350" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q715645" start="11455" end="11472" title="Japanese occupation of Singapore" label="Japanese invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="11514" end="11525" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific War"/>
<link wikidata="Q696664" start="11540" end="11558" title="Malayan campaign" label="invasion of Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q296754" start="11577" end="11596" title="Battle of Singapore" label="Battle of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318423" start="11973" end="11984" title="Australians" label="Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="12211" end="12216" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="12218" end="12225" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q716144" start="12419" end="12438" title="Sook Ching massacre" label="Sook Ching massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540845" start="12459" end="12488" title="Operation Mailfist" label="planned to liberate Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="12607" end="12625" title="Surrender of Japan" label="Japanese surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="12633" end="12639" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q157068" start="12815" end="12832" title="Louis Mountbatten" label="Louis Mountbatten"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097635" start="12833" end="12854" title="Operation Tiderace" label="returned to Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q704374" start="12933" end="12949" title="Seishirō Itagaki" label="Seishirō Itagaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q168339" start="12971" end="12988" title="Hisaichi Terauchi" label="Hisaichi Terauchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q254004" start="13022" end="13040" title="Tomoyuki Yamashita" label="Tomoyuki Yamashita"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="13197" end="13208" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4096586" start="13767" end="13798" title="British Military Administration (Malaya)" label="British Military Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="13854" end="13866" title="Crown colony" label="Crown Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="14059" end="14077" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="14145" end="14158" title="Guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354629" start="14198" end="14215" title="Malayan Emergency" label="Malayan Emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926668" start="14221" end="14248" title="1954 National Service riots" label="1954 National Service riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875492" start="14250" end="14268" title="Hock Lee bus riots" label="Hock Lee bus riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100837" start="14274" end="14302" title="Chinese middle schools riots" label="Chinese middle schools riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q687956" start="14349" end="14363" title="David Marshall (Singaporean politician)" label="David Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219964" start="14396" end="14408" title="Labour Front" label="Labour Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="14486" end="14492" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697131" start="14582" end="14594" title="Lim Yew Hock" label="Lim Yew Hock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448100" start="14683" end="14698" title="Self-governance of Singapore" label="self-government"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843916" start="14786" end="14806" title="1959 Singaporean general election" label="30 May 1959 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q371395" start="14812" end="14838" title="People&amp;#x27;s Action Party" label="People&amp;#x27;s Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4279832" start="14870" end="14878" title="Governor of Singapore" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577848" start="14883" end="14915" title="William Allmond Codrington Goode" label="William Allmond Codrington Goode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133893" start="14936" end="14958" title="Yang di-Pertuan Negara" label="Yang di-Pertuan Negara"/>
<link wikidata="Q60518" start="15388" end="15404" title="Barisan Sosialis" label="Barisan Sosialis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668154" start="15471" end="15506" title="United Malays National Organisation" label="United Malays National Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q296317" start="15995" end="16013" title="Tunku Abdul Rahman" label="Tunku Abdul Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="16068" end="16076" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479726" start="16158" end="16178" title="Federation of Malaya" label="Federation of Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="16191" end="16197" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933920" start="16199" end="16211" title="North Borneo (British Crown colony)" label="North Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589708" start="16217" end="16224" title="Sarawak (British Crown colony)" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523303" start="16536" end="16560" title="1962 Merger Referendum of Singapore" label="referendum on the merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741681" start="16836" end="16854" title="Malaysia Agreement" label="Malaysia Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="16971" end="16980" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361929" start="17062" end="17085" title="Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation" label="&amp;quot;Konfrontasi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721825" start="17188" end="17226" title="MacDonald House bombing" label="a bomb planted by Indonesian saboteurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721822" start="17251" end="17266" title="MacDonald House" label="MacDonald House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669350" start="17433" end="17456" title="Indonesian Marine Corps" label="Indonesian Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201209" start="17458" end="17484" title="Osman bin Haji Mohamed Ali" label="Osman bin Haji Mohamed Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q12485371" start="17489" end="17503" title="Harun bin Said" label="Harun bin Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165452" start="17653" end="17722" title="People&amp;#x27;s Action Party–United Malays National Organisation relations" label="Singaporean government and the Malaysian central government disagreed"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="17938" end="17943" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="17948" end="17955" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q12687629" start="18191" end="18206" title="1964 race riots in Singapore" label="1964 race riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986392" start="18411" end="18433" title="Parliament of Malaysia" label="Parliament of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646277" start="18506" end="18530" title="Members of the Dewan Rakyat, 2nd Malaysian Parliament" label="the Malaysian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q131248" start="18825" end="18837" title="Lee Kuan Yew" label="Lee Kuan Yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q259331" start="18842" end="18857" title="Yusof bin Ishak" label="Yusof bin Ishak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="18950" end="18988" title="Association of Southeast Asian Nations" label="Association of Southeast Asian Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156031" start="19009" end="19028" title="1969 race riots of Singapore" label="broke out once more"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959421" start="19461" end="19478" title="wafer fabrication" label="wafer fabrication"/>
<link wikidata="Q32159" start="19585" end="19609" title="Singapore Changi Airport" label="Singapore Changi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q32245" start="19633" end="19651" title="Singapore Airlines" label="Singapore Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421994" start="19668" end="19685" title="Port of Singapore" label="Port of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995088" start="20524" end="20536" title="Constitution of Singapore" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q39021" start="20575" end="20592" title="President of Singapore" label="elected president"/>
<link wikidata="Q115824963" start="20626" end="20639" title="Reserves of the Government of Singapore" label="past reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q313300" start="20694" end="20707" title="Goh Chok Tong" label="Goh Chok Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="20828" end="20855" title="1997 Asian financial crisis" label="1997 Asian financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q103177" start="20869" end="20873" title="Severe acute respiratory syndrome" label="SARS"/>
<link wikidata="Q57643" start="20893" end="20908" title="Lee Hsien Loong" label="Lee Hsien Loong"/>
<link wikidata="Q131248" start="20928" end="20940" title="Lee Kuan Yew" label="Lee Kuan Yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="21033" end="21059" title="2007–2008 financial crisis" label="2007–2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742087" start="21081" end="21108" title="Malaysia–Singapore Points of Agreement of 1990" label="dispute over land ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096333" start="21112" end="21141" title="Tanjong Pagar railway station" label="Tanjong Pagar railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043159" start="21202" end="21219" title="integrated resort" label="integrated resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q548679" start="21243" end="21259" title="Marina Bay Sands" label="Marina Bay Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955134" start="21264" end="21285" title="Resorts World Sentosa" label="Resorts World Sentosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873387" start="21295" end="21312" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Singapore" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q246828" start="21335" end="21363" title="2011 Singaporean general election" label="worst ever electoral results"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665203" start="21526" end="21530" title="Death and state funeral of Lee Kuan Yew" label="died"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021117" start="21669" end="21695" title="2015 Singaporean general election" label="September general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q20983901" start="21825" end="21838" title="2020 Singaporean general election" label="2020 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299911" start="21899" end="21918" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party (Singapore)" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504758" start="22006" end="22019" title="Lawrence Wong" label="Lawrence Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="22170" end="22183" title="Parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="22206" end="22224" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995088" start="22230" end="22255" title="Constitution of Singapore" label="Constitution of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q39021" start="22356" end="22365" title="President of Singapore" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="22373" end="22386" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053680" start="22419" end="22428" title="Separation of powers in Singapore" label="separated"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="22452" end="22461" title="Executive (government)" label="Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q866756" start="22513" end="22527" title="Prime Minister of Singapore" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818608" start="22537" end="22569" title="Attorney-General of Singapore" label="Attorney General&amp;#x27;s Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818608" start="22581" end="22597" title="Attorney-General of Singapore" label="Attorney-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686796" start="22945" end="22963" title="advice and consent" label="advice and consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="23069" end="23080" title="Legislature" label="Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="23110" end="23120" title="Unicameralism" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236832" start="23465" end="23485" title="Powers of the President of Singapore" label="discretionary powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="23604" end="23613" title="Judiciary" label="Judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001103" start="23830" end="23843" title="Supreme Court of Singapore" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631773" start="23848" end="23860" title="State Courts of Singapore" label="State Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="23974" end="23989" title="judicial review" label="interprets laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="24529" end="24542" title="Public administration" label="public office"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="24692" end="24706" title="private sector" label="private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q827451" start="24746" end="24771" title="Equity (finance)" label="shareholders&amp;#x27; equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086037" start="24906" end="24938" title="Presidential Elections Committee" label="Presidential Elections Committee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25092" end="25100" title="Presidential elections in Singapore#Reserved elections" label="reserved"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523310" start="25330" end="25356" title="2017 Singaporean presidential election" label="2017 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741676" start="25470" end="25488" title="Malay Singaporeans" label="Malay ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642345" start="25553" end="25566" title="Halimah Yacob" label="Halimah Yacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333366" start="25782" end="25795" title="snap election" label="snap election"/>
<link wikidata="Q104845061" start="25811" end="25829" title="14th Parliament of Singapore" label="current Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163953" start="25881" end="25898" title="Constituencies of Singapore" label="31 constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048601" start="25921" end="25938" title="Nominated Member of Parliament" label="nominated members"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048878" start="25981" end="26005" title="Non-constituency Member of Parliament" label="non-constituency members"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104922" start="26161" end="26196" title="Group representation constituency" label="group representation constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="26370" end="26396" title="first-past-the-post voting" label="first-past-the-post voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646193" start="26414" end="26433" title="Surgery (politics)" label="political surgeries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056493" start="26448" end="26472" title="Meet-the-People Sessions" label="Meet-the-People Sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q371395" start="26610" end="26636" title="People&amp;#x27;s Action Party" label="People&amp;#x27;s Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448100" start="26757" end="26772" title="Self-governance of Singapore" label="self-governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q729119" start="26868" end="26890" title="Economic liberalism" label="free-market principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q59599" start="26892" end="26909" title="Civic nationalism" label="civil nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="26915" end="26924" title="Welfare state" label="welfarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299911" start="27134" end="27153" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party (Singapore)" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q605479" start="27308" end="27327" title="illiberal democracy" label="illiberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439061" start="27334" end="27352" title="Dominant-party system" label="soft-authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q632891" start="27699" end="27718" title="McMaster University" label="McMaster University"/>
<link wikidata="Q858717" start="27929" end="27941" title="Asian values" label="Asian values"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="28150" end="28162" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="28657" end="28675" title="English law" label="English common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="28727" end="28739" title="British Empire" label="British rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352899" start="28780" end="28792" title="Criminal law of Singapore" label="Criminal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519479" start="28809" end="28826" title="Indian Penal Code" label="Indian Penal Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="28851" end="28864" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q13368786" start="29096" end="29109" title="Jury trial" label="Trial by jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302964" start="29212" end="29231" title="Judicial corporal punishment" label="corporal punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073373" start="29236" end="29242" title="Caning in Singapore" label="caning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426417" start="29248" end="29266" title="Capital punishment in Singapore" label="capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q175111" start="29271" end="29278" title="hanging" label="hanging"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800866" start="29396" end="29442" title="Article 14 of the Constitution of Singapore" label="Article 14(1) of the Constitution of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="29553" end="29570" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="29575" end="29595" title="freedom of the press" label="freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="29612" end="29617" title="civil rights" label="civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="29698" end="29723" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067271" start="29738" end="29757" title="Press Freedom Index" label="Press Freedom Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="29759" end="29772" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417780" start="29829" end="29849" title="Freedom in the World" label="Freedom in the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063288" start="29872" end="29899" title="Economist Intelligence Unit" label="Economist Intelligence Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q326174" start="29996" end="30011" title="Democracy Index" label="Democracy Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574324" start="30133" end="30154" title="Speakers&amp;#x27; Corner, Singapore" label="Speakers&amp;#x27; Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q210463" start="30164" end="30192" title="Corruption Perceptions Index" label="Corruption Perceptions Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439061" start="30441" end="30459" title="Dominant-party system" label="soft authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178079" start="30491" end="30502" title="meritocracy" label="meritocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035892" start="30684" end="30705" title="World Justice Project" label="World Justice Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="30822" end="30833" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q720829" start="31049" end="31064" title="open government" label="open government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237872" start="31116" end="31134" title="fundamental rights" label="fundamental rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="31244" end="31258" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="31468" end="31473" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q297472" start="31514" end="31535" title="ASEAN Free Trade Area" label="ASEAN Free Trade Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q125447776" start="31664" end="31696" title="The Forum of Small States (FOSS)" label="The Forum of Small States (FOSS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q726746" start="31816" end="31835" title="Asia–Europe Meeting" label="Asia–Europe Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q17076232" start="31841" end="31887" title="Forum for East Asia-Latin American Cooperation" label="Forum for East Asia-Latin American Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297691" start="31893" end="31921" title="Indian Ocean Rim Association" label="Indian Ocean Rim Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q542549" start="31931" end="31947" title="East Asia Summit" label="East Asia Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="32002" end="32016" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="32025" end="32037" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19771" start="32085" end="32088" title="G20" label="G20"/>
<link wikidata="Q11278256" start="32206" end="32242" title="Pacific Economic Cooperation Council" label="Pacific Economic Cooperation Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742090" start="32401" end="32409" title="Malaysia–Singapore relations" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="32414" end="32423" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="32511" end="32522" title="fresh water" label="fresh water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074568" start="32555" end="32577" title="Singapore Armed Forces" label="Singapore Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q246602" start="32799" end="32819" title="Pedra Branca dispute" label="Pedra Branca dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="32847" end="32877" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q48359" start="32893" end="32910" title="Strait of Malacca" label="Strait of Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="32995" end="33001" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q206319" start="33137" end="33150" title="Brunei dollar" label="Brunei dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q190951" start="33155" end="33171" title="Singapore dollar" label="Singapore dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100271" start="33235" end="33264" title="China–Singapore relations" label="diplomatic contact with China"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="33458" end="33471" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="34042" end="34053" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q50396434" start="34157" end="34174" title="2018 North Korea–United States summit" label="a historic summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="34196" end="34208" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q709616" start="34213" end="34232" title="Chairman of the State Affairs Commission" label="North Korean leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q56226" start="34233" end="34244" title="Kim Jong-un" label="Kim Jong-un"/>
<link wikidata="Q19849335" start="34336" end="34349" title="Ma–Xi meeting" label="Ma–Xi meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q127031" start="34431" end="34444" title="Taiwan Strait" label="Taiwan Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="34466" end="34483" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081230" start="34615" end="34619" title="Singapore Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531890" start="34625" end="34629" title="Republic of Singapore Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002451" start="34635" end="34644" title="Republic of Singapore Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q111943711" start="34653" end="34685" title="Digital and Intelligence Service" label="Digital and Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="34993" end="35001" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="35391" end="35397" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="35455" end="35470" title="Islamic" label="Muslim-majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="35510" end="35531" title="Israel Defense Forces" label="Israel Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074568" start="35603" end="35625" title="Singapore Armed Forces" label="Singapore Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363995" start="35865" end="35878" title="Conscription in Israel" label="Israeli model"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658067" start="36043" end="36050" title="MATADOR" label="MATADOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251252" start="36187" end="36224" title="Defence Science and Technology Agency" label="Defence Science and Technology Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162771" start="36583" end="36595" title="Conscription in Singapore" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257606" start="36815" end="36840" title="Public Service Commission (Singapore)" label="Public Service Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q348120" start="37356" end="37374" title="amphibious warfare" label="amphibious warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002451" start="37764" end="37795" title="Republic of Singapore Air Force" label="Republic of Singapore Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="37843" end="37852" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="37858" end="37871" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="37877" end="37883" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q955792" start="37926" end="37942" title="RAAF Base Pearce" label="RAAF Base Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="37944" end="37961" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056847" start="37971" end="37983" title="126 Squadron, Republic of Singapore Air Force" label="126 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903084" start="38000" end="38026" title="Oakey Army Aviation Centre" label="Oakey Army Aviation Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="38028" end="38038" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q973830" start="38092" end="38107" title="Cazaux Air Base" label="Cazaux Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346991" start="38191" end="38210" title="Luke Air Force Base" label="Luke Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="38214" end="38221" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q762743" start="38223" end="38229" title="Marana, Arizona" label="Marana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407551" start="38242" end="38270" title="Mountain Home Air Force Base" label="Mountain Home Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="38274" end="38279" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q491372" start="38285" end="38308" title="Andersen Air Force Base" label="Andersen Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="38312" end="38316" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="38405" end="38409" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="38415" end="38426" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="38510" end="38520" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823" start="38546" end="38550" title="Aceh" label="Aceh"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="38578" end="38618" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami" label="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531890" start="38636" end="38662" title="Republic of Singapore Navy" label="Republic of Singapore Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41837" start="38695" end="38707" title="Gulf of Aden" label="Gulf of Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="38729" end="38735" title="piracy" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669705" start="38755" end="38769" title="Combined Task Force 151" label="Task Force 151"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="38816" end="38833" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q15136651" start="38839" end="38853" title="Typhoon Haiyan" label="Typhoon Haiyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045582" start="38880" end="38911" title="Five Power Defence Arrangements" label="Five Power Defence Arrangements"/>
<link wikidata="Q327901" start="39025" end="39043" title="Global Peace Index" label="Global Peace Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="39124" end="39142" title="Capital punishment" label="Capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332528" start="39204" end="39215" title="Capital punishment by country" label="one of four"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="39223" end="39238" title="Developed country" label="developed world"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="39283" end="39296" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="39298" end="39303" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="39308" end="39314" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249499" start="39334" end="39362" title="capital punishment for drug trafficking" label="use against drug trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="39400" end="39430" title="Non-governmental organization" label="non-governmental organisations"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="39439" end="39460" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="39465" end="39483" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q332142" start="39624" end="39642" title="Deterrence (penology)" label="serious deterrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="39768" end="39789" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q275462" start="39907" end="39924" title="Presumption of innocence" label="presumed innocent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444606" start="40287" end="40317" title="Section 377A of the Penal Code (Singapore)" label="Section 377A of the Penal Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q57643" start="40613" end="40628" title="Lee Hsien Loong" label="Lee Hsien Loong"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="40913" end="40930" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q41075" start="40983" end="40995" title="civil unions" label="civil unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="41073" end="41085" title="conservative" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="41112" end="41123" title="progressivism" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195990" start="41249" end="41260" title="Pink Dot SG" label="Pink Dot SG"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="41294" end="41298" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040758" start="41427" end="41454" title="Institute of Policy Studies (Singapore)" label="Institute of Policy Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="41500" end="41507" title="liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517455" start="41930" end="41935" title="trans rights" label="trans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294530" start="41986" end="42007" title="Ministry of Education (Singapore)" label="Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251913" start="42024" end="42035" title="Buona Vista" label="Buona Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q43437" start="42038" end="42043" title="Procuring (prostitution)" label="Pimps"/>
<link wikidata="Q96405401" start="42050" end="42057" title="Sex trafficking in Singapore" label="traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="42100" end="42105" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="42107" end="42115" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="42120" end="42127" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q131295" start="42137" end="42145" title="brothels" label="brothels"/>
<link wikidata="Q188507" start="42164" end="42173" title="apartment" label="apartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q654772" start="42179" end="42186" title="hostels" label="hostels"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030847" start="42290" end="42310" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Charter" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="42509" end="42523" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q218739" start="42556" end="42564" title="entrepôt" label="entrepôt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="42583" end="42592" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="42594" end="42605" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="42611" end="42617" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q190918" start="42643" end="42660" title="Four Asian Tigers" label="Four Asian Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="42702" end="42724" title="Gross domestic product" label="Gross Domestic Product"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577635" start="43029" end="43046" title="Bond credit rating" label="AAA credit rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906536" start="43056" end="43065" title="Big Three (credit rating agencies)" label="big three"/>
<link wikidata="Q667972" start="43379" end="43429" title="International Institute for Management Development" label="International Institute for Management Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q207987" start="43493" end="43521" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita" label="highest GDP (PPP) per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q190951" start="43829" end="43845" title="Singapore dollar" label="Singapore dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661296" start="43873" end="43904" title="Monetary Authority of Singapore" label="Monetary Authority of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q206319" start="43949" end="43962" title="Brunei dollar" label="Brunei dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q975735" start="43966" end="43975" title="par value" label="par value"/>
<link wikidata="Q178476" start="44004" end="44019" title="monetary policy" label="monetary policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q66100" start="44053" end="44066" title="exchange rate" label="exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="44147" end="44160" title="central banks" label="central banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q179179" start="44172" end="44186" title="interest rates" label="interest rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324629" start="44245" end="44269" title="List of countries by foreign exchange reserves" label="largest foreign reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509278" start="44294" end="44342" title="List of creditor nations by net international investment position per capita" label="net international investment position per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="44380" end="44389" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q28962504" start="44564" end="44576" title="Brett Blundy" label="Brett Blundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q312663" start="44619" end="44634" title="Eduardo Saverin" label="Eduardo Saverin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="44746" end="44800" title="OECD" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q638213" start="44872" end="44891" title="Tax Justice Network" label="Tax Justice Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449645" start="44904" end="44927" title="Financial Secrecy Index" label="Financial Secrecy Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q498921" start="45144" end="45161" title="The Straits Times" label="The Straits Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q193199" start="45381" end="45384" title="UBS" label="UBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q705417" start="45389" end="45392" title="DBS Bank" label="DBS"/>
<link wikidata="" start="45406" end="45425" title=":de:Falcon Private Bank" label="Falcon Private Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063288" start="45618" end="45645" title="Economist Intelligence Unit" label="Economist Intelligence Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15151135" start="45772" end="45813" title="Ministry of Social and Family Development" label="Ministry of Social and Family Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838434" start="46122" end="46132" title="baby bonus" label="baby bonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="46386" end="46409" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029267" start="46500" end="46510" title="List of islands of Singapore" label="63 islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054746" start="46539" end="46550" title="Pulau Ujong" label="Pulau Ujong"/>
<link wikidata="Q183032" start="46590" end="46595" title="Johor" label="Johor"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="46597" end="46605" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q892615" start="46611" end="46635" title="Johor–Singapore Causeway" label="Johor–Singapore Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083571" start="46657" end="46673" title="Malaysia–Singapore Second Link" label="Tuas Second Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383204" start="46687" end="46700" title="Jurong Island" label="Jurong Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611322" start="46702" end="46714" title="Pulau Tekong" label="Pulau Tekong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928550" start="46716" end="46726" title="Pulau Ubin" label="Pulau Ubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q870844" start="46731" end="46738" title="Sentosa" label="Sentosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q720209" start="46821" end="46837" title="Bukit Timah Hill" label="Bukit Timah Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q31063" start="46863" end="46879" title="Christmas Island" label="Christmas Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q36004" start="46888" end="46901" title="Cocos (Keeling) Islands" label="Cocos Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="46955" end="46964" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190558" start="46974" end="46986" title="Pedra Branca, Singapore" label="Pedra Branca"/>
<link wikidata="Q29025841" start="47028" end="47044" title="Land reclamation in Singapore" label="Land reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="47622" end="47629" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q106259" start="47758" end="47764" title="polder" label="polder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438217" start="47980" end="47985" title="Fauna of Singapore" label="fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460417" start="47990" end="47995" title="Flora of Singapore" label="flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q385725" start="48052" end="48078" title="Bukit Timah Nature Reserve" label="Bukit Timah Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q643216" start="48087" end="48115" title="Sungei Buloh Wetland Reserve" label="Sungei Buloh Wetland Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="48424" end="48438" title="nature reserve" label="nature reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522992" start="48468" end="48523" title="Singapore Green Plan 2012" label="plans to preserve the country&amp;#x27;s remaining wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046409" start="48573" end="48598" title="Singapore Botanic Gardens" label="Singapore Botanic Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="48658" end="48664" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="48665" end="48684" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="48719" end="48746" title="tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="48748" end="48754" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="48986" end="48993" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569306" start="49066" end="49070" title="Southeast Asian haze" label="haze"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="49081" end="49090" title="bush fire" label="bush fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="49146" end="49153" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="49603" end="49620" title="sea level rise" label="rising sea levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q288401" start="49992" end="50002" title="carbon tax" label="carbon tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988434" start="50364" end="50380" title="Tengeh reservoir" label="Tengeh Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850658" start="50384" end="50388" title="Tuas" label="Tuas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50710" end="50740" title="Water supply and sanitation in Singapore#Water sources and integrated management" label="&amp;quot;four national taps&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q568742" start="52244" end="52262" title="3D modeling" label="3D digital replica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589317" start="52298" end="52321" title="Government of Singapore" label="Government of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523039" start="52323" end="52347" title="Singapore Land Authority" label="Singapore Land Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="52425" end="52444" title="Emergency management" label="disaster management"/>
<link wikidata="Q40176" start="52563" end="52566" title="Mass Rapid Transit (Singapore)" label="MRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2231347" start="52571" end="52574" title="Light Rail Transit (Singapore)" label="LRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001243" start="52585" end="52590" title="Bus transport in Singapore" label="buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="52595" end="52600" title="taxicab" label="taxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q759229" start="52637" end="52657" title="North–South MRT line" label="North–South MRT line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895425" start="52659" end="52677" title="East–West MRT line" label="East–West MRT line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725116" start="52679" end="52698" title="North East MRT line" label="North East MRT line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154003" start="52700" end="52715" title="Circle MRT line" label="Circle MRT line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663943" start="52717" end="52734" title="Downtown MRT line" label="Downtown MRT line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795883" start="52739" end="52766" title="Thomson–East Coast MRT line" label="Thomson–East Coast MRT line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224065" start="52815" end="52828" title="Bukit Panjang" label="Bukit Panjang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069101" start="52833" end="52846" title="Choa Chu Kang" label="Choa Chu Kang"/>
<link wikidata="Q778271" start="52848" end="52870" title="Bukit Panjang LRT line" label="Bukit Panjang LRT line"/>
<link wikidata="Q10861365" start="52873" end="52881" title="Sengkang" label="Sengkang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133879" start="52883" end="52900" title="Sengkang LRT line" label="Sengkang LRT line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260156" start="52906" end="52913" title="Punggol" label="Punggol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134179" start="52915" end="52931" title="Punggol LRT line" label="Punggol LRT line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308083" start="53227" end="53238" title="road transport in Singapore" label="road system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136930" start="53265" end="53279" title="expressways of Singapore" label="of expressways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522877" start="53285" end="53316" title="Singapore Area Licensing Scheme" label="Singapore Area Licensing Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q13743387" start="53369" end="53387" title="congestion pricing" label="congestion pricing"/>
<link wikidata="Q942847" start="53540" end="53563" title="Electronic Road Pricing" label="Electronic Road Pricing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191337" start="53593" end="53619" title="electronic toll collection" label="electronic toll collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q23119" start="54203" end="54229" title="Certificate of Entitlement" label="Certificate of Entitlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q220656" start="54626" end="54643" title="Left- and right-hand traffic" label="left-hand traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q892615" start="54650" end="54674" title="Johor–Singapore Causeway" label="Johor–Singapore Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q231318" start="54702" end="54713" title="Johor Bahru" label="Johor Bahru"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="54715" end="54723" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54732" end="54774" title="Border checkpoint#Land" label="busiest international land border crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11289008" start="54867" end="54887" title="Woodlands Checkpoint" label="Woodlands Checkpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056509" start="54892" end="54916" title="Sultan Iskandar Building" label="Sultan Iskandar Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299279" start="54977" end="55001" title="Land Transport Authority" label="Land Transport Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298537" start="55147" end="55160" title="transport hub" label="transport hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q32159" start="55224" end="55238" title="Changi Airport" label="Changi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q32491" start="55298" end="55304" title="Qantas" label="Qantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319333" start="55311" end="55325" title="Kangaroo Route" label="Kangaroo Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q32159" start="55399" end="55413" title="Singapore Changi Airport" label="Changi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432865" start="55418" end="55433" title="Seletar Airport" label="Seletar Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q735415" start="55757" end="55764" title="Skytrax" label="Skytrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445460" start="55795" end="55840" title="list of busiest passenger flight routes" label="busiest international air routes in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q32245" start="55996" end="56014" title="Singapore Airlines" label="Singapore Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q721639" start="56029" end="56041" title="flag carrier" label="flag carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q735415" start="56097" end="56104" title="Skytrax" label="Skytrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q735415" start="56237" end="56244" title="Skytrax" label="Skytrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q32159" start="56291" end="56305" title="Changi Airport" label="Changi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198791" start="56404" end="56431" title="Hamad International Airport" label="Hamad International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861" start="56435" end="56439" title="Doha" label="Doha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421994" start="56534" end="56551" title="Port of Singapore" label="Port of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012832" start="56579" end="56596" title="PSA International" label="PSA International"/>
<link wikidata="Q6315376" start="56601" end="56612" title="Jurong Port" label="Jurong Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719498" start="56717" end="56726" title="gross ton" label="gross ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q187956" start="56750" end="56763" title="container (cargo)" label="containerised"/>
<link wikidata="Q488021" start="56789" end="56816" title="twenty-foot equivalent unit" label="twenty-foot equivalent unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q456407" start="56998" end="57011" title="transshipment" label="transshipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q66076" start="57139" end="57155" title="foreign exchange market" label="foreign exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066984" start="57176" end="57192" title="financial centre" label="financial centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="57746" end="57769" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q699386" start="58159" end="58180" title="statutory corporation" label="statutory corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515558" start="58225" end="58243" title="Singapore Exchange" label="Singapore Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q864923" start="58268" end="58296" title="Singapore Telecommunications" label="Singapore Telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719328" start="58308" end="58342" title="Singapore Technologies Engineering" label="Singapore Technologies Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585610" start="58344" end="58362" title="Keppel Corporation" label="Keppel Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042423" start="58364" end="58399" title="Oversea-Chinese Banking Corporation" label="Oversea-Chinese Banking Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q705417" start="58408" end="58437" title="Development Bank of Singapore" label="Development Bank of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064074" start="58449" end="58469" title="United Overseas Bank" label="United Overseas Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q833195" start="58561" end="58583" title="Bloomberg Businessweek" label="Bloomberg Businessweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q621102" start="58708" end="58738" title="Fortune Global 500" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; Global 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q32245" start="58832" end="58850" title="Singapore Airlines" label="Singapore Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q32159" start="58852" end="58866" title="Changi Airport" label="Changi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421994" start="58876" end="58893" title="Port of Singapore" label="Port of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q372989" start="59094" end="59101" title="Fortune (magazine)" label="Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505734" start="59242" end="59258" title="Travel + Leisure" label="Travel + Leisure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536928" start="59564" end="59584" title="free-trade agreement" label="free-trade agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773907" start="59841" end="59860" title="Economy of Singapore" label="Singaporean economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="60091" end="60108" title="Covid-19 pandemic" label="Covid-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17957" start="60218" end="60231" title="Lonely Planet" label="Lonely Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="60242" end="60260" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q208760" start="60386" end="60393" title="Merlion" label="Merlion"/>
<link wikidata="Q559113" start="60399" end="60408" title="Esplanade – Theatres on the Bay" label="Esplanade"/>
<link wikidata="Q548679" start="60410" end="60426" title="Marina Bay Sands" label="Marina Bay Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q630135" start="60428" end="60446" title="Gardens by the Bay" label="Gardens by the Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q28419359" start="60448" end="60468" title="Jewel Changi Airport" label="Jewel Changi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072593" start="60470" end="60477" title="CHIJMES" label="CHIJMES"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970475" start="60479" end="60505" title="National Gallery Singapore" label="National Gallery Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q752407" start="60511" end="60526" title="Singapore Flyer" label="Singapore Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735712" start="60532" end="60544" title="Orchard Road" label="Orchard Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q870844" start="60581" end="60588" title="Sentosa" label="Sentosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046409" start="60598" end="60623" title="Singapore Botanic Gardens" label="Singapore Botanic Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="60648" end="60674" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263007" start="60728" end="60751" title="Singapore Tourism Board" label="Singapore Tourism Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604699" start="60765" end="60780" title="statutory boards of the Singapore Government" label="statutory board"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294727" start="60791" end="60821" title="Ministry of Trade and Industry (Singapore)" label="Ministry of Trade and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q47073046" start="60999" end="61020" title="Passion Made Possible" label="Passion Made Possible"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735712" start="61097" end="61109" title="Orchard Road" label="Orchard Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709506" start="61290" end="61303" title="Singapore Zoo" label="Singapore Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337785" start="61305" end="61318" title="River Wonders" label="River Wonders"/>
<link wikidata="Q113800717" start="61320" end="61333" title="Bird Paradise" label="Bird Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234723" start="61338" end="61350" title="Night Safari, Singapore" label="Night Safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q757232" start="61679" end="61694" title="medical tourism" label="medical tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523309" start="62014" end="62022" title="Singaporean nationality law" label="citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q26710941" start="62071" end="62090" title="Permanent residency in Singapore" label="permanent residents"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500387" start="62104" end="62125" title="international student" label="international student"/>
<link wikidata="Q10512400" start="62128" end="62142" title="foreign worker" label="foreign worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198163" start="62148" end="62157" title="dependant" label="dependant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696558" start="62487" end="62495" title="Eurasians in Singapore" label="Eurasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="63155" end="63175" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229799" start="63545" end="63576" title="Population planning in Singapore" label="introduced a series of programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790461" start="64284" end="64332" title="Public housing in Singapore" label="subsidised, high-rise, public housing apartments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934365" start="64350" end="64379" title="Housing and Development Board" label="Housing and Development Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q54128" start="64579" end="64594" title="domestic worker" label="domestic worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="64906" end="64925" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502366" start="65044" end="65052" title="Buddhism in Singapore" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115178" start="65165" end="65177" title="Christianity in Singapore" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q74208" start="65232" end="65237" title="Islam in Singapore" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684273" start="65247" end="65253" title="Taoism in Singapore" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="65258" end="65285" title="Chinese folk religion" label="Chinese Traditional Beliefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200883" start="65297" end="65305" title="Hinduism in Singapore" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q134293" start="65657" end="65663" title="Dharma" label="Dharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="65717" end="65726" title="Theravada" label="Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="65728" end="65736" title="Mahayana" label="Mahayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q172175" start="65742" end="65751" title="Vajrayana" label="Vajrayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209722" start="65892" end="65926" title="Buddhism in Thailand" label="Thailand&amp;#x27;s Theravada Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11398042" start="66021" end="66046" title="Soka Gakkai International" label="Soka Gakkai International"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="66164" end="66180" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610939" start="66301" end="66308" title="Singaporean English" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="66310" end="66315" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048980" start="66317" end="66325" title="Singaporean Mandarin" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="66331" end="66336" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="66353" end="66366" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995088" start="66442" end="66467" title="Constitution of Singapore" label="Constitution of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q210439" start="66526" end="66538" title="Language interpretation" label="interpreters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303037" start="66600" end="66618" title="Judicial system of Singapore" label="Singaporean courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q699386" start="66620" end="66641" title="Statutory corporation" label="Statutory corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="66849" end="66854" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q209973" start="67152" end="67169" title="Majulah Singapura" label="Majulah Singapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523311" start="67193" end="67227" title="Singaporean orders and decorations" label="Singaporean orders and decorations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673515" start="67313" end="67324" title="Rumi script" label="Rumi script"/>
<link wikidata="Q83942" start="67385" end="67396" title="Jawi alphabet" label="Jawi script"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="67498" end="67507" title="bilingual" label="bilingual"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="67567" end="67580" title="mother-tongue" label="mother-tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748296" start="67899" end="67919" title="varieties of Chinese" label="varieties of Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624231" start="67928" end="67935" title="Hokkien" label="Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q36759" start="67937" end="67944" title="Teochew dialect" label="Teochew"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="67950" end="67959" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q391025" start="68063" end="68091" title="Singapore Chinese characters" label="Singapore Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q185614" start="68110" end="68139" title="simplified Chinese characters" label="simplified Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610939" start="68142" end="68161" title="Singapore English" label="Singaporean English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="68182" end="68197" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373718" start="68246" end="68258" title="Colony of Singapore" label="crown colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610939" start="68317" end="68343" title="Singapore Standard English" label="Standard Singapore English"/>
<link wikidata="Q939451" start="68374" end="68382" title="Singlish" label="Singlish"/>
<link wikidata="Q31989" start="68459" end="68473" title="English-based creole language" label="English creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q14437894" start="68704" end="68720" title="Standard English" label="Standard English"/>
<link wikidata="Q59203" start="69044" end="69053" title="diglossia" label="diglossia"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="69252" end="69273" title="Mutual intelligibility" label="mutually intelligible"/>
<link wikidata="Q987355" start="69309" end="69335" title="English-speaking country" label="English-speaking countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294530" start="69509" end="69530" title="Ministry of Education (Singapore)" label="Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="69673" end="69686" title="mother tongue" label="mother tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="70433" end="70444" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="70450" end="70457" title="natural science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q6313528" start="70816" end="70831" title="Junior college (Singapore)" label="Junior Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858771" start="70839" end="70858" title="Millennia Institute" label="Millennia Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q738236" start="71134" end="71166" title="National University of Singapore" label="National University of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q721064" start="71171" end="71203" title="Nanyang Technological University" label="Nanyang Technological University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243084" start="71406" end="71440" title="Primary School Leaving Examination" label="Primary School Leaving Examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522850" start="71538" end="71545" title="Singapore-Cambridge GCE Ordinary Level" label="O-Level"/>
<link wikidata="Q48731204" start="71549" end="71556" title="Singapore-Cambridge GCE Normal Level" label="N-Level"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522848" start="71628" end="71639" title="Singapore-Cambridge GCE Advanced Level" label="GCE A-Level"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443838" start="71756" end="71775" title="Secondary education in Singapore" label="secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q892615" start="71919" end="71943" title="Johor–Singapore Causeway" label="Johor–Singapore Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="72108" end="72113" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="72302" end="72306" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q323481" start="72477" end="72517" title="Program International Student Assessment" label="Program International Student Assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q588485" start="72533" end="72586" title="Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study" label="Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="72888" end="72913" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035805" start="72990" end="73009" title="World Health Report" label="World Health Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373300" start="73033" end="73075" title="List of countries by infant mortality rate" label="lowest infant mortality rates in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570303" start="73331" end="73357" title="Global Food Security Index" label="Global Food Security Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415366" start="73600" end="73612" title="immunisation" label="immunisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063288" start="73627" end="73654" title="Economist Intelligence Unit" label="Economist Intelligence Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807000" start="73948" end="73956" title="Medisave" label="Medisave"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806595" start="73980" end="74003" title="medical savings account" label="medical savings account"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="74947" end="74962" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907236" start="74982" end="74999" title="Christian culture" label="Christian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="75003" end="75013" title="secularism" label="secularism"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="75090" end="75105" title="Chinese culture" label="Chinese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="75131" end="75152" title="Chinese folk religion" label="Chinese folk religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502366" start="75154" end="75162" title="Buddhism in Singapore" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684273" start="75164" end="75170" title="Taoism in Singapore" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="75175" end="75187" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75236" end="75249" title="Malays (ethnic group)#Culture" label="Malay culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340372" start="75285" end="75300" title="Islamic culture" label="Islamic culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681409" start="75349" end="75362" title="Tamil culture" label="Tamil culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="75397" end="75410" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q15320003" start="75663" end="75680" title="Migrant worker" label="migrant labourers"/>
<link wikidata="Q124047417" start="75807" end="75816" title="Peranakan" label="Peranakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q871091" start="76047" end="76053" title="British Malaya" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511637" start="76223" end="76234" title="nanny state" label="nanny state"/>
<link wikidata="Q178079" start="76283" end="76294" title="meritocracy" label="meritocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="76386" end="76392" title="Hybrid plant" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="76393" end="76399" title="orchid" label="orchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424230" start="76401" end="76431" title="Vanda &amp;#x27;Miss Joaquim&amp;#x27;" label="Vanda &amp;#x27;Miss Joaquim&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q868368" start="76527" end="76540" title="Tanjong Pagar" label="Tanjong Pagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131947" start="76636" end="76648" title="coat of arms of Singapore" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393234" start="76657" end="76673" title="lion head symbol of Singapore" label="lion head symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072953" start="76724" end="76739" title="Public holidays in Singapore" label="public holidays"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970494" start="76777" end="76798" title="National Arts Council (Singapore)" label="National Arts Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970475" start="76906" end="76932" title="National Gallery Singapore" label="National Gallery Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032637" start="77048" end="77068" title="Singapore Art Museum" label="Singapore Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q265387" start="77137" end="77144" title="Red Dot" label="Red Dot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744014" start="77293" end="77310" title="ArtScience Museum" label="ArtScience Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q633033" start="77405" end="77431" title="Asian Civilisations Museum" label="Asian Civilisations Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078303" start="77437" end="77453" title="Peranakan Museum" label="Peranakan Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360293" start="77459" end="77473" title="The Arts House" label="The Arts House"/>
<link wikidata="Q559113" start="77475" end="77488" title="Esplanade – Theatres on the Bay" label="The Esplanade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048818" start="78079" end="78092" title="Edwin Thumboo" label="Edwin Thumboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425855" start="78097" end="78110" title="Koh Buck Song" label="Koh Buck Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682127" start="78330" end="78343" title="Tan Swie Hian" label="Tan Swie Hian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445220" start="78348" end="78359" title="Kuo Pao Kun" label="Kuo Pao Kun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144875" start="78595" end="78623" title="Singapore Symphony Orchestra" label="Singapore Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484939" start="78704" end="78738" title="Singapore National Youth Orchestra" label="Singapore National Youth Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954441" start="78763" end="78798" title="Braddell Heights Symphony Orchestra" label="Braddell Heights Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q51157" start="79334" end="79346" title="Stefanie Sun" label="Stefanie Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q716022" start="79348" end="79354" title="JJ Lin" label="JJ Lin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540013" start="79356" end="79371" title="Liang Wern Fook" label="Liang Wern Fook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567113" start="79373" end="79387" title="Taufik Batisah" label="Taufik Batisah"/>
<link wikidata="Q710609" start="79392" end="79400" title="Dick Lee" label="Dick Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972121" start="79430" end="79442" title="National Day (Singapore)" label="National Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q136703" start="79843" end="79860" title="Peranakan cuisine" label="Peranakan cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239751" start="80014" end="80036" title="Hainanese chicken rice" label="Hainanese chicken rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11079928" start="80066" end="80082" title="Wenchang chicken" label="Wenchang chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688741" start="80382" end="80395" title="Cloud kitchen" label="Cloud kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310583" start="80529" end="80543" title="celebrity chef" label="celebrity chef"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043159" start="80579" end="80596" title="integrated resort" label="integrated resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758861" start="80746" end="80769" title="Singapore Food Festival" label="Singapore Food Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316209" start="80859" end="80870" title="street food" label="street food"/>
<link wikidata="Q863425" start="81035" end="81048" title="hawker centre" label="hawker centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972471" start="81488" end="81515" title="National Environment Agency" label="National Environment Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q229385" start="81762" end="81772" title="soy sauce" label="soya-sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523099" start="82138" end="82163" title="Singapore Recreation Club" label="Singapore Recreation Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q709924" start="82231" end="82245" title="Tan Howe Liang" label="Tan Howe Liang"/>
<link wikidata="Q8415" start="82315" end="82330" title="1960 Summer Olympics" label="1960 Rome Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q170422" start="82363" end="82389" title="2010 Summer Youth Olympics" label="2010 Summer Youth Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="82537" end="82554" title="2016 Rio Olympics" label="2016 Rio Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286898" start="82556" end="82572" title="Joseph Schooling" label="Joseph Schooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q25991452" start="82633" end="82652" title="Swimming at the 2016 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 100 metre butterfly" label="100-metre butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q661496" start="82774" end="82782" title="Optimist (dinghy)" label="Optimist"/>
<link wikidata="Q877484" start="82896" end="82916" title="Southeast Asia Games" label="Southeast Asia Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q995653" start="83070" end="83089" title="2024 Paris Olympics" label="2024 Paris Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q108806367" start="83091" end="83101" title="Max Maeder" label="Max Maeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q14085739" start="83146" end="83153" title="Sailing (sport)" label="sailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q117156631" start="83179" end="83202" title="Sailing at the 2024 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s Formula Kite" label="Men&amp;#x27;s Formula Kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972121" start="83206" end="83218" title="National Day (Singapore)" label="National Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="83361" end="83382" title="2008 Beijing Olympics" label="2008 Beijing Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q867238" start="83448" end="83485" title="World Team Table Tennis Championships" label="World Team Table Tennis Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q20687848" start="83569" end="83581" title="Loh Kean Yew" label="Loh Kean Yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q60969115" start="83663" end="83691" title="2021 BWF World Championships" label="2021 BWF World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q79992429" start="83692" end="83710" title="2021 BWF World Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="men&amp;#x27;s singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q324257" start="83785" end="83822" title="Badminton at the Summer Olympics" label="Summer Olympics badminton tournaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="83842" end="83850" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q285473" start="83863" end="83887" title="Singapore Premier League" label="Singapore Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q866638" start="83985" end="84003" title="Singapore Slingers" label="Singapore Slingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189445" start="84041" end="84064" title="ASEAN Basketball League" label="ASEAN Basketball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436091" start="84101" end="84118" title="Kranji Racecourse" label="Kranji Racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147800" start="84133" end="84152" title="Singapore Turf Club" label="Singapore Turf Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048967" start="84232" end="84268" title="Singapore Airlines International Cup" label="Singapore Airlines International Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="84310" end="84340" title="Formula One World Championship" label="Formula One World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q9137" start="84346" end="84366" title="Singapore Grand Prix" label="Singapore Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171390" start="84374" end="84399" title="Marina Bay Street Circuit" label="Marina Bay Street Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880200" start="84538" end="84554" title="ONE Championship" label="ONE Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q114466" start="84589" end="84607" title="Mixed Martial Arts" label="Mixed Martial Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368796" start="84733" end="84742" title="MediaCorp" label="MediaCorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434225" start="84757" end="84788" title="Television in Singapore" label="free-to-air television channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334547" start="84793" end="84819" title="List of radio stations in Singapore" label="free-to-air radio stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244960" start="84905" end="84915" title="StarHub TV" label="StarHub TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6871306" start="84920" end="84930" title="Singtel TV" label="Singtel TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q177518" start="84942" end="84946" title="IPTV" label="IPTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q111607422" start="84988" end="85003" title="SPH Media Trust" label="SPH Media Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="85246" end="85259" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="85391" end="85416" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q23117" start="85453" end="85480" title="Media Development Authority" label="Media Development Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055937" start="85660" end="85681" title="Internet in Singapore" label="Internet in Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q864923" start="85709" end="85716" title="Singtel" label="Singtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440544" start="85740" end="85747" title="StarHub" label="Starhub"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713673" start="85752" end="85762" title="M1 Limited" label="M1 Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="85794" end="85819" title="internet service provider" label="internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351621" start="85883" end="85889" title="Gbit/s" label="Gbit/s"/>
<link wikidata="Q851641" start="85909" end="85916" title="Equinix" label="Equinix"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840817" start="85944" end="85971" title="Singapore Internet Exchange" label="Singapore Internet Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433061" start="85994" end="86017" title="Internet exchange point" label="Internet exchange point"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="86025" end="86050" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q72588" start="86056" end="86080" title="Content delivery network" label="Content delivery network"/>
<link wikidata="Q749245" start="86132" end="86150" title="Autonomous system (Internet)" label="autonomous systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908802" start="86278" end="86296" title="Singapore Teleview" label="Singapore Teleview"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="86952" end="86962" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q491748" start="86996" end="87004" title="Deloitte" label="Deloitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898702" start="87206" end="87241" title="Index of Singapore-related articles" label="Index of Singapore-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468541" start="87244" end="87274" title="Foreign relations of Singapore" label="Foreign relations of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112451" start="87277" end="87297" title="Outline of Singapore" label="Outline of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="87477" end="87510" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="87516" end="87549" title="Library of Congress" label="United States Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="87560" end="87578" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="88121" end="88129" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27321" wikidata="Q2359833" url="?curid=27321" title="Demographics of Singapore">
<text>As of 2024, the population of Singapore stands at 6.04 million. Of these 6.04 million people, 4.18 million are residents, consisting of 3.64 million citizens and 544,900 permanent residents (PRs). The remaining 1.86 million people living in Singapore are classed as non-residents.

Singapore is a multi-racial, multi-ethnic, and multi-cultural Asian society. Major religions include Buddhism, Christianity, Islam, Taoism, and Hinduism. Its people are broadly organised under the CMIO (Chinese–Malay–Indian–Other) system of categorisation. Although Malays are recognised as the indigenous community, 75.9% of the citizens and permanent resident visa holders are ethnic Chinese, with ethnic Malay and Indians comprising 15.0% and 7.5% respectively. Together, the three largest ethnic groups comprise 98.4% of the citizen population. The remaining 1.6% comprises members of &quot;Other&quot; races, which comprises largely Eurasians. Despite long term occupancy, Singapore excludes 29% of the population as non-residents for the purpose of resident statistics. Officially, mixed-race Singaporeans are often regarded as having the race of their father. However, race categorisation, for example on an individual&#x27;s identity card, may also reflect both ethnicities of their parents.

There are four official languages in Singapore: English, Malay, Mandarin and Tamil. Malay is the symbolic national language, while English is the main working language. Education in Singapore is bilingual, with English being the medium of instruction. Students are also required to learn a second language, usually Malay, Mandarin, or Tamil. Singlish, a local creole and accent, is often used in colloquial speech between all native races of Singapore. There is also Singdarin, a Mandarin creole.

The annual total population growth rate for the year 2020 was -0.3%. Singapore&#x27;s resident total fertility rate (TFR) was 1.10 in 2020; the Singaporean Chinese, Malay and Indian fertility rates were 0.94, 1.83 and 0.97 respectively.

== History ==

===Population growth===

Population growth in Singapore was fueled by immigration for a long period of time, starting soon after Stamford Raffles landed in Singapore in 1819, when the population of the island was estimated to be around 1,000. The first official census taken in January 1824 showed that the resident population of Singapore had grown to 10,683: 4,580 Malays, 3,317 Chinese, 1,925 Bugis, 756 natives of India, 74 Europeans, 16 Armenians, and 15 Arabs. Chinese males greatly outnumbered the females; in the 1826 population figures there were 5,747 Chinese males but only 341 Chinese females, in contrast to 2,501 Malay males and 2,289 Malay females. The figures for around a thousand Indians in 1826 are also similarly skewed towards male – 209 male and 35 female Bengalis, 772 males and 5 females from the Coromandel Coast. By 1836, the population figure had risen to 29,980, and marked a change in demographics as the Malays were outnumbered for the first time; 45.9% of the population were Chinese versus 41.9% for Malays (including Javanese and Bugis). Women from China were discouraged from emigrating, and most of the Chinese females in this early period of Singapore were likely from Malacca; it was noted in 1837 that there were no Chinese women in Singapore who had emigrated directly from China.

The imbalance of the sexes continued for a long period, for example, the 1901 census figures show that there were 130,367 Chinese males compared to 33,674 Chinese females. Such imbalance also meant that fewer people were born in early Singapore, and in the first hundred years, most of the Chinese population in Singapore were immigrants. By the late 1890s, only around 10% of the Chinese population in Singapore were born there. Many of the early migrant workers from China and India did not intend to settle permanently to raise their families in Singapore; they worked to send back remittance to their families back home, and would return to China or India after they had earned enough money. Later an increasing number of Chinese chose to settle permanently in Singapore, especially in the 1920s when it became more favourable to stay in Singapore rather than returning to China. Change in social attitude in the modern era also meant that Chinese women were freer to emigrate from China, and the sex ratio began to normalise. This gradual normalisation of sex ratio led to an increase in the number of native births. Immigration continued to be the main reason for the Chinese population increase in Singapore until the 1931–1947 period when the natural increase in population surpassed the net immigration figure.

After World War II, in the period from 1947 to 1957, Singapore saw a massive population increase mostly due to increased number of native births. The birth rate rose and the death rate fell; the average annual growth rate was 4.4%, of which 1% was due to immigration; Singapore experienced its highest birth rate in 1957 at 42.7 per thousand individuals. (This was also the same year the United States saw its peak birth rate.)

Immigration to Singapore also fell sharply after Singapore independence due to tighter control of immigration from Malaysia and other countries. The population increase became dominated by native births with 315,400 in the 1970–1980 period due to natural increase compared to 24,000 from net migration. However, a lower rate of natural growth in population and the need for low-skill labour resulted in a deliberate shift in policy by the Singapore government to allow more foreigners to live and work in the country, and net migration increased in the 1980–1990 period to nearly 200,000. By the decade of 1990–2000, the net migrant number of over 600,000 had surpassed the natural growth of the population, and accounted for nearly two-thirds of the population increase. The same high level of immigration is also seen in the next decade with 664,083 net migration recorded.

Due to the continued low birth rate, amongst other reasons, the Singapore government has varied its immigration policy over the years. As the demand for labour grew with industrialisation, foreign talent with professional qualifications as well as less-skilled foreign workers has made up a significant and increasing proportion of Singapore&#x27;s total population since the 2000s and 2010s. Curbs on immigration, however, began to be implemented in the 2010s to ease increasing social issues arising from the high level of immigration.

===Population planning===

The post-war boom in births led to an interest in family planning, and by 1960, the government publicly funded and supported family planning programmes. After independence in 1965, the birth rate had fallen to 29.5 per thousand individuals, and the natural growth rate had fallen to 2.5%. Birth rates in the 1960s were still perceived as high by the government; on average, a baby was born every 11 minutes in 1965. Kandang Kerbau Hospital (KKH)—which specialised in women&#x27;s health and was the most popular hospital to have children—saw over 100 deliveries per day in 1962. In 1966, KKH delivered 39835 babies, earning it a place in the Guinness Book of World Records for &quot;largest number of births in a single maternity facility&quot; for ten years. Because there was generally a massive shortage of beds in that era, mothers with routine deliveries were discharged from hospitals within 24 hours.

In September 1965 the Minister for Health, Yong Nyuk Lin, submitted a white paper to Parliament, recommending a &quot;Five-year Mass Family Planning programme&quot; that would reduce the birth rate to 20.0 per thousand individuals by 1970. In 1966, the Family Planning and Population Board (FPPB) had been established based on the findings of the white paper, providing clinical services and public education on family planning.

By 1970, the &quot;Stop at Two&quot; campaign was firmly established, implementing incentives, disincentives and public exhortation to discourage families from having more than two children. After 1975, the fertility rate declined below replacement level, in a sign that Singapore was undergoing the demographic transition. In 1983, the &quot;Graduate Mothers&#x27; Scheme&quot; was implemented in an attempt to get educated women, especially women with a university degree, to marry and procreate, while the government encouraged women without an O-level degree to get sterilised. This was done out of the Lee Kuan Yew government&#x27;s belief that for the nation to best develop and avoid hardship, the educated classes should be encouraged to contribute to the nation&#x27;s breeding pool, while the uneducated should not, sparking the &quot;Great Marriage Debate&quot;.

In 1986, the government reversed its population policy—except its stance on low-income, lowly-educated women—and initiated the Have Three or More (if you can afford it) campaign, offering cash and public administration incentives to have children. In 2001, the Singapore government started its Baby Bonus scheme.

Singapore has one of the lowest fertility rates in the world. In 2012, Singapore total fertility rate (TFR) was 1.20 children born per woman, a sub-replacement fertility rate. Ethnic Chinese had a fertility of 1.07 in 2004 (1.65 in 1990), while Malays had a TFR of 2.10 (2.69 in 1990). Both figures declined further in 2006. TFR for Indians was 1.30 in 2004 and 1.89 in 1990. The Singapore government has launched several highly publicised attempts to raise the fertility rate and increase awareness of the negative effects of an ageing population, the elderly (65 and above) had constituted 9.9% of its population in 2012; this proportion is still significantly lower than that of many other developed nations, such as the United States and Japan. In February 2015, National University of Singapore launched the &quot;New Age Institute&quot; in conjunction with Washington University in St. Louis to conduct research on this issue.

=== Area planning ===
The population of Singapore are generally housed within new towns, which are large scale satellite housing developments designed to be self contained. It includes public housing units, private housing, a town centre and other amenities. Since the 1950s, Singapore had a city centre surrounded by slums and squatter colonies. By 1959 when Singapore attained self government, the problem of housing shortage had grown. Combined with a fast population growth, it led to congestion and squalor. The new towns planning concept was introduced in July 1952 by the country&#x27;s public housing authority, Housing and Development Board (HDB), to counter the housing shortage problem and to relocate most of the population crammed within the city centre to other parts of the island. Today, there are 23 new towns and 3 estates within the country, with Bedok being the largest by area and population.

===Population white paper===
In early 2013, the Parliament of Singapore debated over the policies recommended by the Population White Paper entitled &quot;A Sustainable Population for a Dynamic Singapore&quot;. Citing that Singapore&#x27;s 900,000 Baby Boomers would comprise a quarter of the citizen population by 2030 and that its workforce would shrink &quot;from 2020 onwards&quot;, the White Paper projected that by 2030, Singapore&#x27;s &quot;total population could range between 6.5 and 6.9 million&quot;, with resident population between 4.2 and 4.4 million and citizen population between 3.6 and 3.8 million. The White Paper called for an increase in the number of foreign workers so as to provide balance between the number of skilled and less-skilled workers, as well as provide healthcare and domestic services. It also claimed that foreign workers help businesses thrive when the economy is good. The motion was passed albeit after amendments made to leave out &quot;population policy&quot; and add focus on infrastructure and transport development.

The White Paper was heavily criticised and panned by opposition parties and government critics. Member of Parliament Low Thia Khiang of the Workers&#x27; Party of Singapore had criticised current measures of increasing the fertility rate, claiming that this would lead to an increase of a higher cost of living and discourage young couples from having more kids. As for current immigration policies, he had noted that immigrants were a source of friction for Singaporeans and that an increased population would put more stress and strain on the urban infrastructure. On 16 February 2013, nearly 3,000 people rallied to protest against the White Paper at Hong Lim Park and raised concerns that the increased population would lead to the deterioration of public service and the increase of the cost of living.

==Population==
=== Population size and growth by residential status ===

Source: Singapore Department of Statistics
=== Gender composition of resident population ===
Source: Singapore Department of Statistics
=== Age distribution of resident population ===
Source: Singapore Department of Statistics


===Population by sex and age (Census 30.VI.2020)===
=== Fertility and mortality ===



*Source: Department of Statistics of Singapore: Population Trends, 2020

===Current vital statistics===
=== Population by area ===
== Ethnic groups ==
===Post-independence===
In the post-independence period, the population of Singapore has been categorised into four main groups: Chinese, Malays, Indians, and Others. The CMIO system was first proposed in 1956 to organise the education system of Singapore by four national languages.

Although population growth in Singapore was driven by immigration for a long period during the colonial period, the population increase in Singapore became dominated by native births in Singapore around the middle of the 20th century, and boomed after the Second World War. After Singapore became independent in 1965, the free movement of people between Malaysia and Singapore ended, and net immigration dropped to a low level of 24,000 in the decade of 1970–80 due to tighter control on immigration. However, the fertility of the Chinese population declined sharply after the post-war boom, while that of the Malays remained high. There was therefore a corresponding percentage increase of the Malay population, which rose to 14.5% in 1967 after a long period of continual decline.

From the 1980s onwards, the policy on immigration changed; the number of immigrants increased sharply and became again an important factor in the growth of population in Singapore. By the 1990–2000 period, the number of migrants had overtaken the natural population increase, constituting nearly two-thirds of the decadal population increase with 640,571 net migrants including non-residents. While the racial composition of its citizens has been fairly constant in recent years, it shows a shift in the figures for its residents (citizens plus permanent residents). Fewer of the immigrants were Malays, therefore the percentage resident population of the Malays began to fall. Indian residents, however, rose to 9.2% in 2010 due to an increase in the number of Indians migrant workers (compared to 7.4% Indians in the figures for citizens).

The population profile of the country changed dramatically after the relaxation of immigration policy, with a huge increase in the number of transient migrant workers. Official figures show that the number of foreigners on short-term permits (termed &#x27;non-residents&#x27;) has grown from 30,900 in 1970 to 797,900 in 2005, which translate roughly to a 24-fold increase in 35 years, or from 1% of the population in 1970 to 18.3% in 2005. Despite this huge increase, no further breakdown is given by Singstat. By 2010, the population of non-residents had increased to 25.7%. It was estimated in the mid-2010s that around 40% of Singapore&#x27;s population were of foreign origin (permanent residents plus non-residents such as foreign students and workers including dependents).
While the Singapore Department of Statistics reports overall population figures for Singapore (4.48 million in 2006), as a matter of policy, it only provides more detailed demographic breakdown analysis for the approximately 80% of the population (in 2006) who are Singapore citizens and Permanent Residents (collectively termed &#x27;residents&#x27;). Of this group of about 3.6 million people in 2006, Chinese form 75.2%, Malays form 13.6%, Indians form 8.8%, while Eurasians and other groups form 2.4%. No breakdown by ethnicity is released for the non-resident population. Currently around 60,000 Europeans and 16,900 multiracial people with Asian and European heritage live in Singapore, over 1% of its total population.



=== Pre-independence ===
Singapore, following its founding as a British free port by Stamford Raffles in the 19th century, did not have a sizeable native population as the population became dominated by three main groups of immigrants. When Raffles arrived in Singapore in January 1819, Singapore had approximately 120 Malays, 30 Chinese and some native tribes (Orang Laut) under the rule of the Temenggung. Around 100 of the Malays had originally moved to Singapore from the mainland (Johor) in 1811, led by the Temenggung. Other estimates place the then population of Singapore at 1,000, belonging to various local tribes. Early census figures show a long influx of migrant workers into the country, initially comprising mostly Malays, but shortly thereafter followed by the Chinese. By 1821, the population was estimated to have increased to 4,724 Malays and 1,150 Chinese.

In the first census of 1824, 6,505 out of the 10,683 total were Malays and Bugis, constituting over 60% of the population. Large number of Chinese migrants started to enter Singapore just months after it became a British settlement, and they were predominantly male. In 1826, official census figures give a total population of 13,750, with 6,088 Chinese, 4,790 Malays, 1,242 Bugis, 1,021 Indians from Bengal (244) and the Coromandel Coast (777), smaller number of Javanese (267), Europeans (87) and other peoples. The population total of Singapore increased to 16,000 in 1829, 26,000 five years later. By 1836, the Chinese at 13,749 had become the most populous ethnic group, overtaking the broad Malay grouping (12,538, including other groups such as the Bugis, Javanese, and Balinese from the Dutch East Indies). By 1849, the population had reached 59,043, 24,790 of them Chinese.

Many of the migrants from China in the 19th century came to work on the pepper and gambier plantations, with 11,000 Chinese immigrants recorded in one year. Singapore became one of the entry and dispersal points for large number of Chinese and Indian migrants who came to work in the plantations and mines of the Straits Settlements, many of whom then settled in Singapore after their contract ended. By 1860, the total population had reached around 90,000, of these 50,000 were Chinese, and 2,445 Europeans and Eurasians. The first thorough census in Singapore was undertaken in 1871, and the people were grouped into 33 racial, ethnic or national categories, with Chinese forming the largest group at 57.6%.

Censuses were then conducted at 10-year intervals afterwards. The 1881 census grouped the people into 6 main categories, and further subdivided into 47 sub-categories. The 6 broad groups were given as Europeans, Eurasians, Malays, Chinese, Indians and Others in 1921. The Malays group included other natives of the Malay archipelago, the Europeans included Americans, the Indians would be people from the Indian subcontinent including what are now Pakistan and Bangladesh. In 1901, the total population of Singapore was 228,555, with 15.8% Malays, 71.8% Chinese, 7.8% Indians, and 3.5% Europeans and Eurasians. The Chinese population figure of Singapore has stayed at over 70% of the total since, reaching 77.8% in 1947. After dropping from a peak of 60% in the early years of Singapore, the Malay population settled within the range of 11 and 16% in the first half of the 20th century, while Indians hovered between 7 and just over 9% in the same period.
*
*
*

==Languages==

Singapore has four official languages: English, Malay, Mandarin and Tamil.

Malay is the national language of the country, although English is the official language used in the educational system and by the government. The colloquial English-based creole used in everyday life is often referred to as Singlish, spoken by all races of Singapore.

The government of Singapore promotes the use of Mandarin. The use of other Chinese varieties, like Hokkien, Teochew, Cantonese and Hakka, has been declining over the last two decades, although they are still being used especially by the older generations of the Chinese population.

About 60% of Indian Singaporeans are Tamils although the percentage of those who speak Tamil at home has been declining, with around 37% of Singaporean Indians speaking Tamil at home according to the 2010 census. Other spoken Indian languages are Punjabi, Malayalam, Hindi and Bengali, but none of them alone is spoken by more than 10% of the Indian Singaporeans. As with Chinese Singaporeans, a large proportion of Indian Singaporeans speak English at home.

Around 5,000 to 10,000 Peranakans, the early Chinese population of the region, still use the Hokkien-influenced Malay dialect called Baba Malay.
==Religion==

The main religions of Singapore are Chinese folk religion, Buddhism, Taoism, Confucianism, Christianity, Judaism, Islam, Hinduism, and Sikhism, with a significant number who profess no religion.

Singapore has freedom of religion, although the government restricts some religions such as Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, due to their opposition to conscription. The majority of Malays are Muslim, while the plurality of Chinese practise Buddhism and syncretic Chinese folk traditions. Christianity is growing in the country. Taoism was overtaken as the second-most prominent religion in the 2000 census among the Chinese as more have increasingly described themselves as Buddhists rather than Taoist. Indians are mostly Hindus though many are Muslims, Sikhs, and Christians. People who practise no religion form the third-largest group in Singapore.

==Marriage and divorce==
==Literacy and education==


Among residents aged 25–39 years, the percentage of university graduates increased from 23.7% in 2001 to 45.9% in 2011 while that who had attained a diploma or professional qualification increased from 15.9% to 22.9% over the same period.

==Employment==
In 2005, the unemployment rate for persons aged 15 years and over was 2.5%, the lowest in the last four years, with a labour force of 2.3 million people.

==Household income==

===Average household monthly income===
The average household monthly income was SGD 4,943 in 2000, which was an increase of $3,080 in 1990 at an average annual rate of 4.9%. The average household income experienced a drop of 2.7% in 1999 due to economic slowdown. Measured in 1990 dollars, the average household monthly income rose from SGD$3,080 in 1990 to SGD$4,170 in 2000 at an average annual rate of 3.1%.

===Household income distribution===


===Growth in household income by decile===
With the recovery from the 1998 economic slowdown, household income growth had resumed for the majority of households in 2000. However, for the lowest two deciles, the average household income in 2000 had declined compared with 1999. This was mainly due to the increase in the proportion of households with no income earner from 75% in 1999 to 87% in 2000 for the lowest 10%. Households with no income earner include those with retired elderly persons as well as unemployed members.

===Household income ratio===
The disparity in household income had widened in 2000, reflecting the faster income growth for the higher-income households.

==International rankings==


==See also==
* Singaporeans
* Malay Singaporeans
* Chinese Singaporeans
* Indian Singaporeans
* Arab Singaporeans
* Eurasians in Singapore
* Population planning in Singapore

==References==
==External links==
*Census 2000
*Singapore Dept of Statistics</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="30" end="39" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840821" start="149" end="157" title="Singaporeans" label="citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q26710941" start="170" end="189" title="Permanent residency in Singapore" label="permanent residents"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="329" end="343" title="multiculturalism" label="multi-cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="383" end="391" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="393" end="405" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="407" end="412" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="414" end="420" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="426" end="434" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696558" start="920" end="929" title="Eurasian Singaporeans" label="Eurasians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978006" start="1215" end="1228" title="National Registration Identity Card" label="identity card"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610939" start="1331" end="1338" title="Singapore English" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="1340" end="1345" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048980" start="1347" end="1355" title="Singaporean Mandarin" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="1360" end="1365" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q629071" start="1434" end="1450" title="working language" label="working language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995015" start="1452" end="1474" title="Education in Singapore" label="Education in Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524126" start="1625" end="1633" title="Singlish vocabulary" label="Singlish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="1643" end="1649" title="Creole language" label="creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="1876" end="1896" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q130327" start="2163" end="2179" title="Stamford Raffles" label="Stamford Raffles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002570" start="2430" end="2435" title="Bugis" label="Bugis"/>
<link wikidata="Q402913" start="2812" end="2820" title="Bengalis" label="Bengalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q182561" start="2855" end="2871" title="Coromandel Coast" label="Coromandel Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q185221" start="3239" end="3246" title="Malacca" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4682" end="4694" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5064" end="5077" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q13637697" start="6082" end="6100" title="Immigration to Singapore" label="immigration policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6332329" start="6964" end="6987" title="Kandang Kerbau Hospital" label="Kandang Kerbau Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="7190" end="7220" title="Guinness Book of World Records" label="Guinness Book of World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383964" start="7479" end="7498" title="Ministry of Health (Singapore)" label="Minister for Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054968" start="7500" end="7513" title="Yong Nyuk Lin" label="Yong Nyuk Lin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280670" start="7869" end="7884" title="family planning" label="family planning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7900" end="7923" title="Eugenics in Singapore#Stop at Two" label="&amp;quot;Stop at Two&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q381763" start="8187" end="8209" title="demographic transition" label="demographic transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q13634883" start="8435" end="8449" title="GCE Ordinary Level" label="O-level degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q324503" start="8457" end="8467" title="sterilization (medicine)" label="sterilised"/>
<link wikidata="Q131248" start="8494" end="8506" title="Lee Kuan Yew" label="Lee Kuan Yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229799" start="8889" end="8930" title="Eugenics in Singapore" label="Have Three or More (if you can afford it)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838434" start="9056" end="9066" title="Baby Bonus" label="Baby Bonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="9108" end="9122" title="fertility rate" label="fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q598949" start="9220" end="9245" title="sub-replacement fertility" label="sub-replacement fertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q738236" start="9843" end="9875" title="National University of Singapore" label="National University of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="9939" end="9973" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="Washington University in St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016510" start="10088" end="10097" title="New towns of Singapore" label="new towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="10527" end="10536" title="Planned community" label="new towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934365" start="10630" end="10665" title="Housing and Development Board" label="Housing and Development Board (HDB)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517231" start="10973" end="10996" title="Parliament of Singapore" label="Parliament of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q713940" start="12107" end="12122" title="Low Thia Khiang" label="Low Thia Khiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299911" start="12130" end="12162" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Singapore" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5895617" start="12644" end="12657" title="Hong Lim Park" label="Hong Lim Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q104849747" start="16436" end="16443" title="Chinese in Singapore" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741676" start="16456" end="16462" title="Malays in Singapore" label="Malays"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024146" start="16475" end="16482" title="Indians in Singapore" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696558" start="16500" end="16509" title="Eurasians in Singapore" label="Eurasians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929782" start="16833" end="16842" title="Free economic zone" label="free port"/>
<link wikidata="Q130327" start="16846" end="16862" title="Stamford Raffles" label="Stamford Raffles"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="16985" end="16994" title="immigrant" label="immigrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q588870" start="17123" end="17133" title="Orang Laut" label="Orang Laut"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479577" start="17157" end="17167" title="Temenggung" label="Temenggung"/>
<link wikidata="Q183032" start="17247" end="17252" title="Johor" label="Johor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002570" start="18014" end="18019" title="Bugis" label="Bugis"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="18040" end="18046" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q182561" start="18061" end="18077" title="Coromandel Coast" label="Coromandel Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q49209" start="18103" end="18111" title="Javanese people" label="Javanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q910384" start="18606" end="18613" title="Uncaria gambir" label="gambier"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="19639" end="19658" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="19682" end="19690" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="19695" end="19705" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="20231" end="20248" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="20251" end="20258" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="20260" end="20265" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="20267" end="20275" title="Standard Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="20280" end="20285" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="20288" end="20293" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995015" start="20389" end="20407" title="Education in Singapore" label="educational system"/>
<link wikidata="Q939451" start="20513" end="20521" title="Singlish" label="Singlish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="20633" end="20640" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q36495" start="20657" end="20664" title="Min Nan" label="Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q36759" start="20666" end="20673" title="Teochew dialect" label="Teochew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033959" start="20675" end="20684" title="Yue Chinese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q33375" start="20689" end="20694" title="Hakka dialect" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024146" start="20854" end="20873" title="Indian Singaporeans" label="Indian Singaporeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="20928" end="20933" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q135595" start="21067" end="21083" title="Languages of India" label="Indian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="21088" end="21095" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="21097" end="21106" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="21108" end="21113" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="21118" end="21125" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q124047417" start="21324" end="21333" title="Peranakan" label="Peranakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="21413" end="21418" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q653415" start="21434" end="21444" title="Baba Malay" label="Baba Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="21496" end="21517" title="Chinese folk religion" label="Chinese folk religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="21519" end="21527" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="21529" end="21535" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="21537" end="21549" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="21551" end="21563" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="21565" end="21572" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="21574" end="21579" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="21581" end="21589" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="21595" end="21602" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="21748" end="21772" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="21842" end="21848" title="Islam" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="21938" end="21950" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="21978" end="21984" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="22173" end="22178" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="22196" end="22203" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="22205" end="22210" title="Sikhs" label="Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="22216" end="22226" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q190951" start="22870" end="22873" title="Singapore dollar" label="SGD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015050" start="23593" end="23606" title="income earner" label="income earner"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840821" start="23966" end="23978" title="Singaporeans" label="Singaporeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741676" start="23981" end="23999" title="Malay Singaporeans" label="Malay Singaporeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003039" start="24002" end="24022" title="Chinese Singaporeans" label="Chinese Singaporeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024146" start="24025" end="24044" title="Indian Singaporeans" label="Indian Singaporeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783241" start="24047" end="24064" title="Arab Singaporeans" label="Arab Singaporeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696558" start="24067" end="24089" title="Eurasians in Singapore" label="Eurasians in Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229799" start="24092" end="24124" title="Population planning in Singapore" label="Population planning in Singapore"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27322" wikidata="Q1155533" url="?curid=27322" title="Politics of Singapore">
<text>Singapore is a parliamentary representative democratic republic in which the President of Singapore is the head of state, the prime minister of Singapore is the head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the Cabinet from the parliament, and to a lesser extent, the president. Cabinet has the general direction and control of the government and is accountable to Parliament. There are three separate branches of government: the legislature, executive and judiciary resembling by the Westminster system. Singapore has been described as being a &quot;de facto&quot; one-party state.

Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Parliament of Singapore. The legislature is the parliament, which consists of the president as its head and a single chamber whose members are elected by popular vote. The role of the president as the head of state has been, historically, largely ceremonial although the constitution was amended in 1991 to give the president some veto powers in a few key decisions such as the use of the national reserves and the appointment of key judiciary, Civil Service and Singapore Armed Forces posts. They also exercise powers over civil service appointments and national security matters.

==Political background==
Singaporean politics have been dominated by the People&#x27;s Action Party (PAP) since the 1959 general election when Lee Kuan Yew became Singapore&#x27;s first prime minister (Singapore was then a self-governing state within the British Empire). The PAP has been the only ruling party to form the government since then. Singapore joined the Federation of Malaysia in 1963 and gained independence in 1965 after being expelled.

Singapore has consistently been rated as the least-corrupt country in Asia and amongst the top ten cleanest in the world by Transparency International. The World Bank&#x27;s governance indicators have also rated Singapore highly on rule of law, control of corruption and government effectiveness. However, it is widely perceived that some aspects of the political process, civil liberties, and political and human rights are lacking. Freedom House deemed the press &quot;not free&quot; in 2015.

==Political climate==
===Domination of the ruling party===
In the 2020 election, the PAP won 83 out of 93 seats, or 89% of the seats in Singapore&#x27;s parliament. The remaining seats are split between the Workers&#x27; Party, which won 10, and the Progress Singapore Party, which won 2 Non-constituency Member of Parliament seats.

One commonly cited reason for a lack of opposition in Singapore is the use of defamation lawsuits by the PAP to bankrupt political opponents and disqualify them from running for office when accusations were made against the ruling party. Cases include former leader of the WP J. B. Jeyaretnam and leader of the Singapore Democratic Party (SDP) Chee Soon Juan, who were bankrupted in 2001 and 2011 respectively.

Another reason given is the pursuit of legal action against journalists and bloggers critical of the PAP and its policies. Reporters Without Borders cites such lawsuits, along with attempts at making critical journalists unemployable, among its concerns when ranking the country 151st in the world for press freedom in 2017.

The PAP has in the past threatened voters by saying that constituencies voting for opposition MPs would be put at the bottom of the list for public housing programs. In 1998, then PAP secretary-general, Goh Chok Tong said, &quot;By linking the priority of upgrading to electoral support, we focus the minds of voters on the link between upgrading and the people whose policies make it possible. This has the desired result.&quot;. As recently as 2011 Lee Hsien Loong expressed that there has to be a distinction between opposition wards and the ones that voted for the PAP in terms of housing upgrades.

The boundaries of electoral constituencies in Singapore are decided by the Elections Department, which is under the control of the Prime Minister&#x27;s Office. Electoral boundaries are redrawn just a few days before the general election. There have been accusations of gerrymandering via dissolving of constituencies with relatively stronger opposition support, such as the Cheng San Group Representation Constituency (GRC).

In July 2020, the ruling party, the PAP, won 83 out of 93 seats and 61.2% of the popular vote in the general election, meaning the PAP won its 13th consecutive general election since Singapore&#x27;s independence. However, the result was a significant decline from the 2015 election.

===Human rights condition===

Although Singapore&#x27;s laws are inherited from British and British Indian laws, including many elements of English common law, the PAP has also consistently rejected liberal democratic values, which it typifies as Western and states that there should not be a &#x27;one-size-fits-all&#x27; solution to a democracy. Laws restricting the freedom of speech exist to prohibit speech that may breed ill will or cause disharmony within Singapore&#x27;s multiracial, multi-religious society. For example, in September 2005, three bloggers were convicted of sedition for posting racist remarks targeting minorities.

Some offences can lead to heavy fines or caning and the death penalty is in place for murder and drug trafficking.

==Executive==
In order to become president, the candidate:
* Must not be a member of any political party on the date of their nomination for election.
* Must have for a period of no fewer than three years held office —
** as Minister, Chief Justice, Speaker, Attorney-General, Chairman of the Public Service Commission, Auditor-General, Accountant-General or Permanent Secretary;
** as chief executive officer (CEO) of a key statutory board or government company: the Central Provident Fund Board, the Housing and Development Board, the Jurong Town Corporation, the Monetary Authority of Singapore, Temasek Holdings, or GIC Private Limited (formerly known as the Government of Singapore Investment Corporation);
** as CEO of a company with an average of $500 million in shareholders&#x27; equity for the most recent three years in that office, and which is profitable after taxes; or
** in any other similar or comparable position of seniority and responsibility in any other organisation or department of equivalent size or complexity in the public or private sector which has given him or her such experience and ability in administering and managing financial affairs as to enable him or her to carry out effectively the functions and duties of the office of President.

The president now exercises powers over the following:
*appointment of public officers
*government budgets
*examine government&#x27;s exercise of its powers under the Internal Security Act
*examine government&#x27;s exercise of its powers under religious harmony laws
*investigate cases of corruption

However, the president must consult the Council of Presidential Advisers before taking a decision on some of these matters. The council consists of
*two members appointed at the personal discretion of the president
*two members appointed by the president on the advice of the prime minister
*one member appointed by the president on the advice of the chief justice
*one member appointed by the president on the advice of the chairman of the Public Service Commission
A member of the council serves a six-year term and is eligible for re-appointment for further terms of four years each.

Similar to the Speech from the Throne given by the heads of state in other parliamentary systems, the president delivers an address written by the government at the opening of parliament about what kind of policies to expect in the coming year. The current president is Tharman Shanmugaratnam.

===Cabinet===

The cabinet forms the executive of the government and it is answerable to parliament. It consist of sitting members of parliament and is headed by a prime minister, the head of government. The current prime minister is Lawrence Wong.

Neither the prime minister nor members of the cabinet are elected by parliament. The prime minister is appointed by the president, then Cabinet members, also known as ministers, are appointed by the president on the advice of the prime minister.

The cabinet in Singapore collectively decides the government&#x27;s policies and has influence over lawmaking by introducing bills.

Ministers in Singapore are the highest paid politicians in the world, receiving a 60% salary raise in 2007 and as a result Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong&#x27;s pay jumped to S$3.1 million, five times the US$400,000 earned by US President Barack Obama. Although there was a public outcry regarding the high salary in comparison to the size of the country governed, the government&#x27;s firm stance was that this raise was required to ensure the continued efficiency and corruption-free status of Singapore&#x27;s &quot;world-class&quot; government. On 21 May 2011, following the 2011 general election, the Prime Minister announced that a committee would be appointed to review politicians&#x27; remuneration, and that revised salaries would take effect from that date.

==Legislative==

===Parliament===

The unicameral Singaporean parliament is the legislature in Singapore with the president as its head. Before independence in 1965, it was known as the Legislative Assembly. It currently consists of 93 members of parliament. The maximum term of any one parliament is five years, after which a general election must be held within three months of the dissolution of parliament.

The 93 elected members of parliament (MPs) are elected on a plurality voting basis and represent either single-member constituencies (SMCs) or group representation constituencies (GRCs). In GRCs, political parties field a team of between three and six candidates. At least one candidate in the team must belong to a minority race.

Formerly, there were no GRCs, and all constituencies of Singapore were represented by one member, but amendments to the Parliamentary Elections Act in 1991 led to the creation of GRCs, thus creating a plurality voting system in the process.

This development has led to complaints from opposition parties that they are often unable to field one, let alone three or more candidates. Out of the 93 members of parliament, 26 are female. In the 2001 and 2006 general election, the incumbent People&#x27;s Action Party (PAP) won the same configuration of 82 out of the 84 seats. The final results of the 2020 general election saw a 8.62% swing against the PAP from the 2015 elections of 69.86%.

The constitution also allows for the appointment of additional members of parliament who are not elected during an election. Up to six non-constituency members of parliament from the opposition political parties can be appointed. Currently, there are two non-constituency members of parliament.

A constitutional provision for the appointment of up to nine nominated members of parliament (NMPs) was made in 1990. NMPs are appointed by the president for a term of two and a half years on the recommendation of a select committee chaired by the speaker of Parliament and are not connected to any political parties. The youngest NMP to be sworn into parliament was 26 years old, Yip Pin Xiu.

In 2018, nine NMPs were sworn in, out of which five were female.

Both non-constituency and nominated members of parliament cannot vote on the following issues:
*amendment of the constitution
*public funds
*vote of no confidence in the government
*removing the president from office

===Legislative process===
Before any law is passed, it is first introduced in parliament as a draft known as a bill. Bills are usually introduced by a minister on behalf of the cabinet, known as government bills. However, any member of parliament can introduce a bill, known as a private member&#x27;s bill. All bills must go through three readings in parliament and receive the president&#x27;s assent to become an act of Parliament.

Each bill goes through several stages before it becomes a law. The first stage is a mere formality known as the first reading, where it is introduced without a debate. This is followed by the second reading, where members of parliament debate on the general principles of the bill. If parliament opposes the bill, it may vote to reject the bill.

If the bill goes through the second reading, the bill is sent to a select committee where every clause in the bill is examined. Members of parliament who support the bill in principle but do not agree with certain clauses can propose amendments to those clauses at this stage. Following its report back to parliament, the bill will go through its third reading where only minor amendments will be allowed before it is passed.

Most bills passed by parliament are scrutinised by the Presidential Council for Minority Rights which makes a report to the speaker of Parliament stating whether there are clauses in a bill which affects any racial or religious community. If approved by the council, the bill will be presented for the president&#x27;s assent.

The last stage involves the granting of assent by the president, before the bill officially becomes a law.

===Constitution===

The Constitution of Singapore is the supreme law of Singapore and it is a codified constitution.

The constitution cannot be amended without the support of more than two-thirds of the members of parliament on the second and third readings. The president may seek opinion on constitutional issues from a tribunal consisting of not less than three judges of the Supreme Court. Singaporean courts, like the courts in Australia, cannot offer advisory opinion on the constitutionality of laws.

Part IV of the constitution guarantees the following:
#liberty of a person
#prohibition of slavery and forced labour
#protection against retrospective criminal laws and repeated trials
#equal protection
#prohibition of banishment and freedom of movement
#freedom of speech, assembly and association
#freedom of religion
#right to education

The sections on liberty of the person and freedoms of speech, assembly, movement, association and religion are all qualified by allowing Parliament to restrict those freedoms for reasons including national security, public health, and &quot;public order or morality&quot;. In practice, the courts have given complete discretion to the government in imposing such restrictions.

Part XII of the constitution allows the Parliament of Singapore to enact legislation designed to stop or prevent subversion. Such legislation is valid even if it is inconsistent with Part IV of the constitution. The Internal Security Act (ISA) is a legislation under such provision. In 1966, Chia Thye Poh was detained under the ISA and was imprisoned for 23 years without trial. Afterwards, he was placed under conditions of house arrest for another nine years.

==Judiciary==
==Elections and political parties==

Voting has been compulsory in Singapore since 1959 and there is universal suffrage. The legal voting age is 21. The Elections Department of Singapore is responsible for the planning, preparation and conduct of presidential and parliamentary elections and of any national referendum in Singapore. It is a department under the Prime Minister&#x27;s Office.

Paper ballots are still used in Singapore. However, there is a concern that voting secrecy might be compromised as ballot papers have serial numbers on them. As stated in the Elections Department website:

: ballot papers can be examined only under strict conditions, and there are safeguards that make it extremely difficult to find out how any particular voter voted. After the count, all ballot papers and their counterfoils have to be sealed in the Supreme Court vault for six months, after which all the ballot papers and other election documents are destroyed. During those six months, these documents can only be retrieved by court order. The court will issue such an order only if it is satisfied that a vote has been fraudulently cast and the result of the election may be affected as a result. Our courts have issued no such order since elections have been held here since 1948.

=== Major Political Parties in Singapore ===

==== People&#x27;s Action Party ====
The PAP has been the dominant political party in Singapore, re-elected continuously since 1959. It is headed by Lee Hsien Loong, who succeeded Goh Chok Tong. Goh&#x27;s predecessor Lee Kuan Yew served as Singapore&#x27;s prime minister from independence through 1990. Since stepping down as prime minister, Lee remained influential as Senior Minister and Minister Mentor.

PAP has held the overwhelming majority of seats in parliament since 1966 when the opposition Barisan Sosialis Party resigned from parliament and left the PAP as the sole representative party. PAP won all of the seats in an expanding parliament in the general elections of 1968, 1972, 1976 and 1980. PAP&#x27;s share of the popular vote in contested seats declined from 78% in 1980 to 65% in 1997. However, the elections of 2001 saw the party&#x27;s share of the popular vote climb to 75%, winning 82 of the 84 seats. The 2006 Singapore general election marked the first time since 1988 the PAP did not return to power on nomination day, with the opposition parties fielding candidates in over half of the constituencies. Overall PAP saw its share of the vote fall to 66.6%.

The dominance of the PAP, often to the extent that there is no effective opposition, has led to Singapore being described as a one-party state.
==== Worker&#x27;s Party ====
The Workers&#x27; Party (WP), established in 1957 by David Marshall, is one of Singapore&#x27;s most prominent opposition parties. Known for its steadfast commitment to parliamentary democracy, the WP has played a key role in providing alternative political voices in the country. The party achieved a significant milestone in 1981 when J.B. Jeyaretnam won the Anson by-election, becoming the first opposition Member of Parliament since 1965. In 2011, the WP made history by winning Aljunied Group Representation Constituency (GRC), marking the first-ever opposition victory in a GRC. This was followed by another breakthrough in 2020 with their triumph in Sengkang GRC. The WP continues to advocate for a balanced political landscape, offering constructive and responsible alternatives to the ruling party while championing the rights of Singaporeans.

==== Progress Singapore Party (PSP) ====
The Progress Singapore Party (PSP), founded on 28 March 2019 by former presidential candidate Tan Cheng Bock, is a major opposition party in Singapore. PSP contested its first General Election in 2020, fielding 24 candidates across nine constituencies. While the party did not win any seats, its West Coast GRC team achieved a close 48.31% vote share. This entitled PSP to two Non-Constituency Member of Parliament (NCMP) seats, currently held by Hazel Poa and Leong Mun Wai.

==== Other Opposition Parties ====
There are other major opposition parties such as the Singapore People&#x27;s Party, Reform Party, and the Singapore Democratic Party (SDP), that do not hold a seat in parliament.

Despite acquiring an increasing percentage of the popular vote—34% overall in 2006—opposition parties gained small numbers of seats in the general elections of 1984 (2 seats of 79), 1988 (1 seat of 81), 1991 (4 seats of 81), 1997 (2 seats of 83) and 2001 (2 seats of 84). The opposition parties attribute the disproportionate results to the nature of the GRC system.

As of July 2020, the Worker&#x27;s Party holds 10 of 93 elected seats while Progress Singapore Party holds the remaining 2 Non-constituency MP (NCMP) seats.

===Women&#x27;s participation in politics===

Women traditionally played a significantly smaller role than their male counterparts in Singapore. Nonetheless, in recent years, there is an increasing level of female participation in the Singapore political arena.

On 11 July 2020, He Ting Ru and Raeesah Begum Farid Khan became the third and fourth woman from an opposition party to win a seat in parliament by 4,922 votes over the ruling party&#x27;s candidates in the 2020 general election for Sengkang Group Representation Constituency(GRC). The team was led by He Ting Ru and was first timer Raeesah Khan who proceeded to become the youngest MP in Singapore&#x27;s Parliamentary history.

Lee Li Lian was the second woman from an opposition party to win a seat in Parliament with 54.50% of the votes but lost in the following 2015 general election by a slim margin. Sylvia Lim Swee Lian, currently the Chairperson of the opposition Workers&#x27; Party (WP) and Member of Parliament (MP) representing Aljunied GRC whose team won 54.71% of the votes (54.72% including overseas votes), was the first time that an opposition party won a GRC since the system&#x27;s introduction on 1 June 1988.

In September 2017, Halimah Yacob was inaugurated as Singapore&#x27;s first female President, the only candidate certified as eligible in the election.

===Shirt colours===

The candidates and supporters of the various political parties tend to wear the following shirt colours while making their rounds in various wards or campaigning.

==See also==

* Corruption in Singapore
* Dominant party system
* Laws of Singapore
* Lists of members of parliament in Singapore

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="0" end="9" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="15" end="28" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="29" end="54" title="representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="55" end="63" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39021" start="77" end="99" title="President of Singapore" label="President of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="107" end="120" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q866756" start="126" end="153" title="prime minister of Singapore" label="prime minister of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="161" end="179" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="190" end="208" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="210" end="225" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015558" start="246" end="253" title="Cabinet of Singapore" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q39021" start="303" end="312" title="President of Singapore" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798912" start="385" end="396" title="accountable" label="accountable"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="465" end="476" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="478" end="487" title="Executive (government)" label="executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="492" end="501" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="520" end="538" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="601" end="616" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="619" end="636" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517231" start="678" end="701" title="Parliament of Singapore" label="Parliament of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="707" end="718" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="726" end="736" title="parliament" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="879" end="892" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q115824963" start="1067" end="1084" title="Reserves of the Government of Singapore" label="national reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="1112" end="1121" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q258307" start="1233" end="1250" title="national security" label="national security"/>
<link wikidata="Q371395" start="1334" end="1360" title="People&amp;#x27;s Action Party" label="People&amp;#x27;s Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q131248" start="1404" end="1416" title="Lee Kuan Yew" label="Lee Kuan Yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="1628" end="1650" title="Malaysia" label="Federation of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715618" start="1759" end="1772" title="Corruption in Singapore" label="least-corrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="1838" end="1864" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="2148" end="2161" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299911" start="2417" end="2436" title="The Workers&amp;#x27; Party (Singapore)" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q66120569" start="2460" end="2484" title="Progress Singapore Party" label="Progress Singapore Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048878" start="2498" end="2535" title="Non-constituency Member of Parliament" label="Non-constituency Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077565" start="2820" end="2836" title="J. B. Jeyaretnam" label="J. B. Jeyaretnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289041" start="2855" end="2881" title="Singapore Democratic Party" label="Singapore Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q468131" start="2888" end="2902" title="Chee Soon Juan" label="Chee Soon Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="3079" end="3104" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q313300" start="3485" end="3498" title="Goh Chok Tong" label="Goh Chok Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354577" start="3961" end="3981" title="Elections Department" label="Elections Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q476310" start="4156" end="4170" title="gerrymandering" label="gerrymandering"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926696" start="4261" end="4304" title="Cheng San Group Representation Constituency" label="Cheng San Group Representation Constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q20983901" start="4414" end="4430" title="2020 Singaporean general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021117" start="4582" end="4595" title="2015 Singaporean general election" label="2015 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="4690" end="4704" title="British Raj" label="British Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="4738" end="4756" title="English common law" label="English common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="4797" end="4822" title="liberal democracy" label="liberal democratic values"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="4845" end="4852" title="Western world" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="4967" end="4984" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="5154" end="5158" title="blog" label="blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q544394" start="5181" end="5189" title="sedition" label="sedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="5202" end="5208" title="Racism" label="racist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192695" start="5281" end="5287" title="caning" label="caning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426417" start="5296" end="5321" title="capital punishment in Singapore" label="death penalty is in place"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="5326" end="5332" title="murder" label="murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="5337" end="5353" title="Illegal drug trade" label="drug trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202104" start="5445" end="5460" title="list of political parties in Singapore" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5581" end="5589" title="Cabinet of Singapore#Responsibilities of Ministers" label="Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096799" start="5591" end="5604" title="Chief Justice of Singapore" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597968" start="5606" end="5613" title="Speaker of the Parliament of Singapore" label="Speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818608" start="5615" end="5631" title="Attorney-General of Singapore" label="Attorney-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257606" start="5649" end="5674" title="Public Service Commission (Singapore)" label="Public Service Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q111759032" start="5715" end="5734" title="Permanent Secretary" label="Permanent Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="5742" end="5765" title="chief executive officer" label="chief executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053963" start="5824" end="5852" title="Central Provident Fund Board" label="Central Provident Fund Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934365" start="5858" end="5887" title="Housing and Development Board" label="Housing and Development Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q6109055" start="5893" end="5916" title="JTC Corporation" label="Jurong Town Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661296" start="5922" end="5953" title="Monetary Authority of Singapore" label="Monetary Authority of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q762479" start="5955" end="5971" title="Temasek Holdings" label="Temasek Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q539627" start="5976" end="5995" title="GIC Private Limited" label="GIC Private Limited"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6126" end="6151" title="Equity (finance)#shareholders&amp;#x27; equity" label="shareholders&amp;#x27; equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q645011" start="6230" end="6235" title="Corporate tax" label="taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q294217" start="6399" end="6405" title="public sector" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="6409" end="6423" title="private sector" label="private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q787020" start="7535" end="7557" title="Speech from the Throne" label="Speech from the Throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q983752" start="7790" end="7812" title="Tharman Shanmugaratnam" label="Tharman Shanmugaratnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504758" start="8049" end="8062" title="Lawrence Wong" label="Lawrence Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="8671" end="8683" title="US President" label="US President"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="8684" end="8696" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9116" end="9153" title="Cabinet of Singapore#2011 review" label="review politicians&amp;#x27; remuneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="9255" end="9265" title="unicameral" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153777" start="9402" end="9422" title="Legislative Assembly" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076105" start="9543" end="9559" title="general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q741182" start="9600" end="9625" title="dissolution of parliament" label="dissolution of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211577" start="9688" end="9704" title="plurality voting system" label="plurality voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163953" start="9746" end="9760" title="constituencies of Singapore" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139059" start="10080" end="10107" title="Parliamentary Elections Act" label="Parliamentary Elections Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523302" start="10401" end="10405" title="2001 Singaporean general election" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053541" start="10410" end="10414" title="2006 Singaporean general election" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q20983901" start="10559" end="10580" title="2020 Singaporean general election" label="2020 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021117" start="10624" end="10638" title="2015 Singaporean general election" label="2015 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048878" start="10786" end="10824" title="Non-Constituency Member of Parliament" label="non-constituency members of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048601" start="11008" end="11039" title="Nominated Member of Parliament" label="nominated members of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447672" start="11163" end="11179" title="Select committee (United Kingdom)" label="select committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597968" start="11195" end="11216" title="List of Speakers of the Parliament of Singapore" label="speaker of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053798" start="11328" end="11339" title="Yip Pin Xiu" label="Yip Pin Xiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q53463" start="11504" end="11533" title="constitutional amendment" label="amendment of the constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q41263" start="11535" end="11547" title="budget" label="public funds"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="11549" end="11570" title="vote of no confidence" label="vote of no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="12042" end="12059" title="act of Parliament" label="act of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607599" start="12174" end="12187" title="first reading" label="first reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607599" start="12254" end="12268" title="second reading" label="second reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607599" start="12756" end="12769" title="third reading" label="third reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241423" start="12891" end="12931" title="Presidential Council for Minority Rights" label="Presidential Council for Minority Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="13344" end="13353" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="13366" end="13387" title="codified constitution" label="codified constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001103" start="13652" end="13665" title="Supreme Court of Singapore" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686864" start="13730" end="13746" title="advisory opinion" label="advisory opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="13837" end="13856" title="individual liberty" label="liberty of a person"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="13873" end="13880" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="13885" end="13898" title="forced labour" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q328293" start="13919" end="13946" title="Ex post facto law" label="retrospective criminal laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253920" start="13951" end="13966" title="double jeopardy" label="repeated trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137223" start="13968" end="13984" title="equal protection" label="equal protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q188863" start="14001" end="14011" title="Exile" label="banishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344824" start="14016" end="14035" title="freedom of movement" label="freedom of movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="14037" end="14054" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q162254" start="14056" end="14064" title="freedom of assembly" label="assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q688503" start="14069" end="14080" title="freedom of association" label="association"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="14082" end="14101" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q69370" start="14103" end="14121" title="right to education" label="right to education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517231" start="14541" end="14564" title="Parliament of Singapore" label="Parliament of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060330" start="14614" end="14624" title="subversion (political)" label="subversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581552" start="14717" end="14738" title="Internal Security Act (Singapore)" label="Internal Security Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095139" start="14793" end="14806" title="Chia Thye Poh" label="Chia Thye Poh"/>
<link wikidata="Q573624" start="15032" end="15042" title="compulsory voting" label="compulsory"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="15080" end="15098" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q905151" start="15378" end="15384" title="ballot" label="ballot"/>
<link wikidata="Q371395" start="16313" end="16339" title="People&amp;#x27;s Action Party" label="People&amp;#x27;s Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q57643" start="16457" end="16472" title="Lee Hsien Loong" label="Lee Hsien Loong"/>
<link wikidata="Q313300" start="16488" end="16501" title="Goh Chok Tong" label="Goh Chok Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q131248" start="16526" end="16538" title="Lee Kuan Yew" label="Lee Kuan Yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q20983917" start="16680" end="16695" title="Senior Minister of Singapore" label="Senior Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q165270" start="16700" end="16715" title="Minister Mentor" label="Minister Mentor"/>
<link wikidata="Q60518" start="16811" end="16833" title="Barisan Sosialis Party" label="Barisan Sosialis Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053541" start="17239" end="17270" title="2006 Singapore general election" label="2006 Singapore general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="17620" end="17635" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299911" start="17642" end="17661" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party (Singapore)" label="Worker&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299911" start="17671" end="17695" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party (Singapore)" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party (WP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q687956" start="17720" end="17734" title="David Marshall (Singaporean politician)" label="David Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077565" start="18004" end="18019" title="J. B. Jeyaretnam" label="J.B. Jeyaretnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523278" start="18028" end="18045" title="1981 Anson by-election" label="Anson by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q66120569" start="18526" end="18556" title="Progress Singapore Party" label="Progress Singapore Party (PSP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320603" start="19127" end="19156" title="Singapore People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Singapore People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375054" start="19158" end="19170" title="Reform Party (Singapore)" label="Reform Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289041" start="19180" end="19206" title="Singapore Democratic Party" label="Singapore Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104922" start="19609" end="19619" title="Group Representation Constituency" label="GRC system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299911" start="19643" end="19662" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Singapore" label="Worker&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q66120569" start="19698" end="19722" title="Progress Singapore Party" label="Progress Singapore Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048878" start="19745" end="19764" title="Non-constituency Member of Parliament" label="Non-constituency MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q97016471" start="20060" end="20070" title="He Ting Ru" label="He Ting Ru"/>
<link wikidata="Q97129699" start="20075" end="20099" title="Raeesah Khan" label="Raeesah Begum Farid Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q89965458" start="20275" end="20317" title="Sengkang Group Representation Constituency" label="Sengkang Group Representation Constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104922" start="20318" end="20321" title="Group representation constituency" label="GRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786667" start="20472" end="20483" title="Lee Li Lian" label="Lee Li Lian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021117" start="20609" end="20630" title="2015 Singaporean general election" label="2015 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q713945" start="20649" end="20669" title="Sylvia Lim" label="Sylvia Lim Swee Lian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642345" start="20993" end="21006" title="Halimah Yacob" label="Halimah Yacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523310" start="21111" end="21123" title="2017 Singaporean presidential election" label="the election"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715618" start="21327" end="21350" title="Corruption in Singapore" label="Corruption in Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439061" start="21353" end="21374" title="Dominant party system" label="Dominant party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q653790" start="21377" end="21394" title="Laws of Singapore" label="Laws of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q115800585" start="21397" end="21440" title="Lists of members of parliament in Singapore" label="Lists of members of parliament in Singapore"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27324" wikidata="Q7696023" url="?curid=27324" title="Telecommunications in Singapore">
<text>The telecommunication infrastructure of Singapore spans the entire city-state. Its development level is high, with close accessibility to the infrastructure from nearly all inhabited parts of the island and for all of the population, with exceptions. Today, the country is considered an international telecommunications hub, an achievement that was driven by Singapore&#x27;s view that high-quality telecommunications is one of the critical factors that support its economic growth.

== Background ==
After reform initiatives, the Singaporean telecommunication industry became streamlined and largely directed by the government, which viewed such policy as critical in shaping societal preferences and in directing the state&#x27;s economy. Being able to provide adequate telecommunications services is also critical when approached from the perspective that Singapore&#x27;s legitimacy as a state rests on its capability to deliver a high standard of living to its citizens. Hence, beginning in the 1970s, the state pursued a three-phase strategy oriented towards developing world-class telecommunications infrastructure capable of high-quality telecommunications services.

The first phase involved the expansion of infrastructure to meet business and societal needs (e.g. service enhancement, reduction of waiting lists for telephone connections). The second phase involved the integration of telecommunications to the over-all state strategy, particularly in the area of services for banking, financial services, and tourism with the goal of tapping telecommunications in ensuring the competitive advantage for Singapore. The National Computer Board was formed during this period for the purpose of developing and adopting IT applications. In 1986, this agency issued Singapore&#x27;s comprehensive National Information Technology Plan (NITP). By the late 1980s, the third phase commenced and it focused on bolstering Singapore&#x27;s international role as well as the IT 2000, which was an ambitious plan to encourage new multimedia services, which is articulated in the promotion of Singapore as &quot;an intelligent island&quot;.

The government&#x27;s role in the telecommunication industry is best demonstrated in the case of Singtel, which the state controls through its investment company Temasek Holdings Private Limited. Singtel does not only roll out affordable, high-quality telecommunication services to the city&#x27;s residents, but it also pursues initiatives that will attract overseas companies to invest in the country.

Radio and television stations are all government-owned entities. All six television channels are owned by MediaCorp; its only other competitor, SPH MediaWorks closed its television channel on 1 January 2005. Due to the proximity of Singapore to Malaysia and Indonesia, almost all radios and television sets in Singapore can pick up broadcast signals from both countries. Private ownership of satellite dishes is banned, but most households have access to the StarHub TV and the Singtel IPTV TV(mio TV) network.

All radio stations are operated either by MediaCorp, the SAFRA National Service Association (SAFRA) or SPH UnionWorks.

As of 1998, there were almost 55 million phone lines in Singapore, close to 47 million of which also served other telecommunication devices like computers and facsimile machines. Underwater telephone cables have been laid that lead to Malaysia, the Philippines and Indonesia.

In 2002, Virgin Mobile in a joint venture with Singtel, set up the fourth telecommunications company in Singapore. It was the first mobile virtual network operator (MVNO) in Singapore. The operations were closed down on 11 October 2002 after failing to attract a significant number of customers. Failure of the joint venture was attributed to a saturated mobile market and Virgin Mobile&#x27;s positioning as a &quot;premium&quot; brand.

As for internet facilities, as of 2009, there are four major internet service providers (ISPs) in Singapore. By February 2009, there were more than 4.8 million broadband users in Singapore. However, due to the small market and possible market collusion, there have been rising concerns that various ISPs&#x27; telecommunication infrastructures being highly under-utilised. In July 2015, Liberty Wireless signed an agreement with M1 Limited that allowed it to tap on M1&#x27;s mobile network, thus becoming the first MVNO, operating as Circles Asia, in Singapore to offer a full service mobile network experience.

On 14 December 2016, TPG, an Australian ISP, won the bid to be Singapore&#x27;s fourth telecommunications company at S$105 million. By 2019, due to the introduction of TPG and 9 MVNO entrants to the market, thus turning the market to be more competitive, the price of mobile plans had fallen.

As of January 2018, there are four cellular phone operators in Singapore serving more than 6.4 million cellular phones.

==Telephones==

Telephones – fixed line:

* Total Fixed Line Subscriptions: 1,982,400 (March 2023)
* Fixed Line Population Penetration: 35.2% (March 2023)

Telephones – mobile market:

* Total Mobile Subscriptions (3G+4G+5G): 9,743,100 (April 2023)
* Mobile Population Penetration: 169.6% (2022)
* Operators:
** MNOs:
***Singtel (includes sub-brand GOMO and heya)
*** StarHub (includes sub-brand giga! and eight)
*** M1 (includes sub-brand Maxx)
*** SIMBA (formerly TPG Singapore)
** MVNOs:
***CMLink SG (on Singtel&#x27;s network)
***VIVIFI (on Singtel&#x27;s network)
***Zero1 (on Singtel&#x27;s network)
***ZYM Mobile (on Singtel&#x27;s network)
***CUniq SG (on StarHub&#x27;s network)
*** MyRepublic Mobile (on StarHub&#x27;s network for 5G plans; on M1&#x27;s network for 4G plans)
*** redONE (on StarHub&#x27;s network)
***Changi Mobile (on M1&#x27;s network)
***Circles.Life (on M1&#x27;s network)
***Geenet mobile (on M1&#x27;s network)

** Niche:
*** GRID Communications (iDEN network)
* Former operators:
** MVNOs:
*** ZΩH (August 2022 - December 2023)
*** Gorilla Mobile (June 2021 - January 2023)
*** Grid Mobile (June 2019 - 6 December 2021)
*** Zero Mobile (December 2017 - March 2020)
*** Virgin Mobile Singapore (on Singtel&#x27;s network ceased operations in 2002)

Telephone system:
* Domestic: NA
* International: Submarine cables to several countries and territories including Malaysia (Sabah and Peninsular Malaysia), Indonesia, the Philippines, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and India; satellite earth stations – 2 Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean and 1 Pacific Ocean), and 1 Inmarsat (Pacific Ocean region)

IDD Country Code: +65

==Radio==
Radio broadcast stations &quot;(as of October 2021)&quot;:AM 0, FM 18, shortwave 1 (&quot;Source: Asiawaves.net &quot;)

Radios:2.55 million (1997)

==Television==
Television broadcast stations &quot;(as of March 2020)&quot;:
* 6 free-to-air (6 digital, 6 high-definition)
**Channel 5
**Channel 8
**Suria
**Vasantham
**Channel U
**CNA (Channel NewsAsia)

Operators:
* Mediacorp - Free-to-Air TV Provider
* StarHub TV - Fibre IPTV Provider
* Singtel TV - Fibre IPTV Provider

==Internet==

Singapore has a large number of computer users and most households have computers and Internet access. A survey conducted by Infocomm Development Authority of Singapore indicated that 78% of households own computers at home and 7 in 10 households have Internet access (2006). The CIA&#x27;s The World Factbook reports that Singapore has 2.422 million Internet users (2005) and 898,762 Internet hosts (2006).

Country code (Top level domain): SG

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 6 (2019)

Broadband
* Subscribers: 12,067,200 (87.52% wireless, 12.06% optical fibre, 0.37% cable modem, 0.02% xDSL, 0.03% others) as of June 2019

Fibre Internet

Singapore&#x27;s National Broadband Network (NBN) consists of three distinct layers; the Network Company (NetCo) which owns and operates the passive fibre network infrastructure, the Operating Company (OpCo) which owns and manages the active network equipment, and the Retail Services Provides (RSP) which retails fibre broadband packages to end users. 

The fibre network infrastructure is owned and operated by NetLink Trust, the appointed NetCo. NetLink&#x27;s network provides nationwide coverage to residential and non-residential premises in Singapore and its connected islands. With the exception of Nucleus Connect, the rest of the OpCos are also RSPs. Some of the licensed RSPs are Singtel, Starhub, M1, MyRepublic, ViewQwest and WhizComms. More than 90% of households in Singapore have high-speed wired broadband.

Optical Fiber broadband providers:
* StarHub (RSP)
* M1 (RSP)
* Singtel (RSP)
* MyRepublic (RSP)
* ViewQwest (RSP)
* WhizComms (RSP)
* NetLink Trust (Passive Infrastructure Company ; NetCo ; Wholesale)
* Nucleus Connect (Active Infrastructure Company ; OpCo ; Wholesale)

Wireless@SG operators (Up to 5 Mbit/s):
* M1
* Singtel
* StarHub
* SIMBA

Mobile broadband providers:
* MNOs:
**Singtel (includes sub-brand GOMO &amp; heya)
** StarHub (includes sub-brand giga! and eight telecom)
** M1 (includes sub-brand M1 Maxx)
** SIMBA (previously TPG Singapore)
* MVNOs:
**Circles.Life (on M1&#x27;s network)
**Zero1 (on Singtel&#x27;s network)
** MyRepublic (on StarHub&#x27;s 5G network and M1&#x27;s 4G network)
**redONE (on StarHub&#x27;s network)
**VIVIFI (on Singtel&#x27;s network)
**geenet mobile (on M1&#x27;s network)
**CMLink SG (on Singtel&#x27;s network)
**Changi mobile (on M1&#x27;s network)
**Zym Mobile (on Singtel&#x27;s network)
**CUniq SG (on StarHub&#x27;s network)

==References==

===Others===
# Terry Johal, &quot;Controlling the Internet: The use of legislation and its effectiveness in Singapore (pdf file)&quot;, &quot;Proceedings, 15th Biennial Conference of the Asian Studies Association of Australia&quot;, Canberra, 2004.

== External links ==
* Ministry Of Information, Communications And The Arts, Singapore
* Media Development Authority (MDA), Singapore
* Infocomm Development Authority (IDA), Singapore
* IDA, Singapore Infocomm Statistics at a Glance, Singapore
* Wireless@SG, Singapore
* Press in Singapore
* Singapore Wireless Guide</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7696023" start="4" end="49" title="Telecommunications in Singapore" label="telecommunication infrastructure of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="67" end="77" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q864923" start="2235" end="2242" title="Singtel" label="Singtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="2254" end="2268" title="State ownership" label="state controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q762479" start="2300" end="2332" title="Temasek Holdings" label="Temasek Holdings Private Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="2543" end="2548" title="Radio" label="Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="2553" end="2563" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001305" start="2616" end="2634" title="television channel" label="television channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368796" start="2649" end="2658" title="Mediacorp" label="MediaCorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207045" start="2687" end="2701" title="SPH MediaWorks" label="SPH MediaWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244960" start="3002" end="3012" title="StarHub TV" label="StarHub TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q864923" start="3021" end="3028" title="Singtel" label="Singtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q177518" start="3029" end="3033" title="IPTV" label="IPTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q24909748" start="3112" end="3146" title="SAFRA National Service Association" label="SAFRA National Service Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q111607422" start="3158" end="3172" title="SPH UnionWorks" label="SPH UnionWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="3320" end="3328" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q132744" start="3334" end="3351" title="facsimile machine" label="facsimile machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="3410" end="3418" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="3424" end="3435" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="3440" end="3449" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325951" start="3461" end="3474" title="Virgin Mobile" label="Virgin Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058891" start="3584" end="3615" title="mobile virtual network operator" label="mobile virtual network operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="3898" end="3906" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="3952" end="3977" title="internet service provider" label="internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q194163" start="4051" end="4060" title="broadband" label="broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q7671152" start="4526" end="4529" title="TPG (ISP)" label="TPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="4834" end="4848" title="cellular phone" label="cellular phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941618" start="5232" end="5235" title="Mobile network operator" label="MNO"/>
<link wikidata="Q864923" start="5241" end="5248" title="Singtel" label="Singtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440544" start="5288" end="5295" title="StarHub" label="StarHub"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713673" start="5337" end="5339" title="M1 Limited" label="M1"/>
<link wikidata="Q116273944" start="5370" end="5375" title="SIMBA Telecom" label="SIMBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058891" start="5404" end="5408" title="Mobile virtual network operator" label="MVNO"/>
<link wikidata="Q741618" start="5414" end="5423" title="China Mobile" label="CMLink SG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068485" start="5572" end="5580" title="China Unicom" label="CUniq SG"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840460" start="5613" end="5623" title="MyRepublic" label="MyRepublic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24882795" start="5789" end="5801" title="Circles.Life" label="Circles.Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531090" start="5901" end="5905" title="iDEN" label="iDEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="6317" end="6325" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="6359" end="6368" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="6374" end="6385" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="6387" end="6396" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="6398" end="6404" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="6410" end="6415" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="6446" end="6454" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736682" start="6840" end="6849" title="Channel 5 (Singaporean TV channel)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q986117" start="6852" end="6861" title="Channel 8 (Singaporean TV channel)" label="Channel 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262793" start="6864" end="6869" title="Suria (TV channel)" label="Suria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532123" start="6872" end="6881" title="Vasantham (TV channel)" label="Vasantham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207180" start="6884" end="6893" title="Channel U (Singaporean TV channel)" label="Channel U"/>
<link wikidata="Q40238" start="6896" end="6899" title="CNA (TV network)" label="CNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368796" start="6933" end="6942" title="Mediacorp" label="Mediacorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244960" start="6971" end="6981" title="StarHub TV" label="StarHub TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6871306" start="7006" end="7016" title="Singtel TV" label="Singtel TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030438" start="7179" end="7222" title="Infocomm Development Authority of Singapore" label="Infocomm Development Authority of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="7334" end="7337" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="7345" end="7363" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q906278" start="7463" end="7475" title="Country codes" label="Country code"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="7500" end="7525" title="Internet Service Provider" label="Internet Service Provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q104860965" start="8112" end="8125" title="NetLink Trust" label="NetLink Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="8524" end="8537" title="Optical Fiber" label="Optical Fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440544" start="8561" end="8568" title="StarHub" label="StarHub"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713673" start="8577" end="8579" title="M1 Limited" label="M1"/>
<link wikidata="Q864923" start="8588" end="8595" title="Singtel" label="Singtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840460" start="8604" end="8614" title="MyRepublic" label="MyRepublic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24589918" start="8623" end="8632" title="ViewQwest" label="ViewQwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713673" start="8838" end="8840" title="M1 Limited" label="M1"/>
<link wikidata="Q864923" start="8843" end="8850" title="Singtel" label="Singtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440544" start="8853" end="8860" title="StarHub" label="StarHub"/>
<link wikidata="Q116273944" start="8863" end="8868" title="SIMBA Telecom" label="SIMBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941618" start="8900" end="8903" title="Mobile network operator" label="MNO"/>
<link wikidata="Q864923" start="8908" end="8915" title="Singtel" label="Singtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440544" start="8956" end="8963" title="StarHub" label="StarHub"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713673" start="9012" end="9014" title="M1 Limited" label="M1"/>
<link wikidata="Q116273944" start="9047" end="9052" title="SIMBA Telecom" label="SIMBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058891" start="9082" end="9086" title="Mobile virtual network operator" label="MVNO"/>
<link wikidata="Q24882795" start="9091" end="9103" title="Circles.Life" label="Circles.Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840460" start="9166" end="9176" title="MyRepublic" label="MyRepublic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27325" wikidata="Q4462092" url="?curid=27325" title="Transport in Singapore">
<text>Transportation in Singapore is predominantly land-based, with a comprehensive network of roads making many parts of the city-state, including islands such as Sentosa and Jurong Island, accessible. The road network is complemented by a robust rail system consisting of the Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) and the Light Rail Transit (LRT), which cover the length and width of Singapore and serve a few neighbourhoods respectively. The main island of Singapore is also connected to other islands via ferryboat services. Furthermore, the city-state maintains strong international connections through two bridges linking it to Malaysia – the Causeway and the Second Link – and the Singapore Changi Airport, a major aviation hub in Asia.

Singapore&#x27;s transport system is globally recognized for its reliability, efficiency and effectiveness. According to McKinsey&#x27;s Urban Transportation report, it ranks as the world&#x27;s best overall, excelling in five criteria: availability, affordability, efficiency, convenience, and sustainability. A study by London consulting firm Credo further highlights the cost-efficiency of Singapore&#x27;s public transport networks, with integrated multi-modal (bus and train) single-journey regular trunk adult card-based fares ranging from S$0.99 to S$2.26. The Monthly Travel Pass, offering unlimited bus and train rides, is set at S$128 per month.

Public transport, encompassing public buses and the MRT and LRT rail networks, is the most common mode of transportation within the city-state. The Land Transport Authority (LTA) fully integrates public transport, with state ownership and public financing of the public infrastructure and public capital assets of railways and buses. The operation and maintenance of these systems are tendered to bidding operator companies on contract.

Private transport, including cars, motorcycles, and commercial vehicles, is less commonly used due to the country&#x27;s limited land space and dense population. The LTA has controlled and limited the private vehicle population through the Vehicle Quota System (VQS) ownership market-based license auctions since 1990. High taxes, such as the Certificate of Entitlement (COE) and Additional Registration Fee (ARF), make private vehicle ownership prohibitively expensive, leading to Singapore&#x27;s reputation as the most expensive country in the world to own a car. 

In recent years, Singapore has emerged as a preferred location for the testing and development of autonomous vehicles.

==Road transport==
===Buses===


Bus transport forms a significant part of public transport in Singapore, with over 4.0 million rides taken per day on average as of 2019. There are more than 365 scheduled bus services, operated by SBS Transit, SMRT Buses, Tower Transit Singapore and Go-Ahead Singapore. There are also around 5,800 buses, most of which are single-deck and double-deck, and a small minority of articulated buses and minibuses currently in active passenger service.

Since 2016, the Land Transport Authority regulates the public bus service standards and owns relevant assets whereas bus operators bid for operating bus services via competitive tendering, under its Bus Contracting Model.

===Taxis and PHVs===

Taxis and private hire vehicles (PHV) are a popular form of transport, with fares considered low compared to those in most cities in developed countries. Starting rates were $3.20 - $3.90. As of March 2019, the taxi and private hire car population has been increased to 83,037.

In Singapore, taxis can be flagged down at any time of the day along any public road outside of the Central Business District (CBD), while private hire cars can only be booked via ridesharing apps.

===Private cars===
As of 2018, there was a total of 957,006 motor vehicles in Singapore, with 509,302 of them being private cars.

Private transport (cars, motorcycles, commercial vehicles) is less commonly used as due to limited land space of the country. The Land Transport Authority (LTA) has limited and controlled the population of privately owned vehicles in the country through the Vehicle Quota System (VQS) ownership market-based license auctions since 1990. As a result, private vehicles are prohibitively expensive and Singapore is known to be most expensive country in the world to own a car. Prospective private vehicle owners are required to place a bid for a Certificate of Entitlement (COE) sold under auction (valid for ten years, as of May 2024; COEs are priced at more than S$92,700 for CAT A cars [below 97bhp], S$105,689 for bigger CAT B cars [above 97bhp], S$72,001 for prospective commercial vehicle owners and more than S$9,311 for prospective motorcycle owners) and pay the Additional Registration Fee (ARF) tax imposed at 100-320% of the open market value (OMV) of the vehicle, among other fees. As a result of the aforementioned taxes, on-the-road car prices in Singapore are approximately five times the on-the-road car prices in Western countries.

===Roads and expressways===

Singapore pioneered congestion pricing (the market-based usage management of public roads to reduce congestion at specific times within the city centre and certain expressways), with the Singapore Area Licensing Scheme, which has since been replaced with the Electronic Road Pricing, a form of electronic toll collection.

* Total length of expressways: 164 km
* Total length of major arterial roads: 576 km
* Total length of collector roads: 704 km
* Total length of local access roads: 2056 km (as of 2017)

Traffic drives on the left which is typical in Commonwealth countries.

The planning, construction and maintenance of the road network is fully conducted by the Land Transport Authority (LTA), and this extends to expressways in Singapore. These form key transport arteries between the distinct towns and regional centres as laid out in Singapore&#x27;s urban planning, with the main purpose of allowing vehicles to travel from satellite towns to the city centre and vice versa in the shortest possible distance. These expressways include:
* Ayer Rajah Expressway (AYE)
* Bukit Timah Expressway (BKE)
* Central Expressway (CTE)
* East Coast Parkway (ECP)
* Marina Coastal Expressway (MCE)
* Kallang–Paya Lebar Expressway (KPE)
* Kranji Expressway (KJE)
* Pan Island Expressway (PIE)
* Seletar Expressway (SLE)
* Tampines Expressway (TPE)
* North–South Corridor (scheduled opening in 2027)

The influence of expressways on Singapore&#x27;s transport policy developed shortly after independence during the history of Singapore because of frequent traffic congestion in the Central district. The aim was to encourage residential development in other parts of the island and give residents in these new &quot;satellite towns&quot; a convenient link between their homes and their workplaces (which were mostly situated around the city centre).

===Causeway and link bridge===
Singapore has two land links to Malaysia. The Johor-Singapore Causeway, built in the 1920s to connect Johor Bahru in Johor, Malaysia to Woodlands in Singapore, carries a road and a railway line. The Tuas Second Link, a bridge further west, was completed in 1996 and links Tuas in Singapore to Tanjung Kupang in Johor.

===Trishaws===
Before World War II, rickshaws were an important part of urban public transportation. In 1947 they were banned on humanitarian grounds, and replaced by trishaws (cycle rickshaws).

Usage of trishaws as a means of transportation had died out by 1983. Some trishaws then served as tourist attractions, taking tourists for a ride around the downtown district. Individual trishaw rider licenses were last issued in 2001, while the last licensed operator of trishaw tours, Trishaw Uncle, ended its contract with the Singapore Tourism Board at the end of May 2023. As of April 2024, there are no commercial trishaw services operating in Singapore.

==Rail transport==
===Mass Rapid Transit (MRT)===

The Mass Rapid Transit, which opened in 1987, is a heavy rail metro system that serves as the major backbone of Singapore&#x27;s public transport system along with public buses; as of November 2022, the network has a length of and 166 stations. The Land Transport Authority, the main planning authority of the MRT, plans to provide a more comprehensive rail transport system by expanding the rail system to a total of by the year 2030, with eight in ten households living within a 10-minute walking distance of an MRT station.

The current MRT network consists of six main lines: the North–South Line, East–West Line, Circle Line and Thomson–East Coast Line operated by SMRT Trains (SMRT Corporation) and the North East Line and Downtown Line operated by SBS Transit. Two more lines, the Jurong Region Line and the Cross Island Line, will open in stages from 2027 and 2030 respectively.

===Light Rail Transit (LRT)===

In several new towns, automated rubber-tyred light rail transit systems function as feeders to the main MRT network in lieu of feeder buses. The total length of Singapore&#x27;s LRT systems is . The first LRT line, which is operated by SMRT Light Rail, opened in Bukit Panjang in 1999 to provide a connection to Choa Chu Kang in neighbouring Choa Chu Kang New Town. Although subsequently hit by over 50 incidents, some of which resulted in several days of system suspension, similar systems albeit from a different company were introduced in Sengkang and Punggol in 2003 and 2005 respectively, both operated by SBS Transit.

===International rail links===
The international railway line to Malaysia is an extension of the Malaysian rail network operated by Keretapi Tanah Melayu (Malayan Railways). Since 1 July 2011, Woodlands Train Checkpoint serves as the southern terminus of the KTM rail network. Previously, KTM trains terminated at Tanjong Pagar railway station in central Singapore. A new rail link is being built: the Johor Bahru-Singapore Rapid Transit System between Woodlands North and Bukit Chagar, Johor Bahru.

==Air transport==
===Airlines===

The national flag carrier is Singapore Airlines. In total, there are three local airlines, all operating out of Changi Airport:

* Jetstar Asia Airways
* Scoot 
* Singapore Airlines

Malaysia&#x27;s Firefly is the sole operator with scheduled services out of Seletar Airport.

===Airports===

The aviation industry is regulated by the Civil Aviation Authority of Singapore, a statutory board of the Singapore government under the Ministry of Transport.

An open skies agreement was concluded with the United Kingdom in October 2007 permitting unrestricted services from Singapore by UK carriers. Singapore carriers were allowed to operate domestic UK services as well as services beyond London Heathrow to a number of destinations, including the United States along with Canada.

Singapore Changi Airport, with its four terminals, is one of the most important air hubs in the region. The international airport is situated at the easternmost tip of the main island, and serves 185 cities in 58 countries. With the recent opening of the fourth terminal, Changi is now capable of handling more than 70 million passengers every year. Singapore Changi Airport is also named World&#x27;s Best Airport in 2023 by Skytrax, its 12th selection in the past few decades.

Seletar Airport is Singapore&#x27;s first civil aviation airport and is primarily used for private aviation. Smaller turbo props also serve Seletar Airport.

===Heliports===
==Aerial lift transport==
===Cable car===
The Singapore Cable Car is a three-station gondola lift system that plies between Mount Faber on the main island of Singapore and the resort island of Sentosa via HarbourFront. Opened in 1974, it was the first aerial ropeway system in the world to span a harbour. The cable car system underwent a revamp that was completed in August 2010.

In addition, a similar gondola lift system also operates within Sentosa as the Sentosa Line were opened in 2015. This line links Siloso Point to Imbiah.

==Maritime transport==
===Ports and harbours===
The Port of Singapore, run by the port operators PSA International (formerly the Port of Singapore Authority) and Jurong Port, is the world&#x27;s busiest in terms of shipping tonnage handled. 1.04 billion gross tons were handled in 2004, crossing the one billion mark for the first time in Singapore&#x27;s maritime history. Singapore also emerged as the top port in terms of cargo tonnage handled with 393 million tonnes of cargo in the same year, beating the Port of Rotterdam for the first time in the process. In 2019, it handled a total of 626 million tonnes of cargo.

In 2018, Singapore was ranked second globally in terms of containerised traffic, with 36.6 million Twenty-Foot Equivalent Units (TEUs) handled, and is also the world&#x27;s busiest hub for transshipment traffic. Additionally, Singapore is the world&#x27;s largest bunkering hub, with 49.8 million tonnes sold in 2018.

In 2007, the Port of Singapore was ranked the world&#x27;s busiest port, surpassing Hong Kong and Shanghai. The Port of Singapore is also ranked the Best Seaport in Asia.

===Passenger transport===
Water transport within the main island is limited to the River Taxi along the Singapore River. The service was introduced in January 2013, with low ridership. There are also daily scheduled ferry services from the Marina South Pier to the Southern Islands such as Kusu Island, Lazarus Island &amp; Saint John&#x27;s Island and Sisters&#x27; Islands. Changi Point Ferry Terminal in the east offers daily ferry services to Pulau Ubin and some destinations in Johor, Malaysia.

Singapore Cruise Centre (SCC) runs Tanah Merah and HarbourFront Ferry Terminals which are connected by ferry services to Indonesian Riau Islands of Batam, Bintan and Karimun.

In addition to the ferry terminals, the Singapore Cruise Centre (SCC) also operates a cruise terminal which is handled by the International Passenger Terminal (IPT), and has two berths of 310 metres and 270 metres with a height limit of 52 metres. It has a draft of 12 metres. It underwent an upgrade in 2005 to improve its passenger handling facilities. An additional cruise terminal, the Marina Bay Cruise Centre Singapore, began construction in 2009 and was completed in 2012 in order to accommodate bigger cruise ships that are not able to dock at the Singapore Cruise Centre.

==See also==

* Plug-in electric vehicles in Singapore

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* Ministry of Transport
* Public Transport Council
* Land Transport Authority
* TransitLink
*Taxi Singapore and Transport Guide
*traffic management system</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="18" end="27" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q870844" start="158" end="165" title="Sentosa" label="Sentosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383204" start="170" end="183" title="Jurong Island" label="Jurong Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q40176" start="272" end="290" title="Mass Rapid Transit (Singapore)" label="Mass Rapid Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2231347" start="305" end="323" title="Light Rail Transit (Singapore)" label="Light Rail Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="490" end="499" title="ferryboat" label="ferryboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q892615" start="630" end="638" title="Johor–Singapore Causeway" label="Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083571" start="647" end="658" title="Malaysia–Singapore Second Link" label="Second Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q32159" start="669" end="693" title="Singapore Changi Airport" label="Singapore Changi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q310207" start="847" end="862" title="McKinsey &amp;amp; Company" label="McKinsey&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="1136" end="1152" title="public transport" label="public transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q924286" start="1153" end="1161" title="Transport network" label="networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299279" start="1531" end="1555" title="Land Transport Authority" label="Land Transport Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="1602" end="1617" title="state ownership" label="state ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q274490" start="1622" end="1638" title="public financing" label="public financing"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="1646" end="1667" title="public infrastructure" label="public infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q457193" start="1672" end="1686" title="public capital" label="public capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661652" start="1821" end="1838" title="Private transport" label="Private transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q23119" start="2164" end="2190" title="Certificate of Entitlement" label="Certificate of Entitlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661305" start="2741" end="2752" title="SBS Transit" label="SBS Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q10852420" start="2754" end="2764" title="SMRT Buses" label="SMRT Buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q19898668" start="2766" end="2789" title="Tower Transit Singapore" label="Tower Transit Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q24698874" start="2794" end="2812" title="Go-Ahead Singapore" label="Go-Ahead Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523708" start="2867" end="2878" title="Single-deck bus" label="single-deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q854585" start="2883" end="2894" title="Double-deck bus" label="double-deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q654749" start="2920" end="2937" title="articulated buses" label="articulated buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q28419566" start="3191" end="3212" title="Bus contracting model of Singapore" label="Bus Contracting Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="3237" end="3241" title="Taxi" label="Taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762479" start="3247" end="3267" title="vehicle for hire" label="private hire vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="3530" end="3535" title="Taxi" label="taxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810086" start="3616" end="3641" title="Downtown Core" label="Central Business District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762479" start="3655" end="3672" title="Vehicle for hire" label="private hire cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q27973" start="3696" end="3712" title="Ridesharing company" label="ridesharing apps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299279" start="3976" end="4000" title="Land Transport Authority" label="Land Transport Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q23119" start="4389" end="4415" title="Certificate of Entitlement" label="Certificate of Entitlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q13743387" start="5042" end="5060" title="congestion pricing" label="congestion pricing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522877" start="5209" end="5240" title="Singapore Area Licensing Scheme" label="Singapore Area Licensing Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q942847" start="5281" end="5304" title="Electronic Road Pricing" label="Electronic Road Pricing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191337" start="5316" end="5342" title="electronic toll collection" label="electronic toll collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q220656" start="5540" end="5558" title="Right- and left-hand traffic" label="drives on the left"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="5579" end="5591" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299279" start="5693" end="5717" title="Land Transport Authority" label="Land Transport Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091262" start="5836" end="5852" title="regional centre (Singapore)" label="regional centres"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900142" start="5868" end="5899" title="urban planning in Singapore" label="Singapore&amp;#x27;s urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657325" start="6073" end="6094" title="Ayer Rajah Expressway" label="Ayer Rajah Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003271" start="6103" end="6125" title="Bukit Timah Expressway" label="Bukit Timah Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053776" start="6134" end="6152" title="Central Expressway, Singapore" label="Central Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277791" start="6161" end="6179" title="East Coast Parkway" label="East Coast Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898230" start="6188" end="6213" title="Marina Coastal Expressway" label="Marina Coastal Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722056" start="6222" end="6251" title="Kallang–Paya Lebar Expressway" label="Kallang–Paya Lebar Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164575" start="6260" end="6277" title="Kranji Expressway" label="Kranji Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585650" start="6286" end="6307" title="Pan Island Expressway" label="Pan Island Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575163" start="6316" end="6334" title="Seletar Expressway" label="Seletar Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164571" start="6343" end="6362" title="Tampines Expressway" label="Tampines Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310053" start="6371" end="6391" title="North–South Corridor, Singapore" label="North–South Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969320" start="6535" end="6555" title="history of Singapore" label="history of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q244156" start="6576" end="6594" title="traffic congestion" label="traffic congestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="6934" end="6942" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q892615" start="6948" end="6972" title="Johor-Singapore Causeway" label="Johor-Singapore Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q231318" start="7004" end="7015" title="Johor Bahru" label="Johor Bahru"/>
<link wikidata="Q183032" start="7019" end="7024" title="Johor" label="Johor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254438" start="7038" end="7047" title="Woodlands, Singapore" label="Woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083571" start="7101" end="7117" title="Malaysia–Singapore Second Link" label="Tuas Second Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850658" start="7174" end="7178" title="Tuas" label="Tuas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683421" start="7195" end="7209" title="Tanjung Kupang" label="Tanjung Kupang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16337999" start="7257" end="7266" title="Pulled rickshaw" label="rickshaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362895" start="7388" end="7396" title="Cycle rickshaw" label="trishaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362895" start="7426" end="7433" title="trishaw" label="trishaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263007" start="7747" end="7770" title="Singapore Tourism Board" label="Singapore Tourism Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q40176" start="7934" end="7952" title="Mass Rapid Transit (Singapore)" label="Mass Rapid Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142599" start="7981" end="7991" title="heavy rail" label="heavy rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001243" start="8094" end="8106" title="Bus transport in Singapore" label="public buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299279" start="8179" end="8203" title="Land Transport Authority" label="Land Transport Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q40176" start="8470" end="8473" title="Mass Rapid Transit (Singapore)" label="MRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q759229" start="8514" end="8530" title="North–South MRT line" label="North–South Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895425" start="8532" end="8546" title="East–West MRT line" label="East–West Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154003" start="8548" end="8559" title="Circle MRT line" label="Circle Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795883" start="8564" end="8587" title="Thomson–East Coast MRT line" label="Thomson–East Coast Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243209" start="8600" end="8611" title="SMRT Trains" label="SMRT Trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267863" start="8613" end="8629" title="SMRT Corporation" label="SMRT Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725116" start="8639" end="8654" title="North East MRT line" label="North East Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663943" start="8659" end="8672" title="Downtown MRT line" label="Downtown Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661305" start="8685" end="8696" title="SBS Transit" label="SBS Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391052" start="8718" end="8736" title="Jurong Region MRT line" label="Jurong Region Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335354" start="8745" end="8762" title="Cross Island MRT line" label="Cross Island Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="8861" end="8869" title="new town" label="new town"/>
<link wikidata="Q787208" start="8872" end="8881" title="automatic train operation" label="automated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199344" start="8882" end="8894" title="rubber-tyred metro" label="rubber-tyred"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267863" start="9086" end="9090" title="SMRT Corporation" label="SMRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q778271" start="9113" end="9126" title="Bukit Panjang LRT Line" label="Bukit Panjang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236720" start="9162" end="9175" title="Choa Chu Kang MRT/LRT station" label="Choa Chu Kang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069101" start="9192" end="9214" title="Choa Chu Kang New Town" label="Choa Chu Kang New Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133879" start="9392" end="9400" title="Sengkang LRT Line" label="Sengkang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134179" start="9405" end="9412" title="Punggol LRT Line" label="Punggol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661305" start="9461" end="9472" title="SBS Transit" label="SBS Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984812" start="9510" end="9536" title="West Coast Line (Malaysia)" label="international railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187590" start="9607" end="9628" title="Keretapi Tanah Melayu" label="Keretapi Tanah Melayu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132101" start="9668" end="9694" title="Woodlands Train Checkpoint" label="Woodlands Train Checkpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096333" start="9789" end="9818" title="Tanjong Pagar railway station" label="Tanjong Pagar railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q18359019" start="9877" end="9919" title="Johor Bahru-Singapore Rapid Transit System" label="Johor Bahru-Singapore Rapid Transit System"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032946" start="9928" end="9943" title="Woodlands North MRT/RTS station" label="Woodlands North"/>
<link wikidata="Q721639" start="10023" end="10035" title="flag carrier" label="flag carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q32245" start="10039" end="10057" title="Singapore Airlines" label="Singapore Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q32159" start="10122" end="10136" title="Changi Airport" label="Changi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q935837" start="10141" end="10161" title="Jetstar Asia Airways" label="Jetstar Asia Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319404" start="10164" end="10169" title="Scoot" label="Scoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418913" start="10209" end="10216" title="Firefly (airline)" label="Firefly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432865" start="10269" end="10284" title="Seletar Airport" label="Seletar Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124431" start="10345" end="10382" title="Civil Aviation Authority of Singapore" label="Civil Aviation Authority of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612431" start="10440" end="10461" title="Ministry of Transport (Singapore)" label="Ministry of Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q32159" start="10790" end="10814" title="Singapore Changi Airport" label="Singapore Changi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432865" start="11270" end="11285" title="Seletar Airport" label="Seletar Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432865" start="11410" end="11425" title="Seletar Airport" label="Seletar Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150848" start="11490" end="11509" title="Singapore Cable Car" label="Singapore Cable Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576693" start="11529" end="11541" title="gondola lift" label="gondola lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q6920714" start="11568" end="11579" title="Mount Faber" label="Mount Faber"/>
<link wikidata="Q870844" start="11637" end="11644" title="Sentosa" label="Sentosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13882341" start="11649" end="11661" title="HarbourFront" label="HarbourFront"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421994" start="12032" end="12049" title="Port of Singapore" label="Port of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="12498" end="12507" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q428072" start="12662" end="12675" title="containerization" label="containerised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454776" start="13199" end="13214" title="Singapore River" label="Singapore River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763914" start="13335" end="13352" title="Marina South Pier" label="Marina South Pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570048" start="13360" end="13376" title="Southern Islands" label="Southern Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794635" start="13385" end="13396" title="Kusu Island" label="Kusu Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q24947358" start="13398" end="13412" title="Lazarus Island" label="Lazarus Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519991" start="13419" end="13443" title="Saint John&amp;#x27;s Island" label="Saint John&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q838664" start="13448" end="13469" title="Sisters&amp;#x27; Islands" label="Sisters&amp;#x27; Islands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13471" end="13498" title="Changi Village#Changi Point Ferry Terminal" label="Changi Point Ferry Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928550" start="13542" end="13552" title="Pulau Ubin" label="Pulau Ubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q183032" start="13578" end="13583" title="Johor" label="Johor"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="13585" end="13593" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522945" start="13596" end="13619" title="Singapore Cruise Centre" label="Singapore Cruise Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11316221" start="13631" end="13642" title="Tanah Merah Ferry Terminal" label="Tanah Merah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223" start="13728" end="13740" title="Riau Islands" label="Riau Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q10103" start="13744" end="13749" title="Batam" label="Batam"/>
<link wikidata="Q10097" start="13751" end="13757" title="Bintan" label="Bintan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15222068" start="13762" end="13769" title="Great Karimun" label="Karimun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522945" start="13812" end="13835" title="Singapore Cruise Centre" label="Singapore Cruise Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763789" start="14162" end="14196" title="Marina Bay Cruise Centre Singapore" label="Marina Bay Cruise Centre Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522945" start="14328" end="14351" title="Singapore Cruise Centre" label="Singapore Cruise Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q115803540" start="14370" end="14408" title="Plug-in electric vehicles in Singapore" label="Plug-in electric vehicles in Singapore"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27327" wikidata="Q5468541" url="?curid=27327" title="Foreign relations of Singapore">
<text>Singapore maintains diplomatic relations with 189 UN member states. The three exceptions are the Central African Republic, Monaco and South Sudan.

Singapore supports the concept of Southeast Asian regionalism and plays an active role in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), of which it is a founding member.

Being a key member of ASEAN and a global hub, Singapore maintains favorable relations with many countries on the world stage, and embodies building friendships and mutual benefits in its foreign policy. The nation works closely with neighboring and regional countries, specifically in Asia-Pacific, and consistently supports international initiatives to maintain peace, security and order. It is one of the most pro-neutral countries in the world. Due to its status, Singapore is the headquarters of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Secretariat, the Pacific Economic Cooperation Council (PECC) Secretariat, and is the host city of many international conferences and events. Singapore is also a member of the United Nations, World Trade Organization, East Asia Summit, Non-Aligned Movement, the Commonwealth of Nations and a founding member of the Forum on Small States (FOSS).

Due to geographical reasons, relations with Malaysia and Indonesia are most important. Historical baggage, including the traumatic separation from Malaysia, and Konfrontasi with Indonesia, have caused a siege mentality of sorts. Singapore enjoys good relations with the United Kingdom which shares ties in the Five Power Defence Arrangements (FPDA) along with Malaysia, Australia and New Zealand. Singapore also enjoys robust defense ties with the United States while simultaneously maintaining good relations with China. Additionally, it is one of the few countries to establish relations with both North Korea and United States.

As part of its role in the United Nations, Singapore held a rotational seat on the UN Security Council from 2001 to 2002. Singapore has consistently supported the &#x27;rules-based international order&#x27; and it has participated in UN peacekeeping/observer missions in Kuwait, Angola, Kenya, Cambodia and Timor Leste.

==Timeline of Singapore foreign relations==

Source:

* 7 August 1965 – Singapore and Malaysia sign the separation agreement.
* 9 August 1965 – The Malaysian Parliament votes to expel Singapore from the Federation; Singapore becomes an independent republic after separating from Malaysia.
* 9 August 1965 – Ministry of Foreign Affairs was established and S. Rajaratnam becomes Singapore&#x27;s first Minister for Foreign Affairs.
* 21 September 1965 – Singapore is admitted into the United Nations as the 117th member.
* 15 October 1965 – Singapore becomes the 22nd member of the Commonwealth.
* 8 August 1967 – Singapore becomes a founding member of Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
* 17 January 1968 – Britain announces its intention to withdraw its armed forces from Singapore.
* September 1970 – Singapore is admitted into the Non-Aligned Movement.
* 14–22 January 1971 – Singapore hosts the 18th Conference of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting.
* 15–16 April 1971 – Singapore, United Kingdom, Malaysia, Australia and New Zealand sign the Five Power Defence Arrangements.
* 31 October 1971 – The last British military forces withdraws from Singapore.
* 1973 – Singapore joins General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
* March 1981 – Singapore&#x27;s Permanent Representative to the United Nations, Ambassador Tommy Koh, assumed the presidency of the Third UN Conference on the Law of the Sea.
* 3 October 1990 – Singapore and People&#x27;s Republic of China establish diplomatic relations.
* 11 February 1993 – Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation Secretariat set up in Singapore.
* 26 February 1994 – Singapore and China signed an agreement to jointly develop the Suzhou Industrial Park.
* 5 May 1994 – United States media sensationalise the caning incident of American teenager Michael P. Fay who was convicted for vandalism.
* 1 January 1995 – Inauguration of World Trade Organization (WTO), Ambassador K Kesavapany is elected for a one-year term as chairman of the General Council.
* 9–13 December 1996 – Singapore hosts the 1st WTO Ministerial Conference.
* 15 January 1998 – Singapore and United States announces agreement for US ships to use a planned $35 million naval base from 2000.
* 10 October 2000 – Singapore is elected as a non-permanent member of the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) at the 55th session of the UN General Assembly.
* 14 November 2000 – Singapore and New Zealand sign Agreement on Closer Economic Partnership, Singapore&#x27;s first bilateral Free Trade Agreement.
* 1 January 2001 – Singapore starts its two-year term in the United Nations Security Council.
* 15 January 2001 – A pipeline feeding gas to Singapore from Indonesia&#x27;s Natuna field in South China Sea opens.
* 13 January 2002 – Singapore and Japan sign the Japan-Singapore Economic Agreement.
* 6 May 2003 – Singapore and United States sign the United States-Singapore Free Trade Agreement (USS-FTA).
* 26 April 2005 – Singapore and Malaysia sign a settlement agreement concerning land reclamation in and around the Straits of Johor.
* 15–17 August 2005 – Singapore hosted a multi-national maritime interdiction exercise, codename Exercise Deep Sabre, participated by 13 countries.
* 23 August 2005 – Singapore and Australia sign a memorandum of agreement to allow Singapore Armed Forces to train on the Shoalwater Bay Training Area till 2009.
* 14 December 2005 – Singapore attends the inaugural East Asia Summit (EAS).
* 18 November 2007 – Singapore signed an agreement with China to jointly develop Tianjin Eco-city.
* 23 May 2008 – territorial dispute of Pedra Branca with Malaysia is largely settled through adjudication by International Court of Justice with Singapore getting Pedra Branca and Malaysia awarded Middle Rocks.
* 20 September 2010 – railway land owned by Malaysia through KTM is returned to Singapore in exchange for joint development of plots of land at prime locations, ending the 20-year impasse of the Points of Agreement.
* 23 November 2016 – 9 Terrex infantry carrier vehicles were detained in Kwai Chung Container Terminal at Hong Kong while en route from Taiwan. The vehicles were detained for more than two months despite diplomatic efforts by Singapore to retrieve its assets, signalling deteriorating ties with China.

==Main foreign policy themes since 1965==
The main themes of Singapore&#x27;s foreign policy:

* Formative Years (1965-1970s): In the early years after independence, Singapore faced numerous challenges, including the need to establish its sovereignty and secure its survival. Its foreign policy focused on seeking recognition and building diplomatic relations with other countries. Singapore pursued a policy of non-alignment and sought to establish itself as a reliable partner in the international community.

* Economic Development and Trade (1970s-1980s): In the 1970s, Singapore began to prioritize economic development and trade as key pillars of its foreign policy. The government implemented pro-business policies, attracted foreign investments, and actively pursued trade agreements with various countries. Singapore also joined regional organizations like ASEAN in 1967 to enhance economic cooperation and promote stability in Southeast Asia.

* Regional Security and ASEAN (1980s-1990s): As Singapore grew economically, it became increasingly concerned about regional security. It played an active role in promoting regional stability through initiatives like the Five Power Defense Arrangements (FPDA) and the Zone of Peace, Freedom, and Neutrality (ZOPFAN). Singapore supported the establishment of the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) in 1994, which aimed to enhance security cooperation and dialogue among ASEAN and its partners.

* Pragmatic Diplomacy and Bilateral Relations (1990s-2000s): Singapore&#x27;s foreign policy during this period emphasized pragmatic diplomacy and building strong bilateral relations with major powers. It sought to diversify its partnerships and engaged with countries like the United States, China, and India to enhance economic ties, attract investments, and promote regional stability. Singapore also hosted several high-profile international events and conferences to bolster its diplomatic profile.

* Economic Integration and Free Trade (2000s-Present): In the 2000s, Singapore continued to prioritize economic integration and free trade. It actively pursued bilateral and regional free trade agreements (FTAs) to expand market access and boost economic growth. Notable agreements include the Singapore-U.S. Free Trade Agreement (2003), the Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement with India (2005), and participation in the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP).

* Global Engagement and Multilateralism: Singapore has increasingly engaged in global affairs and actively participated in multilateral institutions. It has sought to shape global norms and contribute to issues such as climate change, sustainable development, and cybersecurity. Singapore has played an active role in organizations like the United Nations (UN), World Trade Organization (WTO), and ASEAN to advance its interests and contribute to international cooperation.

==Foreign policy approaches==

Singapore&#x27;s leaders are realists; they perceive a Hobbesian world where might makes right. Even so, there are shades of liberalism and constructivist thought in its foreign policy as evinced by the belief that economic interdependence will lessen the chances of conflict and that Singapore cannot be fatalistic as a small country. The resultant siege mentality is due to Singapore&#x27;s geographical weaknesses, mistrust of Malaysia and Indonesia due to historical baggage, and from how it stands out as a &quot;little red dot in a sea of green&quot;, as then-President Habibie of Indonesia put it.

Singapore&#x27;s first foreign minister was S. Rajaratnam, and the country&#x27;s foreign policy still bears his imprimatur. Rajaratnam originally framed Singapore&#x27;s foreign policy, taking into account &quot;the jungle of international politics&quot;, and was wary of foreign policy &quot;on the basis of permanent enemies.&quot; In 1966, S. Rajaratnam saw Singapore&#x27;s challenge as ensuring its sustained survival, peace, and prosperity in a region suffering from mutual jealousies, internal violence, economic disintegration and great power conflicts.

In accordance with this worldview, Singapore&#x27;s foreign policy is aimed at maintaining friendly relations with all countries, especially Malaysia, Indonesia, and ASEAN, and ensuring that its actions do not exacerbate its neighbours&#x27; insecurities. In 1972, Rajaratnam envisioned the world being Singapore&#x27;s hinterland – integration into the world economy would ameliorate Singapore&#x27;s inherent lack of natural resources. Thus, Rajaratnam believed that maintaining a balance of power, rather than becoming a de facto vassal of some larger power, would provide Singapore with freedom to pursue an independent foreign policy. The cultivation of the great powers&#x27; interest in Singapore also would effectively function to deter the interference of regional powers.

==Trade agreements==

==International organizations==

===APEC===

The Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) is based in Singapore, of which Singapore is a founding member of. Singapore has long recognised the importance of APEC as an essential platform for promoting economic linkages and its benefits towards strengthening regional peace and security between member economies. Singapore has endorsed APEC&#x27;s efforts at regional economic integration as well as its non-trade agendas of human resource development, emergency preparedness and health. Singapore has since hosted the APEC forum in 2009.

===INTERPOL===

The International Criminal Police Organization INTERPOL has opened its Global Complex for Innovation, or IGCI, in Singapore in 2015. As of 2016, the IGCI houses a global Command and Coordination Centre, the Organization&#x27;s Capacity Building and Training Directorate, an Innovation Centre annex Cyber Research Lab, and the Cybercrime Directorate, which also incorporates the building&#x27;s Cyber Fusion Centre. The building is also used for large-scale projects and operations with a global impact, law enforcement trainings and cross-sector conferences with a nexus in the ASEAN region.

===G20===

Singapore, although not a G20 member, has been invited to participate in G20 summits and its related processes in 2010, 2011 and from 2013 to 2017 as a representative of the Global Governance Group. In February 2017, Minister for Foreign Affairs Dr Vivian Balakrishnan attended the G20 Foreign Ministers Meeting in Bonn.

== Diplomatic relations ==
List of countries which Singapore maintains diplomatic relations with:
==Bilateral relations==

=== Africa ===

=== Americas ===

=== Asia ===

=== Europe ===

=== Oceania ===

==International humanitarian effort==

* In December 2004, during the disaster wrought by the massive tsunami that hit Indonesia, the Singapore Armed Forces dispatched three Endurance class landing platform dock ships – RSS &quot;Endurance&quot;, RSS &quot;Persistence&quot; and RSS &quot;Endeavour&quot; off the coast of Meulaboh, one of the worst hit areas where all road access was cut off. On board these ships were medical and engineering teams and volunteers with NGOs. The ships were also loaded with medical supplies and heavy equipment to help clear roads and debris. Six Chinook helicopters and two Super Puma helicopters were also dispatched to Aceh, two Chinook helicopters and two Super Puma helicopters to Phuket, Thailand. C130s were also dispatched to ferry relief supplies to tsunami-hit areas.
* In September 2005, Singapore responded to the relief effort of Hurricane Katrina in the United States, by sending four CH-47 Chinook helicopters and forty-five RSAF personnel.
* In the aftermath of the 2005 Bali bombings, the Singapore Armed Forces sent a medical team, composed of two doctors, two nurses, and two paramedics, to Bali to help treat victims of the blasts at the Sanglah Hospital.
* In October 2005, the Singapore Civil Defence Force dispatched a 44-member Disaster Assistance and Rescue Team to Pakistan to help in the relief and rescue operations following the 2005 Kashmir earthquake

==Participation in the War on Terrorism==
Singapore is affected by ongoing international affairs relating to terrorism as demonstrated by the Singapore embassies attack plot.

During 15–17 August 2005, Singapore hosted a multi-national maritime interdiction exercise, codename Exercise Deep Sabre as part of the Proliferation Security Initiative to address the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Launched at Changi Naval Base and conducted in the South China Sea, the exercise involves some 2,000 personnel from 13 countries.

Singapore hosted the Regional Special Forces Counter-Terrorism Conference from 21 to 25 November 2005.

On 6 May 2004, then Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong delivered a speech at the Council on Foreign Relations in Washington, D.C., titled &quot;Beyond Madrid: Winning Against Terrorism&quot;, expressing Singapore&#x27;s view on the controversial and often criticised (see Criticism of the War on terrorism) war on terrorism.

==International effort on anti-piracy==

In August 2005, Malaysia, Indonesia and Singapore agreed to conduct joint anti-piracy patrols in the Malacca Strait to increase security in one of the world&#x27;s busiest sea lanes Thailand later also joined in this effort.

Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore conduct trilateral, coordinated maritime surface patrols, known as the Malacca Strait Sea Patrols, and coordinated airborne surveillance under the &#x27;Eyes in the Sky&#x27; arrangement. Other forms of cooperation between the littoral states include an agreement between Malaysia and Indonesia in 2007 to increase joint anti-piracy training in the Malacca Strait, the Surface Picture Surveillance System (SURPIC) launched by Singapore and Indonesia in May 2005, and the Malacca Strait Patrol Information System (MSP-IS) to share information about shipping in the Malacca Strait.

==Consulates==

In addition to embassies or High Commissions, Singapore maintains consulates or honorary consulates in Austria, Bangladesh, Canada, Chile, People&#x27;s Republic of China, Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mexico, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Portugal, Saudi Arabia, South Korea, Spain, Sri Lanka, Switzerland (Permanent Mission in Geneva), Turkey, United Arab Emirates, United States of America and Vietnam.

==See also==

* List of diplomatic missions in Singapore
* List of diplomatic missions of Singapore

==References==
==Further reading==
* Abshire, Jean. &quot;The history of Singapore&quot; (ABC-CLIO, 2011).
* Acharya, Amitav. &quot;Singapore&#x27;s foreign policy: the search for regional order&quot; (World Scientific, 2008).
* Ang, Cheng Guan. &quot;Singapore&#x27;s Grand Strategy&quot; (National University of Singapore Press, 2023). details foreign and defense policy from its founding to the present. online scholarly review of this book

* Brewster, David. &quot;India&#x27;s security partnership with Singapore.&quot; &quot;Pacific Review&quot; 22.5 (2009): 597-618. online
* Cai, Yunci. &quot;The art of museum diplomacy: The Singapore–France cultural collaboration in perspective.&quot; &quot;International Journal of Politics, Culture, and Society&quot; 26 (2013): 127-144. online
* Chang, David W., and Hung-chao Tai. &quot;The Informal Diplomacy of the Republic of China, with a Case Study of ROC&#x27;s Relations with Singapore.&quot; &quot;American Journal of Chinese Studies&quot; 3.2 (1996): 148-176. online
* Chong, Alan. &quot;Singapore&#x27;s foreign policy beliefs as ‘Abridged Realism’: pragmatic and liberal prefixes in the foreign policy thought of Rajaratnam, Lee, Koh, and Mahbubani.&quot; &quot;International Relations of the Asia-Pacific&quot; 6.2 (2006): 269-306.
* Chong, Alan. &quot;Small state soft power strategies: virtual enlargement in the cases of the Vatican City State and Singapore.&quot; &quot;Cambridge Review of International Affairs&quot; 23.3 (2010): 383-405.
* Chong, Alan. &quot;The Diplomacy of Singapore: Rationality and Pitfalls.&quot; on &quot;Diplomatic Strategies of Nations in the Global South: The Search for Leadership&quot; (2016): 393-424.
* Corfield, Justin J. &quot;Historical dictionary of Singapore&quot; (2011) online
* Dent, Christopher M. &quot;Singapore&#x27;s foreign economic policy: the pursuit of economic security.&quot; &quot;Contemporary Southeast Asia&quot; (2001): 1-23. online
* Ganesan, Narayan. &quot;Realism and Interdependence in Singapore&#x27;s Foreign Policy&quot; (Routledge 2005)
* Guan, Ang Cheng. &quot;Singapore, ASEAN and the Cambodian Conflict 1978-1991&quot; (NUS Press, 2013) online.

* Heng, Derek, and Syed Muhd Khairudin Aljunied, eds. &quot;Singapore in global history&quot; (Amsterdam University Press, 2011) scholarly essays online
* Huxley, Tim. &quot;Defending the Lion City: The Armed Forces of Singapore&quot; (Allen and Unwin 2000) 
* Lee, Kuan Yew. &quot;From Third World To First: The Singapore Story: 1965–2000&quot;. (2000). 
* Leifer, Michael. &quot;Singapore&#x27;s foreign policy: Coping with vulnerability&quot; (Psychology Press, 2000) online
* Milia, Jana, Yandry Kurniawan, and Wibisono Poespitohadi. &quot;Analysis of Defense Cooperation Agreement between Indonesia and Singapore in 2007–2017 through Defense Diplomacy Goal Variable.&quot; &quot;Jurnal Pertahanan&quot; 4.2 (2018): 104-119. online
* Perry, John Curtis. &quot;Singapore: Unlikely Power&quot; (Oxford University Press, 2017).
* Phelps, Nigel A. &quot;Triangular diplomacy writ small: the political economy of the Indonesia–Malaysia–Singapore growth triangle.&quot; &quot; Pacific Review&quot; 17.3 (2004): 341-368.
* Rahim, Lily Zubaidah. &quot;Singapore in the Malay world: Building and breaching regional bridges&quot; (Routledge, 2010) online
* Rana, Kishan S. &quot;Singapore&#x27;s Diplomacy: Vulnerability into Strength.&quot; &quot;Hague Journal of Diplomacy&quot; 1.1 (2006): 81-106.
* Tan, See Seng. &quot;Mailed Fists and Velvet Gloves: The Relevance of Smart Power to Singapore&#x27;s Evolving Defence and Foreign Policy.&quot; &quot;Journal of Strategic Studies&quot; 38.3 (2015): 332-358. DOI: 10.1080/01402390.2014.1002909
* Tan, Andrew T. H. &quot;Punching Above Its Weight: Singapore&#x27;s Armed Forces and Its Contribution to Foreign Policy&quot; &quot;Defence Studies&quot; 11#4 (Dec. 2011), 672–97. https://doi.org/10.1080/14702436.2011.642196
* Teo, Ang Guan, and Kei Koga. &quot;Conceptualizing equidistant diplomacy in international relations: the case of Singapore.&quot; &quot;International Relations of the Asia-Pacific&quot; 22.3 (2022): 375-409.
* Woo, Jun Jie. &quot;Singapore as an international financial centre: History, policy and politics&quot; (Springer, 2016).
* Yew, Lee Kuan. &quot;From Third World to First: The Singapore Story: 1965–2000&quot; (HarperCollins, 2000).

==External links==

* &quot;Singapore Infopedia&quot; from Singapore&#x27;s National Library Board; numerous well-researched and well-documented essays on key events and important figures, as well as topics regarding culture, architecture, nature, etc.

* Singapore Ministry of Foreign Affairs
* Water trade and Pedra Branca</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5468541" start="0" end="9" title="Foreign relations of Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="50" end="52" title="UN" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q929" start="97" end="121" title="Central African Republic" label="Central African Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="123" end="129" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q958" start="134" end="145" title="South Sudan" label="South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="182" end="196" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="242" end="288" title="Association of Southeast Asian Nations" label="Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070940" start="610" end="622" title="Asia-Pacific" label="Asia-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q185963" start="721" end="758" title="Neutral country" label="one of the most pro-neutral countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q170481" start="829" end="862" title="Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation" label="Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11278256" start="887" end="923" title="Pacific Economic Cooperation Council" label="Pacific Economic Cooperation Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138613" start="973" end="1009" title="MICE (Meetings, Incentives, Conferences, Exhibitions) tourism" label="international conferences and events"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1045" end="1059" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="1061" end="1085" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q542549" start="1087" end="1103" title="East Asia Summit" label="East Asia Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="1105" end="1125" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="1131" end="1154" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q125447776" start="1184" end="1205" title="Forum on Small States" label="Forum on Small States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1259" end="1267" title="#Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1272" end="1281" title="#Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361929" start="1376" end="1387" title="Konfrontasi" label="Konfrontasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1485" end="1499" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045582" start="1525" end="1563" title="Five Power Defence Arrangements" label="Five Power Defence Arrangements (FPDA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="1575" end="1583" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1585" end="1594" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="1599" end="1610" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1730" end="1735" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="1815" end="1826" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="1930" end="1949" title="United Nations Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540844" start="2016" end="2047" title="Liberal international order" label="rules-based international order"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="2118" end="2124" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="2126" end="2132" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="2134" end="2139" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="2141" end="2149" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="2154" end="2165" title="Timor Leste" label="Timor Leste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207092" start="2316" end="2336" title="Dewan Rakyat" label="Malaysian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294400" start="2475" end="2502" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Singapore)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q337799" start="2523" end="2536" title="S. Rajaratnam" label="S. Rajaratnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294400" start="2568" end="2596" title="Minister for Foreign Affairs (Singapore)" label="Minister for Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2651" end="2665" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="2748" end="2760" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="2819" end="2857" title="Association of Southeast Asian Nations" label="Association of Southeast Asian Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2887" end="2894" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="3014" end="3034" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="3102" end="3114" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3176" end="3190" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="3192" end="3200" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="3202" end="3211" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="3216" end="3227" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045582" start="3237" end="3268" title="Five Power Defence Arrangements" label="Five Power Defence Arrangements"/>
<link wikidata="Q194284" start="3374" end="3412" title="General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade" label="General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3485" end="3499" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819603" start="3512" end="3521" title="Tommy Koh" label="Tommy Koh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088099" start="3580" end="3594" title="Law of the Sea" label="Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="3629" end="3660" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q170481" start="3714" end="3747" title="Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation" label="Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q863462" start="3865" end="3887" title="Suzhou Industrial Park" label="Suzhou Industrial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817576" start="3904" end="3923" title="United States media" label="United States media"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833299" start="3980" end="3994" title="Michael P. Fay" label="Michael P. Fay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6160" start="4017" end="4026" title="vandalism" label="vandalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="4063" end="4087" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4106" end="4118" title="K Kesavapany" label="K Kesavapany"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4295" end="4308" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="4467" end="4498" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="4589" end="4600" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536928" start="4681" end="4701" title="Free Trade Agreement" label="Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="4764" end="4795" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="4858" end="4867" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14954496" start="4875" end="4887" title="Natuna field" label="Natuna field"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="4891" end="4906" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="4948" end="4953" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4963" end="4997" title="Japan-Singapore Economic Agreement" label="Japan-Singapore Economic Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5028" end="5041" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523325" start="5051" end="5095" title="United States-Singapore Free Trade Agreement" label="United States-Singapore Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="5139" end="5147" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q732132" start="5222" end="5238" title="Straits of Johor" label="Straits of Johor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420025" start="5337" end="5356" title="Exercise Deep Sabre" label="Exercise Deep Sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="5421" end="5430" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074568" start="5471" end="5493" title="Singapore Armed Forces" label="Singapore Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499753" start="5510" end="5524" title="Shoalwater Bay" label="Shoalwater Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q542549" start="5603" end="5619" title="East Asia Summit" label="East Asia Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577635" start="5708" end="5724" title="Sino-Singapore Tianjin Eco-city" label="Tianjin Eco-city"/>
<link wikidata="Q246602" start="5754" end="5777" title="Pedra Branca dispute" label="dispute of Pedra Branca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="5835" end="5865" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190558" start="5889" end="5901" title="Pedra Branca, Singapore" label="Pedra Branca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045574" start="5923" end="5935" title="Middle Rocks" label="Middle Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742087" start="6132" end="6151" title="Malaysia–Singapore Points of Agreement of 1990" label="Points of Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550647" start="6176" end="6182" title="Terrex ICV" label="Terrex"/>
<link wikidata="Q471183" start="9447" end="9455" title="realism (international relations)" label="realists"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="9473" end="9479" title="Hobbes" label="Hobbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822951" start="9543" end="9553" title="Liberalism (international relations)" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783023" start="9558" end="9572" title="Constructivism (international relations)" label="constructivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509786" start="9768" end="9783" title="siege mentality" label="siege mentality"/>
<link wikidata="Q76156" start="9994" end="10001" title="B. J. Habibie" label="Habibie"/>
<link wikidata="Q337799" start="10068" end="10081" title="S. Rajaratnam" label="S. Rajaratnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125082" start="11071" end="11087" title="Balance of power in international relations" label="balance of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q170481" start="11442" end="11475" title="Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation" label="Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="12043" end="12051" title="INTERPOL" label="INTERPOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="12110" end="12119" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="12574" end="12579" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q19771" start="12626" end="12629" title="G20" label="G20"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937671" start="12849" end="12868" title="Vivian Balakrishnan" label="Vivian Balakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074568" start="13260" end="13282" title="Singapore Armed Forces" label="Singapore Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975865" start="13300" end="13342" title="Endurance class landing platform dock ship" label="Endurance class landing platform dock ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026402" start="13448" end="13456" title="Meulaboh" label="Meulaboh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523316" start="13969" end="13999" title="Singaporean response to Hurricane Katrina" label="responded to the relief effort"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="14003" end="14020" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q209613" start="14059" end="14084" title="CH-47 Chinook" label="CH-47 Chinook helicopters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002451" start="14100" end="14104" title="Republic of Singapore Air Force" label="RSAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q569255" start="14142" end="14160" title="2005 Bali bombings" label="2005 Bali bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074568" start="14166" end="14188" title="Singapore Armed Forces" label="Singapore Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125978" start="14270" end="14274" title="Bali" label="Bali"/>
<link wikidata="Q19731704" start="14318" end="14334" title="Sanglah Hospital" label="Sanglah Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522936" start="14359" end="14388" title="Singapore Civil Defence Force" label="Singapore Civil Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281326" start="14412" end="14447" title="Disaster Assistance and Rescue Team" label="Disaster Assistance and Rescue Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="14451" end="14459" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q210137" start="14518" end="14541" title="2005 Kashmir earthquake" label="2005 Kashmir earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="14610" end="14639" title="War on Terrorism" label="ongoing international affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595595" start="14652" end="14661" title="The US and State terrorism" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523209" start="14685" end="14716" title="Singapore embassies attack plot" label="Singapore embassies attack plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420025" start="14820" end="14839" title="Exercise Deep Sabre" label="Exercise Deep Sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141011" start="14855" end="14888" title="Proliferation Security Initiative" label="Proliferation Security Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="14921" end="14948" title="weapons of mass destruction" label="weapons of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q876994" start="14962" end="14979" title="Changi Naval Base" label="Changi Naval Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="15001" end="15016" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15102" end="15154" title="Regional Special Forces Counter-Terrorism Conference" label="Regional Special Forces Counter-Terrorism Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q313300" start="15220" end="15233" title="Goh Chok Tong" label="Goh Chok Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="15260" end="15288" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="15292" end="15308" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5186859" start="15451" end="15484" title="Criticism of the War on terrorism" label="Criticism of the War on terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="15486" end="15502" title="war on terrorism" label="war on terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="15562" end="15570" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="15572" end="15581" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="15625" end="15631" title="piracy" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48359" start="15647" end="15661" title="Malacca Strait" label="Malacca Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="15728" end="15736" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15877" end="15903" title="Malacca Strait Sea Patrols" label="Malacca Strait Sea Patrols"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15949" end="15992" title="the &amp;#x27;Eyes in the Sky&amp;#x27; arrangement" label="the &amp;#x27;Eyes in the Sky&amp;#x27; arrangement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16175" end="16210" title="Surface Picture Surveillance System" label="Surface Picture Surveillance System"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16277" end="16317" title="Malacca Strait Patrol Information System" label="Malacca Strait Patrol Information System"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="16506" end="16513" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="16515" end="16525" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="16527" end="16533" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="16535" end="16540" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="16542" end="16573" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="16575" end="16589" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="16591" end="16598" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="16600" end="16607" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="16609" end="16615" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="16617" end="16626" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="16628" end="16635" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="16637" end="16642" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="16644" end="16653" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="16655" end="16662" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="16664" end="16670" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="16672" end="16677" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="16679" end="16684" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="16686" end="16692" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="16694" end="16704" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="16706" end="16713" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="16715" end="16723" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="16725" end="16731" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="16733" end="16740" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="16742" end="16748" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="16750" end="16758" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="16760" end="16776" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="16778" end="16782" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="16784" end="16792" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="16794" end="16806" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="16808" end="16819" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="16821" end="16826" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="16828" end="16837" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="16839" end="16850" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="16882" end="16888" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="16890" end="16910" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="16912" end="16936" title="United States" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="16941" end="16948" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616548" start="16967" end="17007" title="List of diplomatic missions in Singapore" label="List of diplomatic missions in Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984348" start="17010" end="17050" title="List of diplomatic missions of Singapore" label="List of diplomatic missions of Singapore"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27328" wikidata="Q324951" url="?curid=27328" title="History of Slovakia">
<text>The history of Slovakia spans from prehistoric settlements to the modern Slovak Republic. Situated in Central Europe, the region’s earliest evidence of human habitation dates to the Palaeolithic era, with significant Neolithic and Bronze Age cultures. By the Iron Age, Celtic tribes like the Boii established settlements, later displaced by Germanic and Slavic migrations. The Slavs arrived in the 5th–6th centuries, forming the basis of Slavic states like Great Moravia (9th century), which adopted Christianity through Cyrillo-Methodian missionary activity. 

Following Great Moravia’s collapse, the territory became part of the Kingdom of Hungary, enduring Mongol invasions and later Ottoman Wars that split Hungary into three parts. Much of present-day territory of Slovakia resisted Ottoman conquest and became a province of the Habsburg monarchy. The 19th century saw the rise of Slovak nationalism, fueled by figures like Ľudovít Štúr, who codified modern Slovak, and movements advocating autonomy within Austria-Hungary. 

Slovakia joined the Czechs to form Czechoslovakia after World War I, though tensions between Czechs and Slovaks persisted. During World War II, Slovakia became a Nazi-aligned puppet state under Jozef Tiso. Post-war, it was reintegrated into Czechoslovakia, which fell under Communist rule in 1948. The Prague Spring of 1968 briefly liberalized politics until the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia. After the Velvet Revolution of 1989, Slovakia peacefully transitioned to democracy, culminating in its independence on 1 January 1993. Since then, it has developed a modern market economy and joined NATO and the European Union in 2004.

== Prehistory ==
Discovery of ancient tools made by the Clactonian technique near Nové Mesto nad Váhom attests that Slovakia&#x27;s territory was inhabited in the Palaeolithic. Other prehistoric discoveries include the Middle Palaeolithic stone tools found near Bojnice, and a Neanderthal discovery at a site near Gánovce. The Gravettian culture was present principally in the river valleys of Nitra, Hron, Ipeľ, Váh and as far as the city of Žilina, and near the foot of the Vihorlat, Inovec, and Tribeč mountains, as well as in the Myjava Mountains. The best known artifact is the Venus of Moravany from Moravany nad Váhom.

Neolithic habitation was found in Želiezovce, Gemer, and the Bukové hory massif, the Domica cave, and at Nitriansky Hrádok. The Bronze Age was marked by the Unetice, Mad&#x27;arovce, Tumulus, Čaka, Velatice, and Lusatian cultures, followed by the Calenderberg culture and the Hallstatt culture in the early Iron Age.

== Antiquity ==

The Celts were the first population in the territory of present-day Slovakia who can be identified on the basis of written sources. The first Celtic groups came from the West around . Settlements of the La Tène culture indicate that the Celts colonized the lowlands along the river Danube and its tributaries. The local population was either subjected by the Celts or withdrew to the mountainous northern territory. New Celtic groups arrived from Northern Italy during the . The Celts initially lived in tiny huts in sizewhich either formed small villages or were scattered across the countryside.

Some of the small hill forts which were built in the developed into important local economic and administrative centers. For example, the hill fort at Zemplín was a center of iron-working; glass works were unearthed at Liptovská Mara; and local coins were struck at Bratislava and Liptovská Mara. Coins from Bratislava bore inscriptions like Biatec and Nonnos. The fort at Liptovská Mara was also an important center of the cult of the bearers of the Púchov culture of the Northern Carpathians.

Burebista, King of the Dacians, invaded the Middle Danube region and subjugated the majority of the local Celtic tribes (the Boii and the Taurisci) around . Burebista&#x27;s empire collapsed after he died about 16 years later. Archaeological sites yielding painted ceramics and other artefacts of Dacian provenance suggest that Dacian groups settled among the local Celts in the region of the rivers Bodrog, Hron and Nitra. The spread of the &quot;Púchov culture&quot;, associated with the Celtic Cotini, shows that the bearers of that culture started a northward expansion during the same period.

The Romans and the Germanic tribes launched their first invasions against the territories along the Middle Danube in the last decade of the . Roman legions crossed the Danube near Bratislava under the command of Tiberius to fight against the Germanic Quadi in , but the local tribes&#x27; rebellion in Pannonia forced the Romans to return. Taking advantage of internal strifes, the Romans settled a group of Quadi in the lowlands along the Danube between the rivers Morava and Váh in 21, making Vannius their king. The Germans lived in rectangular houses, rather than square ones, and cremated their dead, placing the ashes in an urn.

Although the Danube formed the frontier between the Roman Empire and the &quot;Barbaricum&quot;, the Romans built small outposts along the left bank of the Danube, for instance, at Iža and Devín. During the same period, the Germanic tribes were expanding to the north along the rivers Hron, Ipeľ and Nitra. Roman troops crossed the Danube several times during the Marcomannic Wars between 160 and 180. Emperor Marcus Aurelius accomplished the first chapter of his &quot;Meditations&quot; during a campaign against the Quadi in the region of the Hron River in 172. The &quot;Miracle of the Rain&quot;a storm which saved an exhausted Roman armyoccurred in the land north of the Danube in 173; Christian authors attributed it to a Christian soldier&#x27;s prayer. Roman troops crossed the Danube for the last time in 374, during Emperor Valentinian I&#x27;s campaign against the Quadi who had allied with the Sarmatians and invaded the Roman province of Pannonia.

== Medieval history ==

=== New migrations ===
In the 4th century AD, the Roman Empire could no longer resist the attacks by the neighboring peoples. The empire&#x27;s frontier started to collapse along the Danube in the 370s. The development of the Hunnic Empire in the Eurasian Steppes forced large groups of Germanic peoples, including the Quadi and the Vandals, to leave their homelands by the Middle Danube and along the upper course of the river Tisza in the early . Their lands were occupied by the Heruli, Sciri, Rugii and other Germanic peoples. However, the Carpathian Basin was dominated by the nomadic Huns from the early and the Germanic peoples became subjects to Attila the Hun.

Disputes among Attila&#x27;s sons caused the disintegration of his empire shortly after his death in 453. The Germanic peoples either regained their independence or left the Carpathian Basin (like the Heruli and the Sciri, respectively). Warriors&#x27; graves from the next century yielded large number of swords, spears, arrow heads, axes and other weapons. Other archaeological finds, including a glass beaker from Zohor, shows that the local inhabitants had close contacts with the Frankish Empire and Scandinavia.

=== Arrival of the Slavs ===
Regarding the early history of Slavs, Slavic texts or a record written by a Slav dating from before the late 9th century are not known. The foreign sources (mostly Greek and Latin) about Slavs are very inconsistent. According to a scholarly theory, the first Slavic groups settled in the eastern region of present-day Slovakia already in the . The 6th-century Byzantine historian Jordanes wrote that the funeral feast at Attila&#x27;s burial was called &quot;strava&quot;. Scholars who identify that word as a Slavic expression say that Jordanes&#x27; report proves that Slavs inhabited the Carpathian Basin in the middle of the . However, according to a concurrent scholarly theory, &quot;strava&quot; may have been a Hunnic term, because no primary source mentioned that the Slavs were present in Attila&#x27;s court.

Settlements which represented a new archaeological horizonthe so-called &quot;Prague-Korchak cultural horizon&quot;appeared along the northernmost fringes of the Carpathian Mountains around 500. Similar settlements, which are dated to the second half of the , were also excavated in the region of the confluence of the Danube and the Morava. &quot;Prague-Korchak&quot; settlements consisted of about 10 semi-sunken huts, each with a stone oven in a corner. The local inhabitants used handmade pottery and cremated the dead. Most historians associate the spread of the &quot;Prague-Korchak&quot; settlements with the expansion of the early Slavs.

According to historian Gabriel Fusek, written sources also evidence the presence of Slavs in the Central Europe in the first half of the . The 6th-century Byzantine historian, Procopius, wrote of a group of the Heruli who had &quot;passed through the territory of all of the Sclavenes&quot;, or Slavs, during their migration towards the northern &quot;Thule&quot;. Procopius&#x27;s report implies that the Slavs inhabited the region of the river Morava, but its credibility is suspect. Procopius also wrote of an exiled Longobard prince, Hildigis, who first fled to the &quot;Sclaveni&quot; and then to the Gepids, &quot;taking with him not only those of the Longobards who had followed him, but also many of the Sclaveni&quot; in the 540s. According to a scholarly theory, Hildigis most probably mustered his Slavic warriors in the region of the Middle Danube.

The Germanic Longobards were expanding towards the Middle Danube in the early . Archaeological research shows that Longobard expansion bypassed virtually the entire territory of Slovakia and they settled only in the most north-western part of the country (Záhorie). Unlike neighbouring Moravia, Slovakia (except of Záhorie) did not belong to any German empire in this time. The Longobards and the local Slavs remained separated by the natural border formed by Little and White Carpathians, respected by both sides according to Ján Steinhübel. He also writes that the Slavs, who remained &quot;an independent third party&quot; in strained Longobard-Gepid relations, were not interested in conflicts with their Germanic neighbours, but made raids in the faraway Byzantine Empire.

=== Avar Khaganate ===
The Longobards left the Carpathian Basin for Northern Italy after the invasion of the territory by the Avars in 568. The Avars were a group of nomadic warriors of mixed origin. They conquered the Carpathian Basin, subjugated the local peoples and launched plundering expeditions against the neighboring powers during the next decades. By the time of the Avars&#x27; arrival, the Slavs had settled in most lands that now form Slovakia, according to historian Stanislav Kirschbaum. Further migration waves strengthened the local Slavic population because new Slavic groups, pressed by the Avars, crossed the Eastern Carpathians, seceding from the Slavs who continued their expansion to the Balkan Peninsula. Dialects of Slovak still reflect that the Slavs came from different directions already in the Early Middle Ages, according to a widely accepted scholarly theory. Czech and Slovak share some features with the South Slavic languages, distinguishing them from the other West Slavic languages. According to archaeologist P. M. Barford, these features suggest that the Carpathian Mountains and the Sudetes separated the ancestors of the Slovaks and the Czechs from the Slavs living to the north of those mountains. Especially the dialects of Central Slovakia, which &quot;stand out from the continuous chain between the western and eastern dialects&quot;, preserved South Slavic features.

The 7th-century Frankish &quot;Chronicle of Fredegar&quot; wrote that the Avars employed the Slavs, or Wends, as &quot;Befulci&quot;, showing that the Slavs formed special military units in the Avar Khaganate. According to the same chronicle, the Wends rose up in rebellion against their Avar masters and elected a Frankish merchant, Samo, their king &quot;in the fortieth year of Clothar&#x27;s reign&quot;, that is in 623 or 624. Modern historians agree that the Avars&#x27; defeat during the siege of Constantinople in 626 enabled Samo to consolidate his rule. He routed the invading army of Dagobert I, King of the Franks, in the Battle of Wogastisburg in 631 or 632. The realm of Samo, who ruled for 35 years, collapsed soon after his death. Its exact borders cannot be determined, but it must have been located near the confluence of the Danube and the Morava rivers. Historian Richard Marsina puts its centre to Lower Austria.

A new horizon of mostly hand-made potterythe so-called &quot;Devínska Nová Ves pottery&quot;appeared between the Middle Danube and the Carpathians before the end of the . Large inhumation cemeteries yielding such pottery were unearthed at Bratislava, Holiare, Nové Zámky and other places, suggesting that cemeteries were located near stable settlements. For instance, the cemetery at Devínska Nová Ves, which contained about a thousand inhumation graves and thirty cremations, was used up until the end of the .

In the 670s, the new population of the &quot;griffin and tendril&quot; archaeological culture appeared in the Pannonian Basin expelling Kuber&#x27;s Bulgars south out of Sirmium (the westernmost part of Kubrat&#x27;s Onoguria). Shortly afterwards the new Avar-Slav alliance could expand their territories even also over the Vienna Basin. The political and cultural development in Slovakia continued in two separate lines. Lowland areas in the southern Slovakia got under the direct military control of the Avars. The Avars held strategic centers in Devín and Komárno which belonged to the most important centers of the khaganate. The Avars from Devín controlled Moravia and from Komárno they controlled southern Slovakia. In this time, the Avars already began to adopt a more settled lifestyle. The new period introduced Slavo-Avaric symbiosis and multi-ethnic Slavo-Avaric culture. The Slavs in southern Slovakia adopted new burial rite (inhumation), jewelry, fashion and used also common cemeteries with the Avars. Large Slavo-Avaric cemeteries can be found in Devínska Nová Ves and Záhorská Bystrica near Bratislava and similar cemeteries, the proof of direct Avar power, south of the line Devín-Nitra-Levice-Želovce-Košice-Šebastovce. North of this line, the Slavs preserved previous burial rite (cremation, sometimes tumuli). Natural increase of the population together with immigration from the south led to the settlement also in mountain areas.

In the 8th century, the Slavs increased their agricultural productivity (usage of iron plow) along with further development of crafts. Higher productivity initiated changes in the Slavic society, released a part of human resources previously required for farming and allowed to form groups of professional warriors. The Slavs began to build heavily fortified settlements (&quot;hradisko&quot; - large grad) protected by strong walls (8–10 m) and trenches (width 4–7 m, depth 2–3.5 m). Among the oldest belong Pobedim, Nitra-Martinský Vrch, Majcichov, Spišské Tomášovce and Divinka. The neighborhood with Avars raised unification process and probably also formation of local military alliances. The archaeological findings from this period (such as an exquisite noble tomb in Blatnica) support the formation of a Slavic upper class on the territory that later became the nucleus of Great Moravia.

A series of Frankish-Avar wars (788–803) led to the political fall of the khaganate. In 805, the Slavs attacked again. Their offensive aimed mainly on the centers of Avar power - Devín and Komárno. The Avars were not able to resist attack and they were expelled to the right bank of Danube. The Slavs from Slovakia probably participated also in further conflicts between small Slavic dukes and remaining Avar tarkhans.

===Principality of Nitra===

The &quot;Conversio Bagoariorum et Carantanorum&quot;, written around 870, narrates that Moimir, the leader of the Moravians, expelled one Pribina, forcing him to cross (or come up) the Danube and join Radbod, who was the head of the March of Pannonia in the Carolingian Empire from around 830. Radbod presented Pribina to King Louis the German who ordered that Pribina be instructed in the Christian faith and baptised. Three of the eleven extant copies of the &quot;Conversio&quot; also contain an out of context statement which says that Adalram, who was Archbishop of Salzburg between 821 and 836, had once consecrated a church on Pribina&#x27;s &quot;estate at a place over the Danube called Nitrava&quot;. According to a widely accepted scholarly theory, &quot;Nitrava&quot; was identical with Nitra in present-day Slovakia and the forced unification of Pribina&#x27;s Principality of Nitra with Mojmir&#x27;s Moravia gave rise to the development a new state &quot;Great Moravia&quot;.

Between 800 and 832, a group of Slavic forthills in Slovakia quickly arose and disappeared. Archaeological research confirmed the fall of several important central forthills approximately around the time when Pribina was expelled, e.g. Pobedim or Čingov. The lack of written sources does not allow to finally conclude if these events were caused by internal changes or by Moravian expansion. Pribina could be a ruler of an independent entity (the Principality of Nitra) or in the case that Moravian expansion preceded his expulsion, he was a member of &quot;Moravian&quot; aristocracy.

Other historians write that Pribina&#x27;s Nitrava cannot be identified with Nitra. Charles Bowlus says that a letter, written by Theotmar, Archbishop of Salzburg and his suffragan bishops in about 900, strongly suggests that Nitra was only conquered by Svatopluk I of Moravia only in the 870s. However, according to Třeštík, this information can be explained as a reasonable mistake of the Frankish bishops who knew that the territory was in the past a separate &quot;regnum&quot; different from Moravia and because it was ruled by Svatopluk I, they incorrectly assumed that he also conquered it. According to archaeologist Béla Miklós Szőke, no source substantiates either the theory that Pribina was the head of an independent polity or the identification of Nitrava with Nitra.

Richard Marsina writes that the Slovak nation emerged in that principality during Pribina&#x27;s reign. Regarding the 9th century, the archaeological researches successfully established a distinction between &quot;9th-century Slavic-Moravian&quot; and &quot;steppe&quot; burial horizons in Slovakia.

===Great Moravia===


Moravia emerged along the borders of the Avars&#x27; territory. Great Moravia arose around 830 when Mojmír I unified the Slavic tribes settled north of the Danube and extended the Moravian supremacy over them. When Mojmír I endeavoured to secede from the supremacy of the king of East Francia in 846, King Louis the German deposed him and assisted Mojmír&#x27;s nephew, Rastislav (846–870) in acquiring the throne.

The new monarch pursued an independent policy: after stopping a Frankish attack in 855, he also sought to weaken influence of Frankish priests preaching in his realm. Rastislav asked the Byzantine Emperor Michael III to send teachers who would interpret Christianity in the Slavic vernacular. Upon Rastislav&#x27;s request, two brothers, Byzantine officials and missionaries Saints Cyril and Methodius came in 863. Cyril developed the first Slavic alphabet and translated the Gospel into Old Church Slavonic. Rastislav was also preoccupied with the security and administration of his state. Numerous fortified castles built throughout the country are dated to his reign and some of them (&quot;e.g.&quot;, &quot;Dowina&quot; - Devín Castle) are also mentioned in connection with Rastislav by Frankish chronicles.

During Rastislav&#x27;s reign, the Principality of Nitra was given to his nephew Svätopluk as an appanage. The rebellious prince allied himself with the Franks and overthrew his uncle in 870. Similarly to his predecessor, Svätopluk I (871–894) assumed the title of the king (&quot;rex&quot;). During his reign, the Great Moravian Empire reached its greatest territorial extent, when not only present-day Moravia and Slovakia but also present-day northern and central Hungary, Lower Austria, Bohemia, Silesia, Lusatia, southern Poland and northern Serbia belonged to the empire, but the exact borders of his domains are still disputed by modern authors. Svätopluk also withstood attacks of the seminomadic Hungarian tribes and the Bulgarian Empire, although sometimes it was he who hired the Hungarians when waging war against East Francia.

In 880, Pope John VIII set up an independent ecclesiastical province in Great Moravia with Archbishop Methodius as its head. He also named the German cleric Wiching the Bishop of Nitra.

After the death of King Svätopluk in 894, his sons Mojmír II (894–906?) and Svatopluk II succeeded him as the King of Great Moravia and the Prince of Nitra respectively. However, they started to quarrel for domination of the whole empire. Weakened by an internal conflict as well as by constant warfare with Eastern Francia, Great Moravia lost most of its peripheral territories.

In the meantime, the Hungarian tribes, having suffered a defeat from the nomadic Pechenegs, left their territories east of the Carpathian Mountains, invaded the Pannonian Basin and started to occupy the territory gradually around 896. Their armies&#x27; advance may have been promoted by continuous wars among the countries of the region whose rulers still hired them occasionally to intervene in their struggles.

Both Mojmír II and Svätopluk II probably died in battles with the Hungarians between 904 and 907 because their names are not mentioned in written sources after 906. In three battles (4–5 July and 9 August 907) near Brezalauspurc (now Bratislava), the Hungarians routed Bavarian armies. Historians traditionally put this year as the date of the breakup of the Great Moravian Empire.

Great Moravia left behind a lasting legacy in Central and Eastern Europe. The Glagolitic script and its successor Cyrillic were disseminated to other Slavic countries, charting a new path in their cultural development. The administrative system of Great Moravia may have influenced the development of the administration of the Kingdom of Hungary.

===High Middle Ages===
====Settlement of Hungarians in the 10th century====

From 895 to 902, the Hungarians progressively imposed their authority on the Pannonian Basin. Although some contemporary sources mention that Great Moravia disappeared without trace and its inhabitants left, archaeological research and toponyms suggest the continuity of Slavic population in the river valleys of the Inner Western Carpathians.

The oldest Hungarian graves in Slovakia are dated to the end of the 9th and the beginning of the 10th century (Medzibordožie region, Eastern Slovakia). These findings document only a relatively short stay, without direct continuation in the settlement. Further findings elsewhere, in the most southern parts of Slovakia, are dated to 920-925 and consist mainly of graves of warrior type (isolated graves and smaller groups). Between 930 and 940, larger groups of Magyars began to migrate to the southern parts of today&#x27;s Slovakia, but did not cross the line Bratislava, Hlohovec, Nitra, Levice, Lučenec, Rimavská Sobota. The territory affected by this early migration covers about 15% of today&#x27;s Slovakia (7,500 km2). Hungarian settlements from these first two waves are not documented in the most fertile regions of Trnava Board, Považie north of Hlohovec, Ponitrie north of Nitra and the Eastern Slovak Lowland. The initial confrontation did not have a permanent character, and during the 10th century both populations coexisted. In southern Slovakia, the Hungarians frequently founded their villages close to the older Slavic settlements as they changed their nomadic lifestyle and settled; they occasionally joined them and used the same cemeteries. In the 11th century, the differences between Slavic and Magyar graves disappeared. The archaeological research has also significantly changed the view on the settlement of the northern parts of the country. In addition to the southern parts and river valleys of Nitra (river) and Váh, a relative high population density is notable particularly for the Spiš region with the Poprad river valley and the Turiec Basin. Liptov and the Zvolen Basins, Žilina Basin, Central Orava and northern Šariš were rather sparsely populated.

After the fall of the state, some non-landholding noblemen joined the Hungarian forces and participated in their raids in other parts of Europe. The chroniclers of the early history of the Kingdom of Hungary recorded that the prominent noble families of the kingdom descended either from leaders of the Hungarian tribes or from immigrants, and they did not connect any of them to Great Moravia. Archeological evidence proves that to the north of the line mentioned above, not only did the older settlement structures survive, but so also did the territorial administration led by native magnates. The Great Moravian or potential Great Moravian origin of the clan Hunt-Pázmán (&quot;Hont-Pázmány&quot;) has been advanced by some modern scholars. 
The territory of the present-day Slovakia became progressively integrated into the developing state (the future Kingdom of Hungary) in the early 10th century. The &quot;Gesta Hungarorum&quot; (&quot;Deeds of the Hungarians&quot;) mentions that Huba, head of one of the seven Hungarian tribes, received possessions around Nitra and the Žitava River; while according to the &quot;Gesta Hunnorum et Hungarorum&quot; (&quot;Deeds of the Huns and Hungarians&quot;) another tribal leader, Lél, settled down around Hlohovec () and following the Hungarian victory over the Moravians, he usually stayed around Nitra. Modern authors also claim that the north-western parts of the Pannonian Basin were occupied by one of the Hungarian tribes.

====&quot;Tercia pars regni&quot; or Principality of Nitra (11th century)====


The development of the future Kingdom of Hungary started during the reign of Grand Prince Géza (before 972–997) who expanded his rule over the territories of present-day Slovakia west of the River Garam / Hron. Although, he was baptised in or after 972, he never became a convinced Christian – in contrast to his son, Stephen who followed him in 997. Some authors claim that following his marriage with Giselle of Bavaria, Stephen received the &quot;Duchy of Nitra&quot; in appanage from his father.

When Géza died, a member of the Árpád dynasty, the pagan Koppány claimed the succession, but Stephen defeated him with the assistance of his wife&#x27;s German retinue. A Slovak folk song mentions that &quot;Štefan kral&quot; (&quot;i.e.&quot;, King Stephen) could only overcome his pagan opponent with the assistance of Slovak warriors around Bíňa (). According to István Bóna the Slovak song may be a translation of a Hungarian folk song, because in 1664, none of the inhabitants of Bíňa was Slovak. Following his victory, Stephen received a crown from Pope Silvester II and he was crowned as the first King of Hungary in 1000 or 1001.

The Kingdom of Hungary integrated elements of the former Great Moravian state organization. On the other hand, historians have not reached a consensus on this subject; &quot;e.g.&quot;, it is still being debated whether the formation of the basic unit of the administration (&quot;vármegye&quot;) in the kingdom followed foreign ( Frankish, Bulgarian, Moravian or Ottonian) patterns or it was an internal innovation.

Stephen (1000/1001–1038) established at least eight counties &quot;(&quot;vármegye&quot;)&quot; on the territories of present-day Slovakia: Abov (), Boršod (), Esztergom, Hont, Komárno (), Nitra (), Tekov () and Zemplín () were probably founded by him. The scarcely populated northern and north-eastern territories of today Slovakia became the kings&#x27; private forests. King Stephen also set up several dioceses in his kingdom; in the 11th century, present-day Slovakia&#x27;s territories were divided between the Archdiocese of Esztergom (established around 1000) and its suffragan, the Diocese of Eger (founded between 1006 and 1009).

Around 1015, Duke Bolesław I of Poland took some territories of present-day Slovakia east of the River Morava, with Hungarian King Stephen recapturing these territories in 1018.

Following King Stephen&#x27;s death, his kingdom got involved in internal conflicts among the claimants for his crown and Henry III, Holy Roman Emperor also intervened in the struggles. In 1042, the Emperor Henry captured some parts of today Slovakia east of the River Hron and granted them to King Stephen&#x27;s cousin, Béla, but following the withdrawal of the Emperor&#x27;s armies, King Samuel Aba&#x27;s troops recaptured the territories.

In 1048, King Andrew I of Hungary conceded one-third of his kingdom (&quot;Tercia pars regni&quot;) in appanage to his brother, Duke Béla. The duke&#x27;s domains were centered around Nitra and Bihar (in Romanian: &quot;Biharea&quot; in present-day Romania). During the following 60 years, the &quot;Tercia pars regni&quot; were governed separately by members of the Árpád dynasty (&quot;i.e.&quot;, by the Dukes Géza, Ladislaus, Lampert and Álmos). The dukes accepted the kings&#x27; supremacy, but some of them (Béla, Géza and Álmos) rebelled against the king in order to acquire the crown and allied themselves with the rulers of the neighbouring countries (&quot;e.g.&quot;, the Holy Roman Empire, Bohemia).

The history of the &quot;Tercia pars regni&quot; ended in 1107, when King Coloman of Hungary occupied its territories taking advantage of the pilgrimage of Duke Álmos (his brother) to the Holy Land. Although, Duke Álmos, when returned to the kingdom, tried to reoccupy his former duchy with the military assistance of Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor, but he failed and was obliged to accept the &quot;status quo&quot;.

==== Mongol invasion (1241–1242) ====

In 1241, the Mongols invaded and devastated the north-western parts of the kingdom. In April 1241, the Mongolian army crossed the border with Moravia near Hrozenkov. Trenčín Castle resisted the attack, but nearby places were plundered and some of them have never been restored. Mongols turned to the south and devastated regions along rivers Váh and Nitra. Only the strong castles, &quot;e.g.&quot;, Trenčín, Nitra, Fiľakovo () and fortified towns could resist attack. A part of the unprotected population escaped to the mountains and rough terrain where they built hill forts and camps. Most affected areas were the southwest Slovakia, Lower Pohronie to Zvolen and Zemplín. It is estimated that at least a third of population died from famine and epidemics.

Following the withdrawal of the Mongol army, Frederick II, Duke of Austria invaded the country. In July 1242 his army reached Hlohovec but the Hungarian army, mainly thank to troops from Trenčín and Nitra counties repelled the attack. Bohumír (Bogomer), the župan of Trenčín who played an important role in the suppression of Austrian units, later led the army send to help Bolesław V the Chaste (son-in-law of the Hungarian king) attacked by Konrad I of Masovia. The army consisted mainly of soldiers from the ethnic Slovak counties.

====Development of counties and towns====
The royal administration of the territory was developing gradually during the 11th-13th centuries: new counties were established with the partition of existing ones or central counties of the kingdom expanded their territory northward today&#x27;s Bratislava (, ), Trenčín, Gemer-Malohont () and Novohrad (), while the kings&#x27; private forests were organised into &quot;forest counties&quot; around Zvolen and Šariš Castle (). Following the occupation of his brother&#x27;s duchy, King Coloman set up (or re-established) the third bishopric in present-day Slovakia.

Some of the towns in present-day Slovakia were granted special privileges already prior to the Mongol invasion: Trnava (1238), Starý Tekov (1240), Zvolen and Krupina (before 1241). Following the withdrawal of the Mongol troops (1242), several castles were built or strengthened (&quot;e.g.&quot;, Komárno, Beckov () and Zvolen) on the order of King Béla IV. In addition to a relatively developed network of castles, agglomerations of an urban character became more important. Medieval towns should serve both to economic and defensive purposes.

The territory of present-day Slovakia was rich in raw materials like gold, silver, copper, iron and salt and therefore the mining industry developed gradually in the region. The development of the mining industry and commerce strengthened the position of some settlements and they received privileges from the kings. The list of towns with the earliest charters contains Spišské Vlachy (1243), Košice (before 1248), Nitra (1248), Banská Štiavnica (1255), Nemecká Ľupča (1263), Komárno (1269), Gelnica (before 1270), Bratislava (1291) and Prešov, Veľký Šariš and Sabinov (all in 1299). The Saxons in Spiš () were granted a collective charter (1271) by King Stephen V of Hungary.

The colonisation of the northern parts of the Kingdom of Hungary continued during the period; Walloon, German, Hungarian and Slavic &quot;guests&quot; (&quot;hospes&quot;, as they are called in contemporary documents) arrived to the scarcely populated lands and settled down there. The contemporary documents mention that settlers from Moravia and Bohemia arrived to the western parts of present-day Slovakia, while on the northern and eastern parts, Polish and Ruthenian &quot;guests&quot; settled down.

German guests had an important but not exclusive role in the development of towns. Smaller groups of Germans were present already prior the Mongol invasion, but their immigration took a significant rate in the 13th-14th century. In that time, there already existed settlements with a relatively highly developed economy in the territory of present-day Slovakia, but Germans who came from economically and administrative more advanced regions introduced new forms of production and management, new legal system and culture. The German guests settled in Upper and Lower Spiš, mining towns in Central Slovakia, their wide surroundings and many localities in Western Slovakia: Bratislava, Trnava and wine-growing towns in Malé Karpaty.

In the Middle Ages, present-day Slovakia belonged to the most urbanized regions of the Kingdom of Hungary and it was an important cultural and economic base. According to the decree of the King Vladislaus II Jagiello (1498) six of the ten most important towns in the kingdom were located in the present-day Slovakia: Košice, Bratislava, Bardejov, Prešov, Trnava and Levoča. In 1514, more than half of the royal towns and free mining towns of the kingdom were located in Slovakia. At the end of the Middle Ages, about two hundred other settlements had an urban character from a functional point of view. The first written mention prior 1500 is available for 2.476 settlements. The mining towns in Slovakia significantly contributed to the economy of the Kingdom of Hungary. Around the middle of the 14th century, Kremnica alone produced 400 kg of gold per year. Banská Štiavnica and Banská Bystrica produced a substantial proportion of silver of the whole kingdom. During the second half of the 14th century, the Kingdom of Hungary produced cca 25% of Europe&#x27;s total output.

The towns formed unions and associations to defend their privileges and common interests. The most important unions were the Community of Saxons of Spiš () (later reduced and known as the province of twenty-four Spiš towns), the Lower Hungarian Mining Towns (mining towns in Central Slovakia), Pentapolis (alliance of free royal towns in present-day Eastern Slovakia) and the Upper Hungarian Mining Towns (mining towns in eastern Slovakia including two mining towns in present-day Hungary).

The inhabitants of the privileged towns were mainly of German origin, followed by Slovaks and smaller number of Hungarians. Royal privileges prove that several families of the developing local nobility (&quot;e.g.&quot;, the Zathureczky, Pominorszky and Viszocsányi families) were of Slavic origin. The presence of Jews in several towns (&quot;e.g.&quot;, in Bratislava, Pezinok) is also documented at least from the 13th century; the Jews&#x27; special status was confirmed by a charter of King Béla IV of Hungary in 1251, but decisions of local synods limited the participation of Jews (&quot;i.e.&quot;, they could not hold offices and they could not own lands). The Muslims, living in the region of Nitra, also faced similar limitations; they disappeared (perhaps converted to Christianity) by the end of the 13th century.

====Period of the oligarchs (1290–1321)====

The last decades of the 13th century were characterized by discords within the royal family and among the several groups of the aristocracy. The decay of the royal power and the rise of some powerful aristocrats gave rise to the transformation of the administrative system: the counties that had been the basic units of the royal administration (&quot;royal counties&quot;) transformed gradually into autonomous administrative units of the local nobility (&quot;noble counties&quot;); however, the local nobility was not able to stop the rise of oligarchs.

Following the Mongol invasion of the kingdom, a competition started among the landowners: each of them endeavored to build a castle with or without the permission of the king. The competition started a process of differentiation among the noble families, because the nobles who were able to build a castle could also expand their influence over the neighbouring landowners. The conflicts among the members of the royal family also strengthened the power of the aristocrats (who sometimes received whole counties from the kings) and resulted in the formation of around eight huge territories (domains) in the kingdom, governed by powerful aristocrats in the 1290s.

In present-day Slovakia, most of the castles were owned by two powerful aristocrats (Amade Aba and Matthew III Csák) or their followers. Following the extinction of the Árpád dynasty (1301), both of them pretended to follow one of the claimants for the throne, but, in practice, they governed their territories independently. Amade Aba governed the eastern parts of present-day Slovakia from his seat in Gönc. He was killed by Charles Robert of Anjou&#x27;s assassins at the south gate in Košice in 1311.

Matthew III Csák was the &quot;de facto&quot; ruler of the western territories of present-day Slovakia, from his seat at Trenčín. He allied himself with the murdered Amade Aba&#x27;s sons against Košice, but King Charles I of Hungary, who had managed to acquire the throne against his opponents, gave military assistance to the town and the royal armies defeated him at the Battle of Rozgony / Rozhanovce in 1312. However, the north-western counties remained in his power until his death in 1321 when the royal armies occupied his former castles without resistance.

Pressburg (Bratislava) county was &quot;de facto&quot; ruled by the Dukes of Austria from 1301 to 1328 when King Charles I of Hungary reoccupied it.

===Late Middle Ages (14th–15th centuries)===
King Charles I strengthened the central power in the kingdom following a 20-year-long period of struggles against his opponents and the oligarchs. He concluded commercial agreements with Kings John of Bohemia and Casimir III of Poland in 1335 which increased the trade on the commercial routes leading from Košice to Kraków and from Žilina (hu. Zsolna) to Brno.

The king confirmed the privileges of the 24 &quot;Saxon&quot; towns in Spiš, strengthened the special rights of Prešov and granted town privileges to Smolník (hu. Szomolnok ) The towns of present-day Slovakia were still dominated by its German citizens. However, the &quot;Privilegium pro Slavis&quot;, dated to 1381, attests notably to nation-building in the wealthy towns: King Louis I gave the Slavs half of the seats in the municipal council of Žilina. Many of the towns (&quot;e.g.&quot;, Banská Bystrica, Bratislava, Košice, Kremnica and Trnava) received the status of &quot;free royal cities&quot; &quot;(liberæ regiæ civitates)&quot; and they were entitled to send deputies to the assemblies of the Estates of the Kingdom from 1441.

In the first half of the 14th century, the population of the regions of the former &quot;forest counties&quot; increased and their territories formed new counties such as Orava, Liptov, Turiec, Zvolen in the northern parts of present-day Slovakia. In the region of Spiš, some elements of the population received special privileges: the 24 &quot;Saxon&quot; towns formed an autonomous community, independent of Spiš county, and the &quot;nobles with ten lances&quot; were organised into a special autonomous administrative unit (&quot;seat&quot;). In 1412, King Sigismund mortgaged 13 of the &quot;Saxon&quot; towns to King Władysław II of Poland so they &quot;de facto&quot; belonged to Poland until 1769.

From the 1320s, most of the lands of present-day Slovakia were owned by the kings, but prelates and aristocratic families (&quot;e.g.&quot;, the Drugeth, Szentgyörgyi and Szécsényi families) also hold properties on the territory. In December 1385, the future King Sigismund, who was Queen Mary of Hungary&#x27;s prince consort at that time, mortgaged the territories of present-day Slovakia west of the Váh River to his cousins, the Jobst and Prokop of Moravia; and the former held his territories until 1389, while the latter could maintain his rule over some of the territories until 1405. King Sigismund (1387–1437) granted vast territories to his followers (&quot;e.g.&quot;, to the members of the Cillei, Rozgonyi and Perényi families) during his reign; one of his principal advisers, the Polish Stibor of Stiboricz styled himself &quot;Lord of the whole Váh&quot; referring to his 15 castles around the river.

Following the death of King Albert (1439), civil war broke out among the followers of the claimants for the throne. The Dowager Queen Elisabeth hired Czech mercenaries led by Jan Jiskra who captured several towns on the territory of present-day Slovakia (&quot;e.g.&quot;, Kremnica, Levoča and Bardejov) and maintained most of them until 1462 when he surrendered to King Matthias Corvinus.

==Modern era==

===Early modern period===

====Habsburg and Ottoman administration====
The Ottoman Empire conquered the central part of the Kingdom of Hungary, and set up several Ottoman provinces there (see Budin Eyalet, Eğri Eyalet, Uyvar Eyalet). 
Transylvania became an Ottoman protectorate vassal and a base which gave birth to all the anti-Habsburg revolts led by the nobility of the Kingdom of Hungary during the period 1604 to 1711. 
The remaining part of the former Kingdom of Hungary, which included much of present-day territory of Slovakia (except for the southern central regions), northwestern present-day Hungary, northern Croatia and present-day Burgenland, resisted Ottoman conquest and subsequently became a province of the Habsburg monarchy. It remained to be known as the Kingdom of Hungary, but it is referred to by some modern historians as the &quot;Royal Hungary&quot;.
Ferdinand I, prince of Austria was elected king of Habsburg Kingdom of Hungary. After the conquest of Buda in 1541 by the Ottomans, &quot;Pressburg&quot; (the modern-day capital of Slovakia, Bratislava) became, for the period between 1536 and 1784/1848 the capital and the coronation city of the Habsburg Kingdom of Hungary. 
From 1526 to 1830, nineteen Habsburg sovereigns went through coronation ceremonies as Kings and Queens of the Kingdom of Hungary in St. Martin&#x27;s Cathedral.

After the Ottoman invasion, the territories that had been administered by the Kingdom of Hungary became, for almost two centuries, the principal battleground of the Turkish wars. The region suffered due to the wars against the Ottoman expansion. A lot of loss of life and property occurred during the wars and the region also practically lost all of its natural riches, especially gold and silver, which went to pay for the costly and difficult combats of an endemic war. In addition, the double taxation of some areas was a common practice, which further worsened the living standards of the declining population of local settlements.

During Ottoman administration, parts of the territory of present-day Slovakia were included into Ottoman provinces known as the Budin Eyalet, Eğri Eyalet and Uyvar Eyalet. Uyvar Eyalet had its administrative center in the territory of present-day Slovakia, in the town of Uyvar (Slovak: Nové Zámky). In the second half of the 17th century, Ottoman authority was expanded to eastern part of the Habsburg Kingdom of Hungary, where a vassal Ottoman principality led by prince Imre Thököly was established.

After the ousting of the Ottomans from Budin (which later became Budapest) in 1686, it became the capital of the Habsburg Kingdom of Hungary. Despite living under Hungarian, Habsburg and Ottoman administration for several centuries, the Slovak people succeeded in keeping their language and their culture.

===Late modern period===

====Slovak National Movement====
During the 18th century the Slovak National Movement emerged, partially inspired by the broader Pan-Slavic movement with the aim of fostering a sense of national identity among the Slovak people. Advanced mainly by Slovak religious leaders, the movement grew during the 19th century. At the same time, the movement was divided along the confessional lines and various groups had different views on everything from quotidian strategy to linguistics. Moreover, the Hungarian control remained strict after 1867 and the movement was constrained by the official policy of magyarization.

The first codification of standard Slovak by Anton Bernolák in the 1780s was based on the dialect from western Slovakia. It was supported by mainly Roman Catholic intellectuals, with the center in Trnava. The Lutheran intellectuals continued to use a Slovakized form of Czech. Especially Ján Kollár and Pavel Jozef Šafárik were adherents of Pan-Slavic concepts that stressed the unity of all Slavic peoples. They considered Czechs and Slovaks members of a single nation and they attempted to draw the languages closer together.

In the 1840s, the Protestants split as Ľudovít Štúr developed a standard language based on the dialect from central Slovakia. His followers stressed the separate identity of the Slovak nation and uniqueness of its language. Štúr&#x27;s version was finally approved by both the Catholics and the Lutherans in 1847 and, after several reforms, it remains standard Slovak.

==== Hungarian Revolution of 1848 ====
In the Hungarian Revolution of 1848, Slovak nationalist leaders took the side of the Austrians in order to promote their separation from the Kingdom of Hungary within the Austrian monarchy. The Slovak National Council even organized an uprising from Vienna with the aim of equalizing Slovaks and gaining autonomy in the Habsburg monarchy, called the Slovak Uprising. In September, 1848, the Slovak National Council managed to organize a short-lived administration of the captured territories. However, the Slovak troops were later disbanded by the Vienna Imperial Court. On the other hand, thousands of volunteers from the current territory of Slovakia, among them a great number of Slovaks, fought in the Hungarian Army.

After the defeat of the Hungarian Revolution, the Hungarian political elite was oppressed by the Austrian authorities and many participants of the Revolution were executed, imprisoned, or forced to emigrate. In 1850, the Kingdom of Hungary was divided into five military districts or provinces, two of which had administrative centers in the territory of present-day Slovakia: the Military District of Pressburg (Bratislava) and the Military District of Košice.

The Austrian authorities abolished both provinces in 1860. The Slovak political elite made use of the period of neo-absolutism of the Vienna court and the weakness of the traditional Hungarian elite to promote their national goals. Turz-Sankt Martin (Martin / Túrócszentmárton) became the foremost center of the Slovak National Movement with foundation of the nationwide cultural association Matica slovenská (1863), the Slovak National Museum, and the Slovak National Party (1871).

==== Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867 ====
The heyday of the movement came to a sudden end after 1867, when the Habsburg domains in central Europe underwent a constitutional transformation into the dual monarchy of Austria-Hungary as a result of the Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867. The territory of present-day Slovakia was included in the Hungarian part of the dual monarchy, dominated by the Hungarian political elite which distrusted the Slovak elite due to its Pan-Slavism, separatism and its recent stand against the Hungarian Revolution of 1848. Matica was accused of Pan-Slavic separatism and was dissolved by the authorities in 1875; and other Slovak institutions (including schools) shared the same fate.

New signs of national and political life appeared only at the very end of the 19th century. Slovaks became aware that they needed to ally themselves with others in their struggle. One result of this awareness, the Congress of Oppressed Peoples of the Kingdom of Hungary, held in Budapest in 1895, alarmed the government. In their struggle Slovaks received a great deal of help from the Czechs. In 1896, the concept of Czecho-Slovak Mutuality was established in Prague to strengthen Czecho-Slovak cooperation and support the secession of Slovaks from the Kingdom of Hungary.

At the beginning of the 20th century, growing democratization of political and social life threatened to overwhelm the monarchy. The call for universal suffrage became the main rallying cry. In the Kingdom of Hungary, only 5 percent of inhabitants could vote. Slovaks saw in the trend towards representative democracy a possibility of easing ethnic oppression and a breakthrough into renewed political activity.

The Slovak political camp, at the beginning of the century, split into different factions. The leaders of the Slovak National Party, based in Martin, expected the international situation to change in the Slovaks&#x27; favor, and they set great store by Russia. The Roman Catholic faction of Slovak politicians led by Father Andrej Hlinka focused on small undertakings among the Slovak public and, shortly before the war, established a political party named the Slovak People&#x27;s Party. The liberal intelligentsia rallying around the journal &quot;Hlas&quot; (&quot;Voice&quot;), followed a similar political path, but attached more importance to Czecho-Slovak cooperation. An independent Social Democratic Party emerged in 1905.

The Slovaks achieved some results. One of the greatest of these was the election success in 1906, when, despite continued oppression, seven Slovaks managed to get seats in the Assembly. This success alarmed the government, and increased what was regarded by Slovaks as its oppressive measures. Magyarization achieved its climax with a new education act known as the Apponyi Act, named after education minister Count Albert Apponyi. The new act stipulated that the teaching of Hungarian must be included as a subject in the curriculum of non-state-owned four years elementary schools in the framework of compulsory schooling, as a condition for those schools to receive state financing. Non-government organizations such as the Upper Hungary Magyar Educational Society supported Magyarization at a local level.

Ethnic tension intensified when 15 Slovaks were killed during a riot on the occasion of the consecration of a new church at Černová / Csernova near Rózsahegy / Ružomberok (see Černová tragedy). The local inhabitants wanted the popular priest and nationalist politician Andrej Hlinka to consecrate their new church. Hlinka contributed significantly to the construction of the church, but his bishop Alexander Párvy suspended him from his office and from exercising all clerical functions because of Hlinka&#x27;s involvement in the national movement. This resulted in a wave of solidarity with Hlinka across all today&#x27;s Slovakia. The villagers tried to achieve a compromise solution and to cancel the suspensions or to postpone consecration until the Holy See decided about the Hlinka case. Párvy refused to consent, and appointed ethnic Slovak dean Martin Pazúrik for the task. Pazúrik, as well as Hlinka, were active in the election campaign but supported Hungarian and Magyarone politicians and continuously adopted an anti-Slovak attitude. The church had to be consecrated by force, with police assistance. Given where the event occurred, all 15 local gendarmes who participated in the subsequent tragedy were of Slovak origin. In the stress situation, the gendarmes shot dead 15 protesters among a crowd of about 300–400 villagers who tried to avoid the priests&#x27; convoy to enter their village. All this added to Slovak estrangement from and resistance to Hungarian rule, and the incident raised international attention on violation of national rights of non-Hungarian minorities.

Before the outbreak of World War I, the idea of Slovak autonomy became part of Archduke Franz Ferdinand&#x27;s plan of federalization of the monarchy, developed with help of the Slovak journalist and politician Milan Hodža. This last realistic attempt to tie Slovakia to Austria-Hungary was abandoned because of the Archduke&#x27;s assassination, which in turn triggered World War I.

==== Czechoslovakia ====

===== Formation of Czechoslovakia =====
After the outbreak of World War I the Slovak cause took firmer shape in resistance and in determination to leave the Dual Monarchy and to form an independent republic with the Czechs. The decision originated amongst people of Slovak descent in foreign countries. Slovaks in the United States of America, an especially numerous group, formed a sizable organization. These, and other organizations in Russia and in neutral countries, backed the idea of a Czecho-Slovak republic. Slovaks strongly supported this move.

The most important Slovak representative at this time, Milan Rastislav Štefánik, a French citizen of Slovak origin, served as a French general and as leading representative of the Czecho-Slovak National Council based in Paris. He made a decisive contribution to the success of the Czecho-Slovak cause. Political representatives at home, including representatives of all political persuasions, after some hesitation, gave their support to the activities of Masaryk, Beneš and Štefánik.

During the war the Hungarian authorities increased harassment of Slovaks, which hindered the nationalist campaign among the inhabitants of the Slovak lands. Despite stringent censorship, news of moves abroad towards the establishment of a Czech-Slovak state got through to Slovakia and met with much satisfaction.

During World War I (1914–1918) Czechs, Slovaks, and other national groups of Austria-Hungary gained much support from Czechs and Slovaks living abroad in campaigning for an independent state. In the turbulent final year of the war, sporadic protest actions took place in Slovakia; politicians held a secret meeting at Liptószentmiklós / Liptovský Mikuláš on 1 May 1918.

===== First Czechoslovak Republic (1918–1938) =====
At the end of the war Austria-Hungary dissolved. The Prague National Committee proclaimed an independent republic of Czechoslovakia on 28 October, and, two days later, the Slovak National Council at Martin acceded to the Prague proclamation. The new republic was to include the Czech lands (Bohemia and Moravia), a small part of Silesia, Slovakia, and Subcarpathian Ruthenia. The new state set up a parliamentary democratic government and established a capital in the Czech city of Prague.

As a result of the counter-attack of the Hungarian Red Army in May–June, 1919, Czech troops were ousted from central and eastern parts of present Slovakia, where a puppet short-lived Slovak Soviet Republic with its capital in Prešov was established. However, the Hungarian army stopped its offensive and later the troops were withdrawn on the Entente&#x27;s diplomatic intervention.

In the Treaty of Trianon signed in 1920, the Paris Peace Conference set the southern border of Czechoslovakia further south from the Slovak-Hungarian language border due to strategic and economic reasons. Consequently, some fully or mostly Hungarian-populated areas were also included into Czechoslovakia. According to the 1910 census, which had been manipulated by the ruling Hungarian bureaucracy, population of the present territory of Slovakia numbered 2,914,143 people, including 1,688,413 (57.9%) speakers of Slovak, 881,320 (30.2%) speakers of Hungarian, 198,405 (6.8%) speakers of German, 103,387 (3.5%) speakers of Ruthenian and 42,618 (1.6%) speakers of other languages.

In addition, in Subcarpathian Ruthenia, which was also included into Czechoslovakia in this time period, the 1910 manipulated Hungarian census recorded 605,942 people, including 330,010 (54.5%) speakers of Ruthenian, 185,433 (30.6%) speakers of Hungarian, 64,257 (10.6%) speakers of German, 11,668 (1.9%) speakers of Romanian, 6,346 (1%) speakers of Slovak/Czech, and 8,228 (1.4%) speakers of other languages. The Czechoslovak census of 1930 recorded in Slovakia 3,254,189 people, including 2,224,983 (68.4%) Slovaks, 585,434 (17.6%) Hungarians, 154,821 (4.5%) Germans, 120,926 (3.7%) Czechs, 95,359 (2.8%) Rusyns and 72,666 (3%) others.

Slovaks, whom the Czechs outnumbered in the Czechoslovak state, differed in many important ways from their Czech neighbors. Slovakia had a more agrarian and less developed economy than the Czech lands, and the majority of Slovaks practised Catholicism while fewer Czechs adhered to established religions. The Slovak people had generally less education and less experience with self-government than the Czechs. These disparities, compounded by centralized governmental control from Prague, produced discontent with the structure of the new state among the Slovaks.

Although Czechoslovakia, alone among the east-central European countries, remained a parliamentary democracy from 1918 to 1938, it continued to face minority problems, the most important of which concerned the country&#x27;s large German population. A significant part of the new Slovak political establishment sought autonomy for Slovakia. The movement toward autonomy built up gradually from the 1920s until it culminated in independence in 1939.

In the period between the two world wars, the Czechoslovak government attempted to industrialize Slovakia. These efforts did not meet with success, partially due to the Great Depression, the worldwide economic slump of the 1930s. Slovak resentment over perceived economic and political domination by the Czechs led to increasing dissatisfaction with the republic and growing support for ideas of independence. Many Slovaks joined with Father Andrej Hlinka and Jozef Tiso in calls for equality between Czechs and Slovaks and for greater autonomy for Slovakia.

=====Towards autonomy of Slovakia (1938–1939)=====
In September 1938, France, Italy, United Kingdom and Nazi Germany concluded the Munich Agreement, which forced Czechoslovakia to cede the predominantly German region known as the Sudetenland to Germany. In November, by the First Vienna Award, Italy and Germany compelled Czechoslovakia (later Slovakia) to cede primarily Hungarian-inhabited Southern Slovakia to Hungary. They did this in spite of pro-German official declarations of Czech and Slovak leaders made in October.

On 14 March 1939, the Slovak Republic (&quot;Slovenská republika&quot;) declared its independence and became a nominally independent state in Central Europe under Nazi German control of foreign policy and, increasingly, also some aspects of domestic policy. Jozef Tiso became Prime Minister and later President of the new state.

On 15 March, Nazi Germany invaded what remained of Bohemia, Moravia, and Silesia after the Munich agreement. The Germans established a protectorate over them which was known as the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia. On the same day, Carpatho-Ukraine declared its independence. But Hungary immediately invaded and annexed the Republic of Carpatho-Ukraine. On 23 March, Hungary then occupied some additional disputed parts of territory of the present-day Eastern-Slovakia. This caused the brief Slovak-Hungarian War.

====World War II====

The nominally independent Slovak Republic went through the early years of the war in relative peace. As an Axis ally, the country took part in the wars against Poland and the Soviet Union. Although its contribution was symbolic in the German war efforts, the number of troops involved (approx. 45,000 in the Soviet campaign) was rather significant in proportion to the population (2.6 million in 1940).

Soon after independence, under the authoritarian government of Jozef Tiso, a series of measures aimed against the 90,000 Jews in the country were initiated. The Hlinka Guard began to attack Jews, and the &quot;Jewish Code&quot; was passed in September 1941. Resembling the Nuremberg Laws, the Code required that Jews wear a yellow armband, and they were banned from intermarriage and from many jobs. More than 64.000 Jews lost their livelihood. Between March and October 1942, the state deported approximately 57,000 Jews to the German-occupied part of Poland, where almost all of them were killed in Extermination camps. The Slovak Parliament accepted a bill that retroactively legalized the deportation in May 1942. The deportation of the remaining Jewish population was stopped when the government &quot;resolved&quot; the social problem caused by its own policy. However, 12,600 more Jews were deported by the German forces occupying Slovakia after the Slovak National Uprising in 1944. Around a half of them were killed in concentration camps. Other Jews were rounded up and massacred in the country by Slovak collaborators under German command, at Kremnička and Nemecká. Some 10,000 Slovak Jews survived in Slovakia.

On 29 August 1944, 60,000 Slovak troops and 18,000 partisans, organized by various underground groups and the Czechoslovak government-in-exile, rose up against the Nazis. The insurrection later became known as the Slovak National Uprising. Slovakia was devastated by the fierce German counter-offensive and occupation, but the guerrilla warfare continued even after the end of organized resistance. Although ultimately quelled by the German forces, the uprising was an important historical reference point for the Slovak people. It allowed them to end the war as a nation which had contributed to the Allied victory.

Later in 1944 the Soviet attacks intensified. The Red Army, helped by Romanian troops, gradually routed out the German army from Slovak territory. On 4 April 1945, Soviet troops marched into the capital city of the Slovak Republic, Bratislava.

====Czechoslovakia after World War II====
The victorious Powers restored Czechoslovakia in 1945 in the wake of World War II, albeit without Carpathian Ruthenia, which Prague ceded to the Soviet Union. The Beneš decrees, adopted as a result of the events of the war, led to disenfranchisement and persecution of the Hungarian minority in southern Slovakia. The local German minority was expelled, with only the population of some villages such as Chmeľnica evading expulsion but suffering discrimination against use of their language.

The Czechs and Slovaks held elections in 1946. In Slovakia, the Democratic Party won the elections (62%), but the Czechoslovak Communist Party won in the Czech part of the republic, thus winning 38% of the total vote in Czechoslovakia, and eventually seized power in February 1948, making the country effectively a satellite state of the Soviet Union.

Strict Communist control characterized the next four decades, interrupted only briefly in the so-called Prague Spring of 1968 after Alexander Dubček (a Slovak) became First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia. Dubček proposed political, social, and economic reforms in his effort to make &quot;socialism with a human face&quot; a reality. Concern among other Warsaw Pact governments that Dubček had gone too far led to the invasion and occupation of Czechoslovakia on 21 August 1968, by Soviet, Hungarian, Bulgarian, East German, and Polish troops. Another Slovak, Gustáv Husák, replaced Dubček as Communist Party leader in April 1969.
The 1970s and 1980s became known as the period of &quot;normalization&quot;, in which the apologists for the 1968 Soviet invasion prevented as best they could any opposition to their conservative régime. Political, social, and economic life stagnated. Because the reform movement had had its center in Prague, Slovakia experienced &quot;normalization&quot; less harshly than the Czech lands. In fact, the Slovak Republic saw comparatively high economic growth in the 1970s and 1980s relative to the Czech Republic (and mostly from 1994 till ).

The 1970s also saw the development of a dissident movement, especially in the Czech Republic. On 1 January 1977, more than 250 human rights activists signed a manifesto called Charter 77, which criticized the Czechoslovak government for failing to meet its human rights obligations.

==== Velvet Revolution (1989) ====

On 17 November 1989, a series of public protests known as the &quot;Velvet Revolution&quot; began and led to the downfall of Communist Party rule in Czechoslovakia. A transition government formed in December 1989, and the first free elections in Czechoslovakia since 1948 took place in June 1990. In 1992, negotiations on the new federal constitution deadlocked over the issue of Slovak autonomy. In the latter half of 1992, agreement emerged to dissolve Czechoslovakia peacefully. On 1 January 1993, the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic each simultaneously and peacefully proclaimed their existence. Both states attained immediate recognition from the United States of America and from their European neighbors.

In the days following the &quot;Velvet Revolution,&quot; Charter 77 and other groups united to become the Civic Forum, an umbrella group championing bureaucratic reform and civil liberties. Its leader, the playwright and former dissident Václav Havel won election as President of Czechoslovakia in December 1989. The Slovak counterpart of the Civic Forum, Public Against Violence, expressed the same ideals.

In the June 1990 elections, Civic Forum and Public Against Violence won landslide victories. Civic Forum and Public Against Violence found, however, that although they had successfully completed their primary objective – the overthrow of the communist régime – they proved less effective as governing parties. In the 1992 elections, a spectrum of new parties replaced both Civic Forum and Public Against Violence.

==Contemporary period==

===Independent Slovakia===

In an election held in June 1992, Václav Klaus&#x27;s Civic Democratic Party won in Czechia on a platform of economic reform, and Vladimír Mečiar&#x27;s Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS) emerged as the leading party in Slovakia, on a platform of Slovak autonomy. Mečiar and Klaus negotiated the agreement to divide Czechoslovakia, and Mečiar&#x27;s party – HZDS – ruled Slovakia for most of its first five years as an independent state, except for a 9-month period in 1994 after a vote of no-confidence, during which a reformist government under Prime Minister Jozef Moravčík operated.

The first president of newly independent Slovakia was Michal Kováč. The first prime minister, Mečiar, had served as the prime minister of the Slovak part of Czechoslovakia since 1992.

Rudolf Schuster won the presidential election in May 1999. Mečiar&#x27;s semi-authoritarian government allegedly breached democratic norms and the rule of law before its replacement after the parliamentary elections of 1998 by a coalition led by Mikuláš Dzurinda.

The first Dzurinda government made numerous political and economic reforms that enabled Slovakia to enter the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), close virtually all chapters in European Union (EU) negotiations, and make itself a strong candidate for accession to North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). However, the popularity of the governing parties declined sharply, and several new parties that earned relatively high levels of support in public opinion polls appeared on the political scene. Mečiar remained the leader (in opposition) of the HZDS, which continued to receive the support of 20% or more of the population during the first Dzurinda government.

In the September 2002 parliamentary election, a last-minute surge in support for Prime Minister Dzurinda&#x27;s Slovak Democratic and Christian Union (SDKÚ) gave him a mandate for a second term. He formed a government with three other center-right parties: the Party of the Hungarian Coalition (SMK), the Christian Democrats (KDH) and the Alliance of the New Citizen (ANO). The coalition won a narrow (three-seat) majority in the parliament. Dzurinda&#x27;s Second Cabinet (2002–2006) announced strong NATO and EU integration and said they would continue the democratic and free market-oriented reforms begun by the first Dzurinda government.

The new coalition&#x27;s main priorities were aimed at gaining NATO and EU invitations, attracting foreign investment, and reforming social services such as the health-care system. Vladimír Mečiar&#x27;s Movement for a Democratic Slovakia, which received about 27% of the vote in 1998 (almost 900,000 votes), received only 19.5% (about 560,000 votes) in 2002 and again went into opposition, unable to find coalition partners. The opposition comprised the HZDS, Smer (led by Robert Fico), and the Communists, who obtained about 6% of the popular vote.

Initially, Slovakia experienced more difficulty than the Czech Republic in developing a modern market economy. Slovakia joined NATO on 29 March 2004 and the EU on 1 May 2004. Slovakia was, on 10 October 2005, for the first time elected to a two-year term on the UN Security Council (for 2006–2007).

The next election took place on 17 June 2006, where the leftist Smer got 29.14% (around 670 000 votes) of the popular vote and formed a coalition with Slota&#x27;s Slovak National Party and Mečiar&#x27;s Movement for a Democratic Slovakia. Their opposition comprised the former ruling parties: the SDKÚ, the SMK and the KDH.

The election in June 2010 was won by Smer with 34.8% but Fico was unable to form a government, so a coalition of SDKU, KDH, SaS and Most-Hid took over, with Iveta Radičová as the first woman prime minister. This government fell after the vote of the European Financial Stability Fund was connected with a no-confidence vote, as SaS argued, that Slovakia, should not bail out much richer countries.

Smer won the election in 2012 with 44,42%. Fico formed his Second Cabinet. It was a single-party government claiming 83 of the 150 seats. 
It officially supported the position of the EU during the Russian military invasion of Ukraine (2014–present) but sometimes doubted the efficacy of EU sanctions against Russia. In autumn 2015, during the European migrant crisis, the leaders of the four Visegrád Group states rejected the EU&#x27;s proposal to reallocate 120,000 refugees. 
The election 2016 took place in March 2016; some days later Fico formed his Third Cabinet, composed of four parties.

Fico resigned as prime minister in March 2018 following the largest street protests in decades over the murder of Ján Kuciak, an investigative journalist who was investigating high-level political corruption linked to the organized crime. President Andrej Kiska appointed Peter Pellegrini to succeed Fico as prime minister.

In March 2019, Zuzana Čaputová was elected as the first female president of Slovakia. She was a member of the liberal Progressive Slovakia party, which had no seats in parliament.

After the 2020 Slovak parliamentary election, the Ordinary People and Independent Personalities won the election and Igor Matovič became the prime minister in March 2020. In April 2021, Eduard Heger was sworn in as prime minister two days after Matovič resigned. Heger was a close ally of Matovic and deputy head of his Ordinary People party. In May 2023, Heger resigned to be replaced by the Central Bank deputy governor, Ľudovít Ódor, as caretaker prime minister of a technocrat government.

In September 2023, populist left-wing Smer-SSD, led by former prime minister Robert Fico, won the general election, taking 79 seats in a 150-seat parliament with its allies, the centre-left Hlas and nationalist SNS parties. The three parties agreed to form a coalition government. On 25 October 2023, Robert Fico became prime minister, announcing that the new government will stop Slovakia&#x27;s military aid to Ukraine. At his first EU leaders meeting in Brussels, Fico said that Slovakia will not support further military aid for Ukraine nor support further sanctions against Russia because of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. In April 2024, nationalist-left candidate Peter Pellegrini, a close ally of Fico, won the presidential election.

At the beginning of 2025, Slovakia experienced the worst cyber-attack in Slovak history on its land registry system, paralysed for days functioning of towns, municipalities and banks, by not being able to access land registry data. Minister of Agriculture, Richard Takáč, said that there is suspicion that the attack originated in Ukraine. In January 2025, large anti-government protests organised by a protest group Mier Ukrajine (Peace to Ukraine) broke out in Slovakia. On 31 January 2025, the prime minister of Slovakia Robert Fico together with Slovak Information Service showed photographs of Mamuka Mamulashvili, the leader of the Ukrainian military unit Georgian National Legion, with opposition activist Lucia Štasselová and online news commentator Martin Milan Šimečka, the father of opposition leader Michal Šimečka. Fico accused Šimečka and the government opposition of plotting a coup d&#x27;état in the country. 

==See also==
* Communist Party of Czechoslovakia
* History of Bratislava
* History of Czechoslovakia
* History of the Czech Republic
* History of the Jews in Slovakia
* History of the Slovak language
* Politics of Slovakia
* Slovaks in Czechoslovakia (1918–1938)

Lists:
* List of presidents of Czechoslovakia
* List of prime ministers of Czechoslovakia
* List of presidents of Slovakia
* List of prime ministers of Slovakia

General:
* History of Europe

==Notes==
==References==
== Sources ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 


===Historiography===

* Kirschbaum, Stanislav. &quot;A Guide to Historiography in Slovakia&quot;. In: &quot;Canadian Slavonic Papers&quot; (1996) 38#3/4, online

=== Primary sources ===

* &quot;Procopius: History of the Wars (Books VI.16–VII.35.)&quot; (With an English Translation by H. B. Dewing) (2006). Harvard University Press. .
==External links==
* History of Slovakia at the Slovak Ministry of Foreign Affairs website
* Detailed Slovak history timeline until 1714
* Overview from slovakia.org
* History of Slovakia: Primary Documents
* Brief description at the U.S. Department of State website
* History of the Slovak national movement
* Concise Jewish History of Slovakia
* History of Slovakia by Jozef Komornik
* Frontier of the Roman Empire in Slovakia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q324951" start="4" end="23" title="History of Slovakia" label="history of Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="73" end="88" title="Slovak Republic" label="Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="102" end="116" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="182" end="194" title="Palaeolithic" label="Palaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="217" end="226" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="231" end="241" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="259" end="267" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401464" start="269" end="282" title="Celtic tribes" label="Celtic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q157676" start="292" end="296" title="Boii" label="Boii"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="341" end="349" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378782" start="354" end="360" title="Early Slavs" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193152" start="457" end="470" title="Great Moravia" label="Great Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q239925" start="521" end="558" title="Cyril and Methodius" label="Cyrillo-Methodian missionary activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="631" end="649" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q852171" start="660" end="676" title="Mongol invasion of Europe" label="Mongol invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q698985" start="687" end="699" title="Ottoman wars in Europe" label="Ottoman Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="834" end="851" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24970998" start="886" end="904" title="Slovak nationalism" label="Slovak nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q315222" start="929" end="941" title="Ľudovít Štúr" label="Ľudovít Štúr"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="963" end="969" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="1012" end="1027" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="1066" end="1080" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1087" end="1098" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1161" end="1173" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q154346" start="1225" end="1235" title="Jozef Tiso" label="Jozef Tiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q727724" start="1305" end="1319" title="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia" label="Communist rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q162401" start="1333" end="1346" title="Prague Spring" label="Prague Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773668" start="1394" end="1432" title="Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia" label="Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182817" start="1444" end="1461" title="Velvet Revolution" label="Velvet Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059215" start="1537" end="1549" title="Dissolution of Czechoslovakia" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="1607" end="1621" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="1633" end="1637" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1646" end="1660" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q675717" start="1727" end="1747" title="Clactonian" label="Clactonian technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q376987" start="1753" end="1773" title="Nové Mesto nad Váhom" label="Nové Mesto nad Váhom"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="1834" end="1846" title="Palaeolithic" label="Palaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q626270" start="1890" end="1909" title="Middle Palaeolithic" label="Middle Palaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q788753" start="1933" end="1940" title="Bojnice" label="Bojnice"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="1948" end="1959" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q943716" start="1985" end="1992" title="Gánovce" label="Gánovce"/>
<link wikidata="Q756905" start="1998" end="2008" title="Gravettian" label="Gravettian"/>
<link wikidata="Q369773" start="2065" end="2070" title="Nitra River" label="Nitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q213230" start="2072" end="2076" title="Hron" label="Hron"/>
<link wikidata="Q748872" start="2078" end="2082" title="Ipeľ" label="Ipeľ"/>
<link wikidata="Q202598" start="2084" end="2087" title="Váh" label="Váh"/>
<link wikidata="Q25797" start="2114" end="2120" title="Žilina" label="Žilina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640059" start="2147" end="2155" title="Vihorlat" label="Vihorlat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2157" end="2163" title="Inovec" label="Inovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069966" start="2169" end="2175" title="Tribeč" label="Tribeč"/>
<link wikidata="Q837460" start="2205" end="2211" title="Myjava" label="Myjava"/>
<link wikidata="Q938497" start="2254" end="2271" title="Venus of Moravany" label="Venus of Moravany"/>
<link wikidata="Q949738" start="2277" end="2295" title="Moravany nad Váhom" label="Moravany nad Váhom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275904" start="2298" end="2307" title="Neolithic Europe" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q393609" start="2332" end="2342" title="Želiezovce" label="Želiezovce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031515" start="2344" end="2349" title="Gemer" label="Gemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q908287" start="2383" end="2389" title="Domica" label="Domica"/>
<link wikidata="Q643354" start="2403" end="2420" title="Nitriansky Hrádok" label="Nitriansky Hrádok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394404" start="2426" end="2436" title="Bronze Age Europe" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q773818" start="2455" end="2462" title="Unetice culture" label="Unetice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4177937" start="2464" end="2479" title="Mad&amp;#x27;arovce culture" label="Mad&amp;#x27;arovce"/>
<link wikidata="Q603383" start="2481" end="2488" title="Tumulus culture" label="Tumulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q223998" start="2490" end="2494" title="Urnfield culture" label="Čaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300317" start="2496" end="2504" title="Velatice" label="Velatice"/>
<link wikidata="Q611017" start="2510" end="2518" title="Lusatian culture" label="Lusatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q202165" start="2574" end="2591" title="Hallstatt culture" label="Hallstatt culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000127" start="2605" end="2613" title="Iron Age Europe" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="2637" end="2642" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="2775" end="2788" title="Celts" label="Celtic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q208247" start="2836" end="2851" title="La Tène culture" label="La Tène culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="2915" end="2921" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130334" start="3451" end="3465" title="Liptovská Mara" label="Liptovská Mara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585995" start="3574" end="3580" title="Biatec" label="Biatec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682546" start="3683" end="3697" title="Púchov culture" label="Púchov culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q309869" start="3728" end="3737" title="Burebista" label="Burebista"/>
<link wikidata="Q212853" start="3751" end="3758" title="Dacians" label="Dacians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401464" start="3834" end="3847" title="Celtic tribes" label="Celtic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q157676" start="3853" end="3857" title="Boii" label="Boii"/>
<link wikidata="Q589858" start="3866" end="3874" title="Taurisci" label="Taurisci"/>
<link wikidata="Q828570" start="4128" end="4134" title="Bodrog" label="Bodrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q213230" start="4136" end="4140" title="Hron" label="Hron"/>
<link wikidata="Q26397" start="4145" end="4150" title="Nitra" label="Nitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q430457" start="4225" end="4231" title="Cotini" label="Cotini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="4331" end="4337" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="4346" end="4361" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="4539" end="4547" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q308885" start="4578" end="4583" title="Quadi" label="Quadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q179251" start="4793" end="4799" title="Morava (river)" label="Morava"/>
<link wikidata="Q202598" start="4804" end="4807" title="Váh" label="Váh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606500" start="4822" end="4829" title="Vannius" label="Vannius"/>
<link wikidata="Q807748" start="5042" end="5052" title="Barbaricum" label="Barbaricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q780025" start="5144" end="5147" title="Iža" label="Iža"/>
<link wikidata="Q661046" start="5152" end="5157" title="Devín" label="Devín"/>
<link wikidata="Q748872" start="5254" end="5258" title="Ipeľ" label="Ipeľ"/>
<link wikidata="Q933963" start="5327" end="5343" title="Marcomannic Wars" label="Marcomannic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430" start="5373" end="5388" title="Marcus Aurelius" label="Marcus Aurelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152283" start="5433" end="5444" title="Meditations" label="Meditations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5537" end="5556" title="History of Christianity in Slovakia#Antiquity" label="Miracle of the Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q46720" start="5797" end="5810" title="Valentinian I" label="Valentinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q162858" start="5869" end="5879" title="Sarmatians" label="Sarmatians"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="5914" end="5922" title="Pannonia" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6175" end="6188" title="Huns#Before Attila" label="Hunnic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q77120" start="6196" end="6212" title="Eurasian Steppes" label="Eurasian Steppes"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="6282" end="6289" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q134350" start="6377" end="6382" title="Tisza" label="Tisza"/>
<link wikidata="Q220643" start="6431" end="6437" title="Heruli" label="Heruli"/>
<link wikidata="Q622776" start="6439" end="6444" title="Sciri" label="Sciri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253884" start="6446" end="6451" title="Rugii" label="Rugii"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="6493" end="6509" title="Carpathian Basin" label="Carpathian Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="6539" end="6543" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q36724" start="6603" end="6617" title="Attila the Hun" label="Attila the Hun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876107" start="7025" end="7031" title="Beaker (archaeology)" label="beaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q218398" start="7037" end="7042" title="Zohor" label="Zohor"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="7105" end="7120" title="Frankish Empire" label="Frankish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="7125" end="7136" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131548" start="7548" end="7556" title="Jordanes" label="Jordanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="7678" end="7684" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35959" start="7887" end="7893" title="Hunnic language" label="Hunnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636205" start="8025" end="8047" title="archaeological horizon" label="archaeological horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18086903" start="8067" end="8098" title="Prague-Korchak cultural horizon" label="Prague-Korchak cultural horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q186153" start="8812" end="8821" title="Procopius" label="Procopius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257426" start="8911" end="8920" title="Sclavenes" label="Sclavenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q671008" start="8988" end="8993" title="Thule" label="Thule"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="9156" end="9165" title="Longobard" label="Longobard"/>
<link wikidata="Q201706" start="9243" end="9249" title="Gepids" label="Gepids"/>
<link wikidata="Q246725" start="9755" end="9762" title="Záhorie" label="Záhorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q246725" start="9814" end="9821" title="Záhorie" label="Záhorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q426712" start="9959" end="9965" title="Little Carpathians" label="Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338173" start="9970" end="9987" title="White Carpathians" label="White Carpathians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12027480" start="10026" end="10040" title="Ján Steinhübel" label="Ján Steinhübel"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="10404" end="10409" title="Pannonian Avars" label="Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q146665" start="11215" end="11237" title="South Slavic languages" label="South Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q145852" start="11274" end="11295" title="West Slavic languages" label="West Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q152131" start="11400" end="11407" title="Sudetes" label="Sudetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q171336" start="11439" end="11446" title="Slovaks" label="Slovaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="11455" end="11461" title="Czechs" label="Czechs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15623879" start="11723" end="11744" title="Chronicle of Fredegar" label="Chronicle of Fredegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="11886" end="11900" title="Avar Khaganate" label="Avar Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q295168" start="12026" end="12030" title="Samo" label="Samo"/>
<link wikidata="Q209118" start="12073" end="12080" title="Clothar II" label="Clothar"/>
<link wikidata="Q312268" start="12187" end="12217" title="Siege of Constantinople (626)" label="siege of Constantinople in 626"/>
<link wikidata="Q109860" start="12287" end="12297" title="Dagobert I" label="Dagobert I"/>
<link wikidata="Q283321" start="12299" end="12317" title="King of the Franks" label="King of the Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q115105" start="12326" end="12348" title="Battle of Wogastisburg" label="Battle of Wogastisburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q42497" start="12611" end="12624" title="Lower Austria" label="Lower Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q262869" start="12878" end="12885" title="Holiare" label="Holiare"/>
<link wikidata="Q276362" start="12887" end="12897" title="Nové Zámky" label="Nové Zámky"/>
<link wikidata="Q970325" start="13011" end="13028" title="Devínska Nová Ves" label="Devínska Nová Ves"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="13211" end="13233" title="Archaeology" label="archaeological culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q552042" start="13276" end="13281" title="Kuber" label="Kuber"/>
<link wikidata="Q110117" start="13289" end="13296" title="Bulgars" label="Bulgars"/>
<link wikidata="Q833060" start="13310" end="13317" title="Sirmium" label="Sirmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q312477" start="13343" end="13349" title="Kubrat" label="Kubrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082641" start="13357" end="13363" title="Onogur, Bulgaria" label="Onogur"/>
<link wikidata="Q688715" start="13464" end="13476" title="Vienna Basin" label="Vienna Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q661046" start="13689" end="13694" title="Devín" label="Devín"/>
<link wikidata="Q210796" start="13699" end="13706" title="Komárno" label="Komárno"/>
<link wikidata="Q970325" start="14203" end="14220" title="Devínska Nová Ves" label="Devínska Nová Ves"/>
<link wikidata="Q246755" start="14225" end="14242" title="Záhorská Bystrica" label="Záhorská Bystrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="14248" end="14258" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q661046" start="14333" end="14338" title="Devín" label="Devín"/>
<link wikidata="Q26397" start="14339" end="14344" title="Nitra" label="Nitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q506693" start="14345" end="14351" title="Levice" label="Levice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046039" start="14352" end="14359" title="Želovce" label="Želovce"/>
<link wikidata="Q25409" start="14360" end="14366" title="Košice" label="Košice"/>
<link wikidata="Q391375" start="14367" end="14377" title="Šebastovce" label="Šebastovce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500094" start="14995" end="14999" title="Grad (toponymy)" label="grad"/>
<link wikidata="Q290898" start="15103" end="15110" title="Pobedim" label="Pobedim"/>
<link wikidata="Q26397" start="15112" end="15117" title="Nitra" label="Nitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163763" start="15134" end="15143" title="Majcichov" label="Majcichov"/>
<link wikidata="Q607944" start="15145" end="15162" title="Spišské Tomášovce" label="Spišské Tomášovce"/>
<link wikidata="Q779370" start="15167" end="15174" title="Divinka" label="Divinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q784917" start="15369" end="15377" title="Blatnica, Slovakia" label="Blatnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="15406" end="15412" title="Slavic peoples" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="15503" end="15511" title="Franks" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="15512" end="15516" title="Avar Khaganate" label="Avar"/>
<link wikidata="Q331644" start="15565" end="15574" title="Khanate" label="khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q661046" start="15670" end="15675" title="Devín" label="Devín"/>
<link wikidata="Q210796" start="15680" end="15687" title="Komárno" label="Komárno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="15774" end="15780" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q918008" start="15900" end="15907" title="tarkhan" label="tarkhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q269753" start="15950" end="15987" title="Conversio Bagoariorum et Carantanorum" label="Conversio Bagoariorum et Carantanorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q433975" start="16029" end="16035" title="Mojmir I of Moravia" label="Moimir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16055" end="16064" title="Great Moravia#" label="Moravians"/>
<link wikidata="Q355900" start="16079" end="16086" title="Pribina" label="Pribina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132835" start="16142" end="16148" title="Radbod, Prefect of the Ostmark" label="Radbod"/>
<link wikidata="Q942436" start="16174" end="16191" title="March of Pannonia" label="March of Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="16199" end="16217" title="Carolingian Empire" label="Carolingian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q152463" start="16268" end="16284" title="Louis the German" label="Louis the German"/>
<link wikidata="Q259632" start="16498" end="16520" title="Archbishop of Salzburg" label="Archbishop of Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q837326" start="16815" end="16836" title="Principality of Nitra" label="Principality of Nitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q193152" start="16911" end="16924" title="Great Moravia" label="Great Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q290898" start="17169" end="17176" title="Pobedim" label="Pobedim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17180" end="17186" title="Čingov" label="Čingov"/>
<link wikidata="Q837326" start="17380" end="17401" title="Principality of Nitra" label="Principality of Nitra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17548" end="17602" title="Principality of Nitra#On the location of Pribina&amp;#x27;s Nitrava" label="Pribina&amp;#x27;s Nitrava cannot be identified with Nitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q760725" start="17650" end="17658" title="Dietmar I, Archbishop of Salzburg" label="Theotmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q259632" start="17660" end="17682" title="Archbishop of Salzburg" label="Archbishop of Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426709" start="17691" end="17707" title="suffragan bishop" label="suffragan bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q437589" start="17774" end="17796" title="Svatopluk I of Moravia" label="Svatopluk I of Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q437589" start="18053" end="18064" title="Svatopluk I of Moravia" label="Svatopluk I"/>
<link wikidata="Q433975" start="18726" end="18734" title="Mojmir I of Moravia" label="Mojmír I"/>
<link wikidata="Q153080" start="18906" end="18918" title="East Francia" label="East Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152463" start="18932" end="18948" title="Louis the German" label="Louis the German"/>
<link wikidata="Q347148" start="18996" end="19005" title="Rastislav of Moravia" label="Rastislav"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="19229" end="19246" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41622" start="19247" end="19258" title="Michael III" label="Michael III"/>
<link wikidata="Q239925" start="19417" end="19443" title="Saints Cyril and Methodius" label="Saints Cyril and Methodius"/>
<link wikidata="Q239925" start="19457" end="19462" title="Saint Cyril the Philosopher" label="Cyril"/>
<link wikidata="Q145625" start="19477" end="19498" title="Glagolitic alphabet" label="first Slavic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35499" start="19530" end="19549" title="Old Church Slavonic" label="Old Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q830976" start="19769" end="19781" title="Devín Castle" label="Devín Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="20561" end="20570" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="20586" end="20602" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="Bulgarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170504" start="20705" end="20719" title="Pope John VIII" label="Pope John VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q239925" start="20799" end="20808" title="Saint Methodius of Thessaloniki" label="Methodius"/>
<link wikidata="Q319786" start="20854" end="20861" title="Wiching" label="Wiching"/>
<link wikidata="Q551716" start="20935" end="20944" title="Mojmir II of Moravia" label="Mojmír II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354544" start="20960" end="20972" title="Svatopluk II" label="Svatopluk II"/>
<link wikidata="Q181752" start="21346" end="21355" title="Pechenegs" label="Pechenegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q697722" start="21848" end="21861" title="Battle of Bratislava" label="three battles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21895" end="21908" title="Battle of Pressburg#Location" label="Brezalauspurc"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="21949" end="21956" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q145625" start="22141" end="22158" title="Glagolitic script" label="Glagolitic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="22177" end="22185" title="Cyrillic" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="22390" end="22408" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="22565" end="22580" title="Pannonian Basin" label="Pannonian Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="22724" end="22732" title="Toponymy" label="toponyms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="22805" end="22830" title="Carpathian Mountains" label="Inner Western Carpathians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22944" end="22957" title="Medzibordožie" label="Medzibordožie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="23396" end="23406" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q754773" start="23408" end="23416" title="Hlohovec" label="Hlohovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q26397" start="23418" end="23423" title="Nitra" label="Nitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q506693" start="23425" end="23431" title="Levice" label="Levice"/>
<link wikidata="Q728965" start="23433" end="23440" title="Lučenec" label="Lučenec"/>
<link wikidata="Q829812" start="23442" end="23457" title="Rimavská Sobota" label="Rimavská Sobota"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23660" end="23672" title="Trnava Board" label="Trnava Board"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23674" end="23681" title="Považie" label="Považie"/>
<link wikidata="Q754773" start="23691" end="23699" title="Hlohovec" label="Hlohovec"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23701" end="23709" title="Ponitrie" label="Ponitrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q26397" start="23719" end="23724" title="Nitra" label="Nitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542648" start="23733" end="23755" title="Eastern Slovak Lowland" label="Eastern Slovak Lowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q369773" start="24359" end="24372" title="Nitra (river)" label="Nitra (river)"/>
<link wikidata="Q202598" start="24377" end="24380" title="Váh" label="Váh"/>
<link wikidata="Q205530" start="24449" end="24453" title="Spiš" label="Spiš"/>
<link wikidata="Q756302" start="24470" end="24482" title="Poprad (river)" label="Poprad river"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503995" start="24498" end="24510" title="Turiec Basin" label="Turiec Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521564" start="24512" end="24518" title="Liptov" label="Liptov"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24527" end="24539" title="Zvolen Basin" label="Zvolen Basin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24542" end="24554" title="Žilina Basin" label="Žilina Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028412" start="24564" end="24569" title="Orava (region)" label="Orava"/>
<link wikidata="Q181676" start="24583" end="24588" title="Šariš" label="Šariš"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054990" start="25285" end="25296" title="Hont-Pázmány" label="Hunt-Pázmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="25480" end="25498" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q937023" start="25537" end="25553" title="Gesta Hungarorum" label="Gesta Hungarorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q369773" start="25689" end="25694" title="Nitra (river)" label="Nitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q394119" start="25703" end="25715" title="Žitava River" label="Žitava River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104499" start="25746" end="25774" title="Gesta Hunnorum et Hungarorum" label="Gesta Hunnorum et Hungarorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044288" start="25851" end="25854" title="Lehel" label="Lél"/>
<link wikidata="Q754773" start="25876" end="25884" title="Hlohovec" label="Hlohovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q298298" start="26271" end="26275" title="Géza, Grand Prince of the Hungarians" label="Géza"/>
<link wikidata="Q213230" start="26378" end="26383" title="Hron" label="Garam"/>
<link wikidata="Q213230" start="26386" end="26390" title="Hron" label="Hron"/>
<link wikidata="Q177903" start="26499" end="26506" title="Stephen I of Hungary" label="Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q232039" start="26584" end="26602" title="Giselle of Bavaria" label="Giselle of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q260303" start="26739" end="26746" title="Koppány" label="Koppány"/>
<link wikidata="Q854491" start="27026" end="27030" title="Bíňa" label="Bíňa"/>
<link wikidata="Q172383" start="27237" end="27254" title="Pope Silvester II" label="Pope Silvester II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412254" start="27287" end="27302" title="King of Hungary" label="King of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q852231" start="27562" end="27594" title="County (Kingdom of Hungary)" label="basic unit of the administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q177903" start="27739" end="27746" title="Stephen I of Hungary" label="Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785845" start="27879" end="27883" title="Abov" label="Abov"/>
<link wikidata="Q32367" start="27888" end="27894" title="Borsod" label="Boršod"/>
<link wikidata="Q171353" start="27899" end="27908" title="Esztergom" label="Esztergom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054981" start="27910" end="27914" title="Hont County" label="Hont"/>
<link wikidata="Q210796" start="27916" end="27923" title="Komárno" label="Komárno"/>
<link wikidata="Q26397" start="27928" end="27933" title="Nitra" label="Nitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q790774" start="27938" end="27943" title="Bars County" label="Tekov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070534" start="27951" end="27958" title="Zemplén County" label="Zemplín"/>
<link wikidata="Q734693" start="28256" end="28280" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Esztergom-Budapest" label="Archdiocese of Esztergom"/>
<link wikidata="Q976167" start="28330" end="28345" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Eger" label="Diocese of Eger"/>
<link wikidata="Q53436" start="28398" end="28418" title="Bolesław I of Poland" label="Bolesław I of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q179251" start="28483" end="28489" title="Morava (river)" label="Morava"/>
<link wikidata="Q153023" start="28681" end="28710" title="Henry III, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry III, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q311351" start="28881" end="28885" title="Béla I of Hungary" label="Béla"/>
<link wikidata="Q312775" start="28951" end="28961" title="Samuel Aba of Hungary" label="Samuel Aba"/>
<link wikidata="Q299400" start="29019" end="29038" title="Andrew I of Hungary" label="Andrew I of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q911002" start="29048" end="29072" title="Tercia pars regni" label="one-third of his kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094953" start="29199" end="29204" title="Biharia" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="29254" end="29261" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q82687" start="29418" end="29422" title="Géza I of Hungary" label="Géza"/>
<link wikidata="Q26486" start="29424" end="29433" title="Ladislaus I of Hungary" label="Ladislaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q747939" start="29435" end="29442" title="Lampert of Hungary" label="Lampert"/>
<link wikidata="Q250731" start="29447" end="29452" title="Prince Álmos" label="Álmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="29688" end="29705" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42585" start="29707" end="29714" title="Kingdom of Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83066" start="29792" end="29810" title="Coloman of Hungary" label="Coloman of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q151707" start="30036" end="30063" title="Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q201610" start="30115" end="30125" title="status quo" label="status quo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="30186" end="30193" title="Mongols" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q852171" start="30194" end="30216" title="Mongol invasion of Europe" label="invaded and devastated"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="30315" end="30322" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852469" start="30328" end="30337" title="Starý Hrozenkov" label="Hrozenkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q678465" start="30339" end="30353" title="Trenčín Castle" label="Trenčín Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q202598" start="30515" end="30518" title="Váh" label="Váh"/>
<link wikidata="Q369773" start="30523" end="30528" title="Nitra (river)" label="Nitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q145002" start="30573" end="30580" title="Trenčín" label="Trenčín"/>
<link wikidata="Q26397" start="30582" end="30587" title="Nitra" label="Nitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q247620" start="30589" end="30597" title="Fiľakovo" label="Fiľakovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426322" start="30816" end="30824" title="Pohronie" label="Pohronie"/>
<link wikidata="Q11874" start="30828" end="30834" title="Zvolen" label="Zvolen"/>
<link wikidata="Q189386" start="30839" end="30846" title="Zemplín (region)" label="Zemplín"/>
<link wikidata="Q280338" start="30978" end="31007" title="Frederick II, Duke of Austria" label="Frederick II, Duke of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q754773" start="31059" end="31067" title="Hlohovec" label="Hlohovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q40642610" start="31168" end="31175" title="Bogomer Ludány" label="Bohumír"/>
<link wikidata="Q10296503" start="31191" end="31195" title="župa" label="župa"/>
<link wikidata="Q53443" start="31307" end="31328" title="Bolesław V the Chaste" label="Bolesław V the Chaste"/>
<link wikidata="Q53460" start="31376" end="31395" title="Konrad I of Masovia" label="Konrad I of Masovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q187383" start="31759" end="31769" title="Pozsony county" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184596" start="31776" end="31783" title="Trencsén county" label="Trenčín"/>
<link wikidata="Q530876" start="31807" end="31815" title="Nógrád" label="Novohrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q11874" start="31913" end="31919" title="Zvolen" label="Zvolen"/>
<link wikidata="Q181676" start="31924" end="31929" title="Šariš" label="Šariš"/>
<link wikidata="Q26175" start="32193" end="32199" title="Trnava" label="Trnava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071480" start="32208" end="32219" title="Starý Tekov" label="Starý Tekov"/>
<link wikidata="Q11874" start="32228" end="32234" title="Zvolen" label="Zvolen"/>
<link wikidata="Q756667" start="32239" end="32246" title="Krupina" label="Krupina"/>
<link wikidata="Q210796" start="32378" end="32385" title="Komárno" label="Komárno"/>
<link wikidata="Q269607" start="32387" end="32393" title="Beckov" label="Beckov"/>
<link wikidata="Q11874" start="32401" end="32407" title="Zvolen" label="Zvolen"/>
<link wikidata="Q524405" start="32998" end="33012" title="Spišské Vlachy" label="Spišské Vlachy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25409" start="33021" end="33027" title="Košice" label="Košice"/>
<link wikidata="Q26397" start="33043" end="33048" title="Nitra" label="Nitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q208110" start="33057" end="33073" title="Banská Štiavnica" label="Banská Štiavnica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33082" end="33095" title="Nemecká Ľupča" label="Nemecká Ľupča"/>
<link wikidata="Q210796" start="33104" end="33111" title="Komárno" label="Komárno"/>
<link wikidata="Q842028" start="33120" end="33127" title="Gelnica" label="Gelnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="33143" end="33153" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q26119" start="33165" end="33171" title="Prešov" label="Prešov"/>
<link wikidata="Q852313" start="33173" end="33184" title="Veľký Šariš" label="Veľký Šariš"/>
<link wikidata="Q837478" start="33189" end="33196" title="Sabinov" label="Sabinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="33216" end="33222" title="Saxons" label="Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q205530" start="33226" end="33230" title="Spiš" label="Spiš"/>
<link wikidata="Q158038" start="33283" end="33303" title="Stephen V of Hungary" label="Stephen V of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q381151" start="33400" end="33407" title="Walloons" label="Walloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="33409" end="33415" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="33417" end="33426" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="33431" end="33437" title="Slavs" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="33642" end="33649" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="33654" end="33661" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="33757" end="33763" title="Polish people" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q690869" start="33768" end="33777" title="Ruthenians" label="Ruthenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q205530" start="34380" end="34384" title="Spiš" label="Spiš"/>
<link wikidata="Q26175" start="34497" end="34503" title="Trnava" label="Trnava"/>
<link wikidata="Q426712" start="34530" end="34542" title="Malé Karpaty" label="Malé Karpaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q25409" start="34862" end="34868" title="Košice" label="Košice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="34870" end="34880" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q27007" start="34882" end="34890" title="Bardejov" label="Bardejov"/>
<link wikidata="Q26119" start="34892" end="34898" title="Prešov" label="Prešov"/>
<link wikidata="Q26175" start="34900" end="34906" title="Trnava" label="Trnava"/>
<link wikidata="Q242478" start="34911" end="34917" title="Levoča" label="Levoča"/>
<link wikidata="Q754776" start="35357" end="35365" title="Kremnica" label="Kremnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q208110" start="35406" end="35422" title="Banská Štiavnica" label="Banská Štiavnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q144983" start="35427" end="35442" title="Banská Bystrica" label="Banská Bystrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="36432" end="36435" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q659424" start="36488" end="36495" title="Pezinok" label="Pezinok"/>
<link wikidata="Q152370" start="36613" end="36631" title="Béla IV of Hungary" label="Béla IV of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q111161" start="36664" end="36670" title="synods" label="synods"/>
<link wikidata="Q762585" start="36787" end="36794" title="Böszörmény" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37336" end="37362" title="Comitatus (Kingdom of Hungary)#Royal counties (late 10th century - late 13th century)" label="&amp;quot;royal counties&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37446" end="37472" title="Comitatus (Kingdom of Hungary)#Noble counties (late 13th century - 1848)" label="&amp;quot;noble counties&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q479138" start="38298" end="38307" title="Amade Aba" label="Amade Aba"/>
<link wikidata="Q222534" start="38312" end="38328" title="Matthew III Csák" label="Matthew III Csák"/>
<link wikidata="Q842967" start="38617" end="38621" title="Gönc" label="Gönc"/>
<link wikidata="Q25409" start="38702" end="38708" title="Košice" label="Košice"/>
<link wikidata="Q145002" start="38840" end="38847" title="Trenčín" label="Trenčín"/>
<link wikidata="Q213061" start="38932" end="38952" title="Charles I of Hungary" label="Charles I of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q181293" start="39093" end="39123" title="Battle of Rozgony" label="Battle of Rozgony / Rozhanovce"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39354" end="39370" title="List of rulers of Austria#Dukes of Austria#Habsburg Dukes and Archdukes of Austria" label="Dukes of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q213061" start="39399" end="39419" title="Charles I of Hungary" label="Charles I of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415418" start="39652" end="39662" title="Congress of Visegrád (1335)" label="agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q155167" start="39674" end="39689" title="John of Bohemia" label="John of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q53457" start="39694" end="39715" title="Casimir III of Poland" label="Casimir III of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="39798" end="39804" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q25797" start="39814" end="39820" title="Žilina" label="Žilina"/>
<link wikidata="Q25797" start="39826" end="39832" title="Zsolna" label="Zsolna"/>
<link wikidata="Q14960" start="39837" end="39841" title="Brno" label="Brno"/>
<link wikidata="Q698855" start="39894" end="39899" title="Carpathian Germans" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26119" start="39956" end="39962" title="Prešov" label="Prešov"/>
<link wikidata="Q225215" start="39994" end="40001" title="Smolník, Gelnica District" label="Smolník"/>
<link wikidata="Q225215" start="40007" end="40016" title="Szomolnok" label="Szomolnok"/>
<link wikidata="Q4181017" start="40117" end="40139" title="Privilegium pro Slavis" label="Privilegium pro Slavis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752412" start="40181" end="40196" title="nation-building" label="nation-building"/>
<link wikidata="Q53998" start="40224" end="40231" title="Louis I of Hungary" label="Louis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q18702" start="40425" end="40442" title="free royal cities" label="free royal cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q657326" start="40551" end="40573" title="Estates of the realm" label="Estates of the Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034315" start="40772" end="40778" title="Turiec" label="Turiec"/>
<link wikidata="Q11874" start="40780" end="40786" title="Zvolen" label="Zvolen"/>
<link wikidata="Q767378" start="40996" end="41007" title="Szepes county" label="Spiš county"/>
<link wikidata="Q57124" start="41147" end="41156" title="Sigismund, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Sigismund"/>
<link wikidata="Q54049" start="41209" end="41231" title="Jogaila" label="Władysław II of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q725440" start="41380" end="41387" title="prelate" label="prelate"/>
<link wikidata="Q910024" start="41438" end="41445" title="Drugeth" label="Drugeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7664583" start="41447" end="41459" title="Szentgyörgyi" label="Szentgyörgyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q269256" start="41464" end="41473" title="Szécsényi" label="Szécsényi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329104" start="41605" end="41619" title="prince consort" label="prince consort"/>
<link wikidata="Q158181" start="41726" end="41731" title="Jobst of Moravia" label="Jobst"/>
<link wikidata="Q474347" start="41736" end="41753" title="Prokop of Moravia" label="Prokop of Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q700556" start="41995" end="42001" title="House of Cilli" label="Cillei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375365" start="42003" end="42011" title="Rozgonyi" label="Rozgonyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21502076" start="42016" end="42023" title="Perényi" label="Perényi"/>
<link wikidata="Q127684" start="42094" end="42113" title="Stibor of Stiboricz" label="Stibor of Stiboricz"/>
<link wikidata="Q157112" start="42238" end="42244" title="Albert II of Germany" label="Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q167401" start="42344" end="42353" title="Elizabeth of Luxembourg" label="Elisabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="42366" end="42377" title="Mercenary" label="mercenaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073614" start="42385" end="42395" title="Jan Jiskra" label="Jan Jiskra"/>
<link wikidata="Q242478" start="42493" end="42499" title="Levoča" label="Levoča"/>
<link wikidata="Q27007" start="42504" end="42512" title="Bardejov" label="Bardejov"/>
<link wikidata="Q188634" start="42581" end="42598" title="Matthias Corvinus of Hungary" label="Matthias Corvinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="42692" end="42706" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q580460" start="42809" end="42821" title="Budin Eyalet" label="Budin Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138748" start="42823" end="42834" title="Eğri Eyalet" label="Eğri Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138506" start="42836" end="42848" title="Uyvar Eyalet" label="Uyvar Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q655621" start="42875" end="42902" title="Principality of Transylvania (1571–1711)" label="Ottoman protectorate vassal"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="43343" end="43360" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q253094" start="43474" end="43487" title="Royal Hungary" label="Royal Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="43686" end="43696" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q239560" start="43953" end="43980" title="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Concathedral" label="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q698985" start="44148" end="44160" title="Turkish wars" label="Turkish wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242836" start="44472" end="44487" title="double taxation" label="double taxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q580460" start="44748" end="44760" title="Budin Eyalet" label="Budin Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138748" start="44762" end="44773" title="Eğri Eyalet" label="Eğri Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138506" start="44778" end="44790" title="Uyvar Eyalet" label="Uyvar Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q276362" start="44892" end="44897" title="Nové Zámky" label="Uyvar"/>
<link wikidata="Q357151" start="45093" end="45105" title="Imre Thököly" label="Imre Thököly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="45189" end="45197" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q182267" start="45586" end="45605" title="Pan-slavism" label="Pan-Slavic movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q843725" start="46057" end="46070" title="magyarization" label="magyarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q588302" start="46118" end="46132" title="Anton Bernolák" label="Anton Bernolák"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="46221" end="46235" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26175" start="46270" end="46276" title="Trnava" label="Trnava"/>
<link wikidata="Q220550" start="46361" end="46371" title="Ján Kollár" label="Ján Kollár"/>
<link wikidata="Q158354" start="46376" end="46395" title="Pavel Jozef Šafárik" label="Pavel Jozef Šafárik"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="46465" end="46478" title="Slavic people" label="Slavic people"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="46497" end="46503" title="Czechs" label="Czechs"/>
<link wikidata="Q171336" start="46508" end="46515" title="Slovaks" label="Slovaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q315222" start="46641" end="46653" title="Ľudovít Štúr" label="Ľudovít Štúr"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="46963" end="46969" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q473716" start="47018" end="47046" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1848" label="Hungarian Revolution of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q394078" start="47205" end="47228" title="Slovak National Council (1848–1849)" label="Slovak National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="47261" end="47267" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q751143" start="47361" end="47376" title="Slovak Uprising of 1848–49" label="Slovak Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="48309" end="48323" title="neo-absolutism" label="neo-absolutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q27001" start="48448" end="48454" title="Martin, Slovakia" label="Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27001" start="48457" end="48473" title="Túrócszentmárton" label="Túrócszentmárton"/>
<link wikidata="Q763567" start="48589" end="48605" title="Matica slovenská" label="Matica slovenská"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093925" start="48618" end="48640" title="Slovak National Museum" label="Slovak National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q694846" start="48650" end="48671" title="Slovak National Party (historical party)" label="Slovak National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="48796" end="48804" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q209601" start="48843" end="48872" title="Ausgleich" label="constitutional transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="48899" end="48914" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q209601" start="48934" end="48969" title="Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867" label="Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q473716" start="49211" end="49239" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1848" label="Hungarian Revolution of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="50121" end="50139" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q467797" start="50716" end="50729" title="Andrej Hlinka" label="Andrej Hlinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q693985" start="50853" end="50879" title="Slovak People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Slovak People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q381142" start="50893" end="50907" title="intelligentsia" label="intelligentsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541550" start="51083" end="51106" title="Slovak Social Democratic Party of the Kingdom of Hungary" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q843725" start="51419" end="51432" title="Magyarization" label="Magyarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q460211" start="51541" end="51555" title="Albert Apponyi" label="Albert Apponyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q23699918" start="51852" end="51892" title="Upper Hungary Magyar Educational Society" label="Upper Hungary Magyar Educational Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q27541" start="52084" end="52093" title="Rózsahegy" label="Rózsahegy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27541" start="52096" end="52106" title="Ružomberok" label="Ružomberok"/>
<link wikidata="Q686944" start="52112" end="52127" title="Černová tragedy" label="Černová tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52334" end="52349" title="Alexander Párvy" label="Alexander Párvy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="52691" end="52699" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q43063" start="53610" end="53634" title="Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria" label="Archduke Franz Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q349893" start="53742" end="53753" title="Milan Hodža" label="Milan Hodža"/>
<link wikidata="Q192050" start="53847" end="53876" title="Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand" label="Archduke&amp;#x27;s assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="54004" end="54015" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994894" start="54099" end="54112" title="Dual Monarchy" label="Dual Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q319962" start="54553" end="54577" title="Milan Rastislav Štefánik" label="Milan Rastislav Štefánik"/>
<link wikidata="Q78492" start="54954" end="54961" title="Tomáš Masaryk" label="Masaryk"/>
<link wikidata="Q152274" start="54963" end="54968" title="Edvard Beneš" label="Beneš"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="55306" end="55317" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q272040" start="55617" end="55633" title="Liptószentmiklós" label="Liptószentmiklós"/>
<link wikidata="Q272040" start="55636" end="55653" title="Liptovský Mikuláš" label="Liptovský Mikuláš"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="55839" end="55853" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55894" end="55917" title="Slovak National Council (1918)" label="Slovak National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q27001" start="55921" end="55927" title="Martin, Slovakia" label="Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="56013" end="56020" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="56025" end="56032" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="56051" end="56058" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148511" start="56074" end="56096" title="Subcarpathian Ruthenia" label="Subcarpathian Ruthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="56204" end="56210" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277832" start="56254" end="56272" title="Hungarian Red Army" label="Hungarian Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q200896" start="56396" end="56418" title="Slovak Soviet Republic" label="Slovak Soviet Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26119" start="56439" end="56445" title="Prešov" label="Prešov"/>
<link wikidata="Q181902" start="56604" end="56621" title="Treaty of Trianon" label="Treaty of Trianon"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="56642" end="56664" title="Paris Peace Conference, 1919" label="Paris Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="57112" end="57118" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="57148" end="57157" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26245" start="57221" end="57230" title="Rusyn language" label="Ruthenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148511" start="57295" end="57317" title="Subcarpathian Ruthenia" label="Subcarpathian Ruthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26245" start="57485" end="57494" title="Rusyn language" label="Ruthenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="57596" end="57604" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="57629" end="57635" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="57636" end="57641" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q171336" start="57788" end="57795" title="Slovaks" label="Slovaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="57813" end="57823" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="57840" end="57847" title="Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="57864" end="57870" title="Czechs" label="Czechs"/>
<link wikidata="Q140420" start="57886" end="57892" title="Rusyns" label="Rusyns"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="58568" end="58591" title="parliamentary democracy" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="59102" end="59118" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q467797" start="59375" end="59388" title="Andrej Hlinka" label="Andrej Hlinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q154346" start="59393" end="59403" title="Jozef Tiso" label="Jozef Tiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="59597" end="59609" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="59624" end="59640" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="59723" end="59734" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q126604" start="59767" end="59785" title="First Vienna Award" label="First Vienna Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q154401" start="60042" end="60057" title="Slovak Republic (1939–1945)" label="Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="60183" end="60194" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi German"/>
<link wikidata="Q154346" start="60278" end="60288" title="Jozef Tiso" label="Jozef Tiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="60401" end="60408" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="60410" end="60417" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="60423" end="60430" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152750" start="60531" end="60566" title="Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia" label="Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q950644" start="60585" end="60601" title="Carpatho-Ukraine" label="Carpatho-Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q177109" start="60845" end="60865" title="Slovak-Hungarian War" label="Slovak-Hungarian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q154401" start="60916" end="60931" title="Slovak Republic (1939–1945)" label="Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="60997" end="61001" title="Axis Powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150620" start="61037" end="61056" title="Slovak invasion of Poland" label="wars against Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q696012" start="61455" end="61467" title="Hlinka Guard" label="Hlinka Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774211" start="61504" end="61515" title="Jewish Code" label="Jewish Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q153813" start="61895" end="61913" title="Extermination camp" label="Extermination camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q163780" start="62251" end="62275" title="Slovak National Uprising" label="Slovak National Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q18042183" start="62448" end="62469" title="Kremnička and Nemecká massacres" label="Kremnička and Nemecká"/>
<link wikidata="Q430161" start="62628" end="62660" title="Czechoslovak government-in-exile" label="Czechoslovak government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="63186" end="63194" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="63492" end="63504" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148511" start="63521" end="63540" title="Carpathian Ruthenia" label="Carpathian Ruthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="63568" end="63580" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q165559" start="63586" end="63599" title="Beneš decrees" label="Beneš decrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q698855" start="63747" end="63762" title="Carpathian Germans" label="German minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536279" start="63767" end="63775" title="Flight and expulsion of Germans (1944–1950)" label="expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q683460" start="63827" end="63836" title="Chmeľnica" label="Chmeľnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q727724" start="64030" end="64058" title="Czechoslovak Communist Party" label="Czechoslovak Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q325261" start="64231" end="64246" title="satellite state" label="satellite state"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="64276" end="64285" title="Communist" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q162401" start="64373" end="64386" title="Prague Spring" label="Prague Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q150543" start="64401" end="64417" title="Alexander Dubček" label="Alexander Dubček"/>
<link wikidata="Q727724" start="64484" end="64517" title="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia" label="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084040" start="64603" end="64630" title="socialism with a human face" label="socialism with a human face"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="64668" end="64679" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773668" start="64732" end="64773" title="Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia" label="invasion and occupation of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q157651" start="64874" end="64886" title="Gustáv Husák" label="Gustáv Husák"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853526" start="65001" end="65014" title="Normalization (Czechoslovakia)" label="normalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="65617" end="65629" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q729362" start="65666" end="65676" title="Charter 77" label="Charter 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q182817" start="65878" end="65895" title="Velvet Revolution" label="Velvet Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755236" start="66636" end="66647" title="Civic Forum" label="Civic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="66703" end="66718" title="civil liberties" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q36233" start="66768" end="66780" title="Václav Havel" label="Václav Havel"/>
<link wikidata="Q294592" start="66886" end="66909" title="Public Against Violence" label="Public Against Violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053313" start="67413" end="67439" title="Slovak parliamentary election, 1992" label="election held in June 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q57434" start="67441" end="67453" title="Václav Klaus" label="Václav Klaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q316526" start="67537" end="67552" title="Vladimír Mečiar" label="Vladimír Mečiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q828392" start="67560" end="67594" title="Movement for a Democratic Slovakia" label="Movement for a Democratic Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059215" start="67710" end="67744" title="Dissolution of Czechoslovakia" label="agreement to divide Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q705654" start="67976" end="67990" title="Jozef Moravčík" label="Jozef Moravčík"/>
<link wikidata="Q356990" start="68056" end="68068" title="Michal Kováč" label="Michal Kováč"/>
<link wikidata="Q163813" start="68187" end="68202" title="Rudolf Schuster" label="Rudolf Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q780513" start="68207" end="68244" title="Slovak presidential election, 1999" label="the presidential election in May 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="68334" end="68345" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q212765" start="68433" end="68449" title="Mikuláš Dzurinda" label="Mikuláš Dzurinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="68562" end="68616" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="68657" end="68671" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="68743" end="68777" title="North Atlantic Treaty Organization" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q837296" start="69259" end="69296" title="Slovak Democratic and Christian Union" label="Slovak Democratic and Christian Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q107224161" start="69408" end="69440" title="Party of the Hungarian Coalition" label="Party of the Hungarian Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q904070" start="69452" end="69471" title="Christian Democratic Movement" label="Christian Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552951" start="69486" end="69513" title="Alliance of the New Citizen" label="Alliance of the New Citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090182" start="69589" end="69619" title="Dzurinda&amp;#x27;s Second Cabinet" label="Dzurinda&amp;#x27;s Second Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q821929" start="70252" end="70256" title="Direction – Social Democracy" label="Smer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57606" start="70265" end="70276" title="Robert Fico" label="Robert Fico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325836" start="70287" end="70297" title="Communist Party of Slovakia" label="Communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="70438" end="70452" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367724" start="70463" end="70491" title="Enlargement of NATO" label="joined NATO on 29 March 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230874" start="70496" end="70516" title="2004 enlargement of the European Union" label="the EU on 1 May 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="70605" end="70624" title="UN Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q221480" start="70807" end="70828" title="Slovak National Party" label="Slovak National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q856417" start="70973" end="70994" title="Slovak parliamentary election, 2010" label="election in June 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q211771" start="71126" end="71140" title="Iveta Radičová" label="Iveta Radičová"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078236" start="71381" end="71397" title="Slovak parliamentary election, 2012" label="election in 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q851906" start="71423" end="71441" title="Fico&amp;#x27;s Second Cabinet" label="his Second Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="71565" end="71616" title="Russo-Ukrainian War" label="Russian military invasion of Ukraine (2014–present)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20857240" start="71711" end="71734" title="European migrant crisis" label="European migrant crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q244323" start="71760" end="71774" title="Visegrád Group" label="Visegrád Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q17325619" start="71851" end="71864" title="Slovak parliamentary election, 2016" label="election 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q23466079" start="71923" end="71936" title="Fico&amp;#x27;s Third Cabinet" label="Third Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q50192515" start="72069" end="72089" title="murder of Ján Kuciak" label="murder of Ján Kuciak"/>
<link wikidata="Q12762303" start="72214" end="72226" title="Andrej Kiska" label="Andrej Kiska"/>
<link wikidata="Q17330556" start="72237" end="72253" title="Peter Pellegrini" label="Peter Pellegrini"/>
<link wikidata="Q26273268" start="72305" end="72320" title="Zuzana Čaputová" label="Zuzana Čaputová"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468838" start="72353" end="72374" title="president of Slovakia" label="president of Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24971703" start="72481" end="72515" title="2020 Slovak parliamentary election" label="2020 Slovak parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q372043" start="72521" end="72566" title="Ordinary People and Independent Personalities" label="Ordinary People and Independent Personalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q552706" start="72588" end="72600" title="Igor Matovič" label="Igor Matovič"/>
<link wikidata="Q46227987" start="72657" end="72669" title="Eduard Heger" label="Eduard Heger"/>
<link wikidata="Q96747230" start="72894" end="72906" title="Ľudovít Ódor" label="Ľudovít Ódor"/>
<link wikidata="Q821929" start="73003" end="73011" title="Direction – Social Democracy" label="Smer-SSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q105043728" start="73059" end="73079" title="2023 Slovak parliamentary election" label="the general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q96754424" start="73155" end="73159" title="Voice – Social Democracy" label="Hlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q221480" start="73176" end="73179" title="Slovak National Party" label="SNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q111022187" start="73526" end="73550" title="Sanctions against Russia for the invasion of Ukraine" label="sanctions against Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="73566" end="73599" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine."/>
<link wikidata="Q84029171" start="73686" end="73711" title="2024 Slovak presidential election" label="the presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4071928" start="73771" end="73783" title="Cyberattack" label="cyber-attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q123192113" start="73971" end="73984" title="Richard Takáč" label="Richard Takáč"/>
<link wikidata="Q57606" start="74238" end="74249" title="Robert Fico" label="Robert Fico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980822" start="74264" end="74290" title="Slovak Information Service" label="Slovak Information Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q28702331" start="74313" end="74332" title="Mamuka Mamulashvili" label="Mamuka Mamulashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q28702352" start="74376" end="74400" title="Georgian National Legion" label="Georgian National Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490821" start="74472" end="74492" title="Martin Milan Šimečka" label="Martin Milan Šimečka"/>
<link wikidata="Q64159898" start="74526" end="74540" title="Michal Šimečka" label="Michal Šimečka"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="74607" end="74623" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q727724" start="74657" end="74690" title="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia" label="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213398" start="74693" end="74714" title="History of Bratislava" label="History of Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517186" start="74717" end="74742" title="History of Czechoslovakia" label="History of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212036" start="74745" end="74774" title="History of the Czech Republic" label="History of the Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q480496" start="74777" end="74808" title="History of the Jews in Slovakia" label="History of the Jews in Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179193" start="74811" end="74841" title="History of the Slovak language" label="History of the Slovak language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154831" start="74844" end="74864" title="Politics of Slovakia" label="Politics of Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q693985" start="74867" end="74904" title="Slovaks in Czechoslovakia (1918–1938)" label="Slovaks in Czechoslovakia (1918–1938)"/>
<link wikidata="Q213514" start="74915" end="74951" title="List of presidents of Czechoslovakia" label="List of presidents of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346844" start="74954" end="74995" title="List of prime ministers of Czechoslovakia" label="List of prime ministers of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468838" start="74998" end="75028" title="List of presidents of Slovakia" label="List of presidents of Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45369" start="75031" end="75066" title="List of prime ministers of Slovakia" label="List of prime ministers of Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787" start="75079" end="75096" title="History of Europe" label="History of Europe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27329" wikidata="Q682227" url="?curid=27329" title="Geography of Slovakia">
<text>Slovakia is a landlocked Central European country with mountainous regions in the north and flat terrain in the south. During much of the Holocene, Slovakia was much more forested than today. Decline of the forest occurred in as consequence of the Valachian colonization and the development of mining in the territory.

== Statistics ==
Land use:

&quot;agricultural land&quot;: 40.1%

&quot;arable land&quot;: 28.9%; permanent crops: 0.4%; permanent pasture: 10.8%

&quot;forest&quot;: 40.2%

&quot;other&quot;: 19.7% (2011 est.)

Natural resources:

Lignite, small amounts of iron ore, copper and manganese ore; salt; arable land

Natural Hazards:

Flooding

Environment-international agreements:

&quot;Party to&quot;: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulfur 85, Air Pollution-Sulfur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling.

&quot;Signed, but not ratified&quot;: none of the selected agreements

==Area==
Slovakia lies between 49°36&#x27;48&quot; and 47°44&#x27;21&quot; northern latitude and 16°50&#x27;56&quot; and 22°33&#x27;53&quot; eastern longitude.

The northernmost point is near Beskydok, a mountain on the border with Poland near the village of Oravská Polhora in the Beskids. The southernmost point is near the village of Patince on the Danube on the border with Hungary. The westernmost point is on the Morava River near Záhorská Ves on the Austrian border. The easternmost point is close to the summit of Kremenec, a mountain near the village of Nová Sedlica at the meeting point of Slovak, Polish, and Ukrainian borders.

The highest point is at the summit of Gerlachovský štít in the High Tatras, , the lowest point is the surface of the Bodrog River on the Hungarian border at .

The country&#x27;s area is . 31% is arable land, 17% pastures, 41% forests, 3% cultivated land. The remaining 8% is mostly covered with human structures and infrastructure, and partly with rocky mountain ridges and other unimproved land.

Slovakia borders Poland in the north - , Ukraine in the east - , Hungary in the south - , Austria in the south-west - , and the Czech Republic in the north-west - for a total border length of .

The village of Veľké Slemence (Ukrainian: Mali Slementsi/Малі Селменці, Hungarian: Szelmenc) is an anomaly, as it is a village with a majority of Hungarians, but it is split between Slovakia and Ukraine.

=== National parks ===
There are 9 national parks in Slovakia, covering 6.5% of the Slovak land surface.
== Geographical features ==

=== Tatra mountains ===

The Tatra Mountains, with 29 peaks higher than AMSL, are the highest mountain range in the Carpathian Mountains. The Tatras occupy an area of , of which the greater part lies in Slovakia. They are divided into several parts.

To the north, close to the Polish border, are the High Tatras which are a popular hiking and skiing destination and home to many scenic lakes and valleys as well as the highest point in Slovakia, the Gerlachovský štít at and the country&#x27;s highly symbolic mountain Kriváň. To the west are the Western Tatras with their highest peak of Bystrá at and to the east are the Belianske Tatras, smallest by area.

Separated from the Tatras proper by the valley of the Váh river are the Low Tatras, with their highest peak of Ďumbier at .

The Tatra mountain range is represented as one of the three hills on the coat of arms of Slovakia.

=== Caves ===

Slovakia has hundreds of caves and caverns under its mountains, of which 30 are open to the public. Most of the caves have stalagmites rising from the ground and stalactites hanging from above. There are currently five Slovak caves under UNESCO&#x27;s World Heritage Site status. They are Dobšiná Ice Cave, Domica, Gombasek Cave, Jasovská Cave and Ochtinská Aragonite Cave. Other caves open to the public include Belianska Cave, Demänovská Cave of Liberty, Demänovská Ice Cave or Bystrianska Cave.

=== Rivers ===

Most of the rivers arise in the Slovak mountains. Some only pass through Slovakia, while others make a natural border with surrounding countries (more than ). For example, the Dunajec () to the north, the Danube () to the south or the Morava () to the West. The total length of the rivers on Slovak territory is .

The longest river in Slovakia is the Váh (), the shortest is the Čierna voda. Other important and large rivers are the Myjava, the Nitra (), the Orava, the Hron (), the Hornád (), the Slaná (), the Ipeľ (, forming the border with Hungary), the Bodrog, the Laborec, the Latorica and the Ondava.

The biggest volume of discharge in Slovak rivers is during spring, when the snow melts from the mountains. The only exception is the Danube, whose discharge is the greatest during summer when the snow melts in the Alps. The Danube is the largest river that flows through Slovakia.

== Climate ==
The Slovak climate lies between the temperate and continental climate zones with relatively warm summers and cold, cloudy and humid winters. Temperature extremes are between although temperatures below are rare. The weather differs from the mountainous north to the plains in the south.

The warmest region is Bratislava and Southern Slovakia where the temperatures may reach in summer, occasionally to in Hurbanovo. During night, the temperatures drop to . The daily temperatures in winter average in the range of to . During night it may be freezing, but usually not below .

In Slovakia, there are four seasons, each season (spring, summer, autumn and winter) lasts three months. The dry continental air brings in the summer heat and winter frosts. In contrast, oceanic air brings rainfalls and reduces summer temperatures. In the lowlands and valleys, there is often fog, especially in winter.

Spring starts with 21 March and is characterised by colder weather with an average daily temperature of in the first weeks and about in May and in June. In Slovakia, the weather and climate in the spring are very unstable.

Summer starts on 22 June and is usually characterised by hot weather with daily temperatures exceeding . July and August are the warmest months with temperatures up to about , especially in regions of southern Slovakia - in the urban area of Komárno, Hurbanovo or Štúrovo. Showers or thunderstorms may occur because of the summer monsoon called Medardova kvapka (Medard drop - 40 days of rain). Summer in Northern Slovakia is usually mild with temperatures around (less in the mountains).

Autumn in Slovakia starts on 23 September and is mostly characterised by wet weather and wind, although the first weeks can be very warm and sunny. The average temperature in September is around , in November to . Late September and early October is a dry and sunny time of year (so-called Indian summer).

Winter starts on 21 December with temperatures around . In December and January, it is usually snowing, these are the coldest months of the year. At lower altitudes, snow does not stay the whole winter, it changes into the thaw and frost. Winters are colder in the mountains, where the snow usually lasts until March or April and the night temperatures fall to and colder.

=== Examples ===


== Biodiversity ==

Slovakia signed the Rio Convention on Biological Diversity on 19 May 1993, and became a party to the convention on 25 August 1994. It has subsequently produced a National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan, which was received by the convention on 2 November 1998.

The biodiversity of Slovakia comprises animals (such as annelids, arthropods, molluscs, nematodes and vertebrates), fungi (Ascomycota, Basidiomycota, Chytridiomycota, Glomeromycota and Zygomycota), micro-organisms (including Mycetozoa), and plants. The geographical position of Slovakia determines the richness of the diversity of fauna and flora. More than 11,000 plant species have been described throughout its territory, nearly 29,000 animal species and over 1,000 species of protozoa. Endemic biodiversity is also common.

Slovakia is located in the biome of temperate broadleaf and mixed forests and terrestrial ecoregions of Pannonian mixed forests and Carpathian montane conifer forests. As the altitude changes, the vegetation associations and animal communities are forming height levels (oak, beech, spruce, scrub pine, alpine meadows and subsoil). Forests cover 44% of the territory of Slovakia. The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 4.34/10, ranking it 129th globally out of 172 countries. In terms of forest stands, 60% are broadleaf trees and 40% are coniferous trees. The occurrence of animal species is strongly connected to the appropriate types of plant associations and biotopes.

Over 4,000 species of fungi have been recorded from Slovakia. Of these, nearly 1,500 are lichen-forming species. Some of these fungi are undoubtedly endemic, but not enough is known to say how many. Of the lichen-forming species, about 40% have been classified as threatened in some way. About 7% are apparently extinct, 9% endangered, 17% vulnerable, and 7% rare. The conservation status of non-lichen-forming fungi in Slovakia is not well documented, but there is a red list for its larger fungi.

==Lakes==

*Lakes of Slovakia
*Baňur
*Hlboké

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="0" end="8" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="25" end="39" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="138" end="146" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="248" end="270" title="Vlachs#Shepherd culture" label="Valachian colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="984" end="999" title="Desertification" label="Desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q574334" start="1473" end="1488" title="Oravská Polhora" label="Oravská Polhora"/>
<link wikidata="Q215573" start="1496" end="1503" title="Beskids" label="Beskids"/>
<link wikidata="Q338509" start="1551" end="1558" title="Patince" label="Patince"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="1566" end="1572" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="1592" end="1599" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q179251" start="1633" end="1645" title="Morava (river)" label="Morava River"/>
<link wikidata="Q246760" start="1651" end="1663" title="Záhorská Ves" label="Záhorská Ves"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1736" end="1744" title="Kremenec" label="Kremenec"/>
<link wikidata="Q514295" start="1777" end="1789" title="Nová Sedlica" label="Nová Sedlica"/>
<link wikidata="Q81213" start="1892" end="1909" title="Gerlachovský štít" label="Gerlachovský štít"/>
<link wikidata="Q690323" start="1917" end="1928" title="High Tatras" label="High Tatras"/>
<link wikidata="Q828570" start="1971" end="1983" title="Bodrog" label="Bodrog River"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="2270" end="2276" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="2294" end="2301" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="2343" end="2350" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="2381" end="2395" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q202627" start="2463" end="2477" title="Veľké Slemence" label="Veľké Slemence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2490" end="2518" title="Mali Slementsi/Малі Селменці" label="Mali Slementsi/Малі Селменці"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="2630" end="2638" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q277597" start="2643" end="2650" title="Geography of Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2859" end="2863" title="Sea level#AMSL" label="AMSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q690323" start="3088" end="3099" title="High Tatras" label="High Tatras"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="3120" end="3126" title="hiking" label="hiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="3131" end="3137" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q81213" start="3238" end="3255" title="Gerlachovský štít" label="Gerlachovský štít"/>
<link wikidata="Q845990" start="3307" end="3313" title="Kriváň (peak)" label="Kriváň"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072091" start="3335" end="3349" title="Western Tatras" label="Western Tatras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018683" start="3377" end="3383" title="Bystrá (mountain)" label="Bystrá"/>
<link wikidata="Q815583" start="3411" end="3427" title="Belianske Tatras" label="Belianske Tatras"/>
<link wikidata="Q202598" start="3502" end="3505" title="Váh" label="Váh"/>
<link wikidata="Q558893" start="3520" end="3530" title="Low Tatras" label="Low Tatras"/>
<link wikidata="Q341905" start="3559" end="3566" title="Ďumbier" label="Ďumbier"/>
<link wikidata="Q189590" start="3646" end="3670" title="coat of arms of Slovakia" label="coat of arms of Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181312" start="3811" end="3821" title="stalagmite" label="stalagmite"/>
<link wikidata="Q177197" start="3850" end="3860" title="stalactite" label="stalactite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="3926" end="3932" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q284340" start="3977" end="3993" title="Dobšiná Ice Cave" label="Dobšiná Ice Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q908287" start="3995" end="4001" title="Domica" label="Domica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011733" start="4003" end="4016" title="Gombasek Cave" label="Gombasek Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q920499" start="4018" end="4031" title="Jasovská Cave" label="Jasovská Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075804" start="4036" end="4060" title="Ochtinská Aragonite Cave" label="Ochtinská Aragonite Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q815098" start="4101" end="4115" title="Belianska Cave" label="Belianska Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q133949" start="4117" end="4143" title="Demänovská Cave of Liberty" label="Demänovská Cave of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186716" start="4145" end="4164" title="Demänovská Ice Cave" label="Demänovská Ice Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018658" start="4168" end="4184" title="Bystrianska Cave" label="Bystrianska Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q840694" start="4379" end="4386" title="Dunajec" label="Dunajec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="4408" end="4414" title="Danube River" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q179251" start="4438" end="4444" title="Morava (river)" label="Morava"/>
<link wikidata="Q202598" start="4555" end="4558" title="Váh" label="Váh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636357" start="4637" end="4643" title="Myjava (river)" label="Myjava"/>
<link wikidata="Q369773" start="4649" end="4654" title="Nitra (river)" label="Nitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q510481" start="4663" end="4668" title="Orava (river)" label="Orava"/>
<link wikidata="Q213230" start="4674" end="4678" title="Hron" label="Hron"/>
<link wikidata="Q846744" start="4687" end="4693" title="Hornád" label="Hornád"/>
<link wikidata="Q576032" start="4702" end="4707" title="Slaná river" label="Slaná"/>
<link wikidata="Q748872" start="4716" end="4720" title="Ipeľ" label="Ipeľ"/>
<link wikidata="Q828570" start="4762" end="4768" title="Bodrog" label="Bodrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q852308" start="4774" end="4781" title="Laborec" label="Laborec"/>
<link wikidata="Q603664" start="4787" end="4795" title="Latorica" label="Latorica"/>
<link wikidata="Q644669" start="4804" end="4810" title="Ondava" label="Ondava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312" start="4872" end="4878" title="Spring (season)" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="5027" end="5031" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="5159" end="5178" title="continental climate" label="continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313" start="5206" end="5212" title="summer" label="summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311" start="5241" end="5247" title="winter" label="winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="5419" end="5429" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q856402" start="5515" end="5524" title="Hurbanovo" label="Hurbanovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q24384" start="5715" end="5721" title="season" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312" start="5737" end="5743" title="Spring (season)" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314" start="5753" end="5759" title="autumn" label="autumn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311" start="5764" end="5770" title="winter" label="winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q280004" start="7012" end="7025" title="Indian summer" label="Indian summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q152805" start="7466" end="7500" title="Convention on Biological Diversity" label="Convention on Biological Diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914772" start="7604" end="7650" title="Biodiversity action plan" label="National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="7749" end="7755" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="7826" end="7831" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q174726" start="7833" end="7843" title="Ascomycota" label="Ascomycota"/>
<link wikidata="Q174698" start="7845" end="7858" title="Basidiomycota" label="Basidiomycota"/>
<link wikidata="Q473747" start="7860" end="7875" title="Chytridiomycota" label="Chytridiomycota"/>
<link wikidata="Q753723" start="7877" end="7890" title="Glomeromycota" label="Glomeromycota"/>
<link wikidata="Q215384" start="7895" end="7905" title="Zygomycota" label="Zygomycota"/>
<link wikidata="Q378789" start="7935" end="7944" title="Mycetozoa" label="Mycetozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="7951" end="7956" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="8200" end="8207" title="Endemism" label="Endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q622896" start="8274" end="8310" title="temperate broadleaf and mixed forest" label="temperate broadleaf and mixed forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q771194" start="8342" end="8365" title="Pannonian mixed forests" label="Pannonian mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q798028" start="8370" end="8404" title="Carpathian montane conifer forests" label="Carpathian montane conifer forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="8509" end="8512" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q25403" start="8514" end="8519" title="beech" label="beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="8521" end="8527" title="spruce" label="spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505749" start="8529" end="8539" title="scrub pine" label="scrub pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149452" start="8541" end="8555" title="alpine meadows" label="alpine meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q681004" start="8560" end="8567" title="subsoil" label="subsoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520600" start="8641" end="8673" title="Forest Landscape Integrity Index" label="Forest Landscape Integrity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q148993" start="8780" end="8795" title="broadleaf trees" label="broadleaf trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="8808" end="8824" title="coniferous trees" label="coniferous trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q43142" start="9032" end="9038" title="lichen" label="lichen"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9455" end="9472" title=":Category:Lakes of Slovakia" label="Lakes of Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508446" start="9474" end="9479" title="Baňur" label="Baňur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873521" start="9481" end="9487" title="Hlboké (lake)" label="Hlboké"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27330" wikidata="Q340068" url="?curid=27330" title="Demographics of Slovakia">
<text>Demographic features of the population of Slovakia include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population. The demographic statistics are from the Statistical Office of the SR, unless otherwise indicated.

== Population ==
Total population: 5,422,194 as of 2024.

Demographic statistics according to the World Population Review in 2021.

*One birth every 10 minutes
*One death every 9 minutes
*One net migrant every 480 minutes
*Net gain of one person every 1440 minutes

===Population over time===



=== Population growth rate ===
:-0.08% (2021 est.) Country comparison to the world: 202nd

=== Fertility ===
The total fertility rate is the number of children born per woman. It is based on fairly good data for the entire period. Sources: Our World In Data and Gapminder Foundation.

1.45 children born/woman (2021 est.) Country comparison to the world: 211th

==== Mother&#x27;s mean age at first birth ====
:27.2 years (2019 est.)

=== Life expectancy ===

:total population: 78.07 years
:male: 74.56 years
:female: 81.82 years (2021 est.)

=== Age structure ===
:&quot;0-14 years:&quot; 15.13% (male 423,180 /female 400,128)
:&quot;15-24 years:&quot; 10.06% (male 280,284 /female 266,838)
:&quot;25-54 years:&quot; 44.61% (male 1,228,462 /female 1,198,747)
:&quot;55-64 years:&quot; 13.15% (male 342,142 /female 373,452)
:&quot;65 years and over:&quot; 17.05% (male 366,267 /female 561,120) (2020 est.)

==== Median age ====
:total: 41.8 years. Country comparison to the world: 41st
:male: 40.1 years
:female: 43.6 years (2020 est.)

==Vital statistics==
===Current vital statistics===


===Structure of the population===

==Languages==
Slovak (official) 81.77%, Hungarian 8.48%, Roma 1.84%, Rusyn 0.71%, other or unspecified 7.2% (2021 census)

== Employment and income ==

===Unemployment, youth ages 15–24===
:Total: 19.4%. Country comparison to the world: 81st
:Male: 98.6%
:Female: 21.2% (2020 est.)

==Ethnic groups==

The majority of the 5.4 million inhabitants of Slovakia are Slovak (83.82%). Hungarians are the largest ethnic minority (7.75%) and are concentrated in the southern and eastern regions of Slovakia. Other ethnic groups include Roma (1.23%), Czechs, Croats, Rusyns, Ukrainians, Germans, Poles, Gorals, Serbs and Jews (about 2,300 remain of the estimated pre-WWII population of 120,000).

While both international organizations (the United Nations and the World Bank) and the official Slovak statistics office offer population figures for ethnic groups, these figures seldom come close to agreement. Figures for the Roma population (for a variety of reasons) vary between 1% and 10% of the population. In the most recent survey carried out by the Slovak Government&#x27;s Roma Plenipotentiary, the figure for the percentage of Roma was arrived at through interview with municipality representatives and mayors, according to how many Roma they think live in their jurisdictions. The figure arrived at by this means was in the region of 300,000 (about 5.6%). Note that in the case of the 5.6%, however, the above percentages of Hungarians and Slovaks are lower accordingly.

The official state language is Slovak, and Hungarian is widely spoken in the southern regions.

Despite its modern European economy and society, Slovakia has a significant rural element. About 45% of Slovaks live in villages with fewer than 5,000 inhabitants, and 14% in villages with fewer than 1,000.

==Immigration==

Foreign residents:


==Religion==
The Slovak constitution guarantees freedom of religion. The majority of Slovak citizens (55,76%) practice Roman Catholicism; the second-largest group consider themselves atheists (23.79%). About 5.27% are Protestants, 4% are Greek Catholics, and 0.93% are Orthodox and Reformed Christian Church 1.56% (2021 census).

==See also==
* Roma in Slovakia

==References==
==External links==
*
* (in Czech) summary of villages in Hungary in 1864 - 1865, PETROV, Alexej Leonidovich. &quot;Sborník Fr. Pestyho Helység névtara-Seznam osad v Uhrách z r. 1864-65, : jako pramen historicko-demografických údajů o slovenských a karpatoruských osadách.&quot; Praha : Česká akademie věd a umění, 1927. 174 s. - available online at University Library in Bratislava Digital Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="0" end="11" title="Demography" label="Demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="28" end="38" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="42" end="50" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="59" end="77" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="79" end="88" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068463" start="148" end="170" title="Religion in Slovakia" label="religious affiliations"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="716" end="736" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23680080" start="843" end="860" title="Our World In Data" label="Our World In Data"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790593" start="865" end="885" title="Gapminder Foundation" label="Gapminder Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q26245" start="1799" end="1804" title="Rusyn language" label="Rusyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="2079" end="2087" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171336" start="2092" end="2098" title="Slovaks" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="2109" end="2119" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164468" start="2258" end="2262" title="Roma people of Slovakia" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="2272" end="2278" title="Czechs" label="Czechs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789572" start="2280" end="2286" title="Croats in Slovakia" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q140420" start="2288" end="2294" title="Rusyns" label="Rusyns"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="2296" end="2306" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q698855" start="2308" end="2315" title="Carpathian Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="2317" end="2322" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q498700" start="2324" end="2330" title="Gorals" label="Gorals"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="2332" end="2337" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="2342" end="2346" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2388" end="2392" title="World War II" label="WWII"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="3317" end="3323" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="3592" end="3611" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3663" end="3680" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="3762" end="3773" title="Protestantism" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q911398" start="3782" end="3797" title="Slovak Greek Catholic Church" label="Greek Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="3813" end="3821" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="3826" end="3844" title="Reformed Christian" label="Reformed Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164468" start="3889" end="3905" title="Roma in Slovakia" label="Roma in Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4003" end="4029" title="Alexej Leonidovich Petrov" label="PETROV, Alexej Leonidovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q12778078" start="4271" end="4319" title="University Library in Bratislava Digital Library" label="University Library in Bratislava Digital Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27331" wikidata="Q1154831" url="?curid=27331" title="Politics of Slovakia">
<text>Politics of [[Slovakia]] takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic republic, with a multi-party system. Legislative power is vested in the parliament and it can be exercised in some cases also by the government or directly by citizens.

Executive power is exercised by the government led by the Prime Minister. The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. The President is the head of the state. According to the V-Dem Democracy indices Slovakia was 2023 the 18th most electoral democratic country in the world.

==History==
Before the Velvet Revolution, Czechoslovakia was a socialist dictatorship ruled by the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, technically together with the coalition of the so-called National Front. Before the free democratic elections could take place after the revolution, a transitional government was created.

In 1989, President of Czechoslovakia Gustáv Husák was sworn in the Government of National Understanding (, ) led by Marián Čalfa with the former being abdicated. It consisted of ten communists and nine non-communists with the aim to prepare for democratic elections, establish market economy in the country, and start preparing a new constitution.

Between 8 and 9 June 1990, the Czechoslovak parliamentary election of 1990 took place. Čalfa&#x27;s second government disbanded on 27 June 1990 when it was replaced by the Government of National Sacrifice (, ), also headed by Marián Čalfa. From 5 until 6 June 1992, the last elections in Czechoslovakia, the Czechoslovak parliamentary election of 1992 took place. Čalfa&#x27;s third government disbanded on 2 July 1992, when it was replaced by the Caretaker Government of Jan Stráský (&quot;Vláda Jana Stráského&quot;), headed by Jan Stráský. The caretaker government disbanded on 31 December 1992 together with the Dissolution of Czechoslovakia.

Due to federalism after the Velvet Revolution, two national governments (one for the Czech Republic, one for Slovakia) were created as well under the federal Czechoslovak government. In Slovakia it was headed by Milan Čič and it was established on 12 December 1989 and disbanded on 26 June 1990. Between 8 and 9 June 1990, the 1990 Slovak parliamentary election took place together with the federal Czechoslovak elections. Čič&#x27;s government was followed by the First Government of Vladimír Mečiar (1990–1991), Government of Ján Čarnogurský (1991–1992) and the Second Government of Vladimír Mečiar (1992–1994).

===Recent developments===
In September 2023, populist left-wing Smer-SSD, led by former prime minister Robert Fico, won the general election, taking 79 seats in a 150-seat parliament with its allies, the centre-left Hlas and nationalist SNS parties. The three parties agreed to form a coalition government. On 25 October 2023, Robert Fico became new prime minister of Slovakia, announcing that the new government will stop Slovakia&#x27;s military aid to Ukraine. At his first EU leaders meeting in Brussels, Prime Minister Robert Fico stated that Slovakia will not support further military aid for Ukraine nor support further sanctions against Russia due to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.

==Legal system==
The Constitution of the Slovak Republic was ratified on 1 September 1992 and became effective 1 October the same year (1 January 1993 in some parts). It was amended in September 1998 to allow direct election of the president and again in February 2001 due to EU admission requirements.

The civil law system is based on Austro-Hungarian codes. The legal code was modified to comply with the obligations of Organization on Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and to expunge the Marxist–Leninist legal theory. Slovakia accepts the compulsory International Court of Justice jurisdiction with reservations.

==Executive branch==

|President
|Peter Pellegrini
|Independent
|15 June 2024
|Prime Minister
|Robert Fico
|Smer
|25 October 2023

The president is the head of state and the formal head of the executive, though with very limited powers. The president is elected by direct, popular vote, under the two round system, for a five-year term. In March 2019, Zuzana Čaputová was elected as the first female President of Slovakia. She was a member of the liberal Progressive Slovakia party, which did not have seats in parliament.

Following National Council elections, the leader of the majority party or the leader of the majority coalition is usually appointed prime minister by the president. Cabinet appointed by the president on the recommendation of the prime minister has to receive the majority in the parliament. From July 2006 till July 2010 the coalition consisted of Smer, SNS and HZDS. After the 2010 elections, a coalition was formed by the former opposition parties SDKÚ, KDH Most–Híd, and newcomer Freedom and Solidarity. After the major elections from 2012 until 2016, the whole government consisted of members and nominees of the party SMER-SD, which also had majority in the parliament. The 2016 Slovak parliamentary election gave a coalition of parties SMER-SD, SNS, and Most-Híd. After the 2020 Slovak parliamentary election, the Ordinary People and Independent Personalities won the election and Igor Matovič became the Prime Minister. In April 2021, prime minister Eduard Heger was sworn in two days after the resignation of his predecessor Igor Matovič. Heger was a close ally of Matovic and deputy head of his Ordinary People party.

==Legislative branch==

|Speaker of the National Council
|Peter Pellegrini
|Hlas
|25 October 2023
Slovakia&#x27;s sole constitutional and legislative body is the 150-seat unicameral National Council of the Slovak Republic. Delegates are elected for 4-year terms on the basis of proportional representation.

The National Council considers and approves the Constitution, constitutional statutes and other legal acts. It also approves the state budget. It elects some officials specified by law as well as the candidates for the position of a Justice of the Constitutional Court of the Slovak Republic and the Prosecutor General. Prior to their ratification, the parliament should approve all important international treaties. Moreover, it gives consent for dispatching of military forces outside of Slovakia&#x27;s territory and for the presence of foreign military forces on the territory of the country.

==Political parties and elections==
===Suffrage===
18 years of age; universal, equal, and direct suffrage by secret ballot.

===Presidential election===
The president is elected by direct, popular vote, under the two-round system, for a five-year term. Two rounds of the last election occurred on 16 and 30 March 2019.

===Parliamentary election===
Members of the National Council of the Slovak Republic (), are elected directly for a four-year term, under the proportional representation system. Like the Netherlands, the country is a single multi-member constituency. Voters may indicate their preferences within the semi-open list. The election threshold is 5%.

====2020 parliamentary election====

====Other election results====
* EU parliament, see 2019 European Parliament election in Slovakia
* Older elections, see Elections in Slovakia

===Political parties===

The Slovak political scene supports a wide spectrum of political parties including the communists (KSS) and the nationalists (SNS). New parties arise and old parties cease to exist or merge at a frequent rate. Major parties are members of the European political parties. Some parties have regional strongholds, for example SMK is supported mainly by the Hungarian minority living in southern Slovakia. Although the main political cleavage in the 1990s concerned the somewhat authoritarian policy of HZDS, the left-right conflict over economic reforms (principally between Direction - Social Democracy and Slovak Democratic and Christian Union - Democratic Party) has recently become the dominant power in Slovakia&#x27;s politics.

==Judicial branch==
The country&#x27;s highest appellate forum is the Supreme Court (&quot;Najvyšší súd&quot;), the judges of which are elected by the National Council; below that are regional, district, and military courts. In certain cases the law provides for decisions of tribunals of judges to be attended by lay judges from the citizenry. Slovakia also has the Constitutional Court of Slovakia (&quot;Ústavný súd Slovenskej Republiky&quot;), which rules on constitutional issues. The 13 members of this court are appointed by the president from a slate of candidates nominated by Parliament.

Parliament passed legislation which created a 18-member Judicial Council in 2002 consisting of judges, law professors, and other legal experts, is responsible for the nomination of judges. All judges except those of the Constitutional Court are appointed by the president from a list proposed by the Judicial Council. The council also is responsible for appointing Disciplinary Senates in cases of judicial misconduct.

==Minority politics==
==International organization participation==
Slovakia is member of ACCT (observer), Australia Group, BIS, BSEC (observer), CE, CEI, CERN, European Audiovisual Observatory, EAPC, EBRD, EIB, EU, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICCt, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, ITUC, MIGA, NAM (guest), NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNAMSIL, UNCTAD, UNDOF, UNESCO, UNFICYP, UNIDO, UNTSO, UPU, Visegrád Group, WCO, WEU (associate partner), WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTO, ZC

==Political pressure groups and leaders==
* Federation of Employers&#x27; Associations of the Slovak Republic () (AZZZ) (President: Rastislav Machunka)
* Association of Employers of Slovakia (AZS)
* Association of Towns and Villages of Slovakia () (ZMOS) (Chairman: Jozef Dvonč) - pressure group consisting of almost all Slovak towns.
* Confederation of Trade Unions of the Slovak Republic () (KOZ) (President: Miroslav Gazdík)
* Club 500 () (Chairman: Vladimír Soták) - union of Slovak companies employing more than 500 employees.
* Metal Workers Unions () (KOVO) (Chairman: Emil Machyna) - merged with OZ METALURG on 1. January 2010.
* Republic Union of Employers () (RÚZ) (President: Marián Jusko)
* Slovak Academy of Sciences () (SAV) (Chairman: Jaromír Pastorek) - the highest scientific institution in Slovakia.
* Slovak Merchant and Industrial Chamber () (SOPK)
* Union of Slovak Pensioners () (Chairman: Kamil Vajnorský)
* Slovenská živnostenská komora (Chairman: Vojtech Gottschall) (SŽK) - it was created by Law No. 126/1998 Z. z. from 12. December 1998.
* Slovenský živnostenský zväz (Chairman: Čižmárik Stanislav) (SŽZ)
* General Bishop&#x27;s Office () (Director: Dušan Vagaský)

==See also==
* List of political parties in Slovakia
* List of Slovak politicians
* Slovak political scandals
* Privatization in Slovakia

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1154831" start="0" end="24" title="Politics of Slovakia" label="Politics of [[Slovakia]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="57" end="70" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="71" end="96" title="representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="97" end="105" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="114" end="132" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="134" end="151" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="267" end="282" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q45369" start="325" end="339" title="List of Prime Ministers of Slovakia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="345" end="354" title="Judiciary" label="Judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468838" start="412" end="421" title="List of Presidents of Slovakia" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q116916583" start="465" end="488" title="V-Dem Democracy indices" label="V-Dem Democracy indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q182817" start="588" end="605" title="Velvet Revolution" label="Velvet Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="607" end="621" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q727724" start="664" end="697" title="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia" label="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2202921" start="756" end="770" title="National Front (Czechoslovakia)" label="National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q59281" start="850" end="873" title="transitional government" label="transitional government"/>
<link wikidata="Q213514" start="897" end="924" title="President of Czechoslovakia" label="President of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q157651" start="925" end="937" title="Gustáv Husák" label="Gustáv Husák"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="955" end="991" title="Government of National Understanding" label="Government of National Understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q709968" start="1004" end="1016" title="Marián Čalfa" label="Marián Čalfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q207549" start="1039" end="1048" title="abdicated" label="abdicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="1165" end="1179" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201887" start="1268" end="1311" title="Czechoslovak parliamentary election, 1990" label="Czechoslovak parliamentary election of 1990"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1409" end="1441" title="Government of National Sacrifice" label="Government of National Sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201888" start="1545" end="1588" title="1992 Czechoslovak parliamentary election" label="Czechoslovak parliamentary election of 1992"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1685" end="1720" title="Caretaker Government of Jan Stráský" label="Caretaker Government of Jan Stráský"/>
<link wikidata="Q983583" start="1767" end="1778" title="Jan Stráský" label="Jan Stráský"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112663" start="1784" end="1804" title="caretaker government" label="caretaker government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059215" start="1853" end="1882" title="Dissolution of Czechoslovakia" label="Dissolution of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="1892" end="1902" title="federalism" label="federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="1970" end="1984" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505540" start="2097" end="2106" title="Milan Čič" label="Milan Čič"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053294" start="2212" end="2246" title="1990 Slovak parliamentary election" label="1990 Slovak parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q316526" start="2370" end="2385" title="Vladimír Mečiar" label="Vladimír Mečiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q725803" start="2413" end="2428" title="Ján Čarnogurský" label="Ján Čarnogurský"/>
<link wikidata="Q316526" start="2470" end="2485" title="Vladimír Mečiar" label="Vladimír Mečiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q821929" start="2564" end="2572" title="Direction – Social Democracy" label="Smer-SSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q57606" start="2603" end="2614" title="Robert Fico" label="Robert Fico"/>
<link wikidata="Q105043728" start="2624" end="2640" title="2023 Slovak parliamentary election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q96754424" start="2716" end="2720" title="Voice – Social Democracy" label="Hlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q221480" start="2737" end="2740" title="Slovak National Party" label="SNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="2977" end="2979" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q111022187" start="3127" end="3151" title="Sanctions against Russia for the invasion of Ukraine" label="sanctions against Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="3163" end="3195" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969185" start="3219" end="3254" title="Constitution of the Slovak Republic" label="Constitution of the Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="3761" end="3791" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468838" start="3848" end="3857" title="President of Slovakia" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q17330556" start="3859" end="3875" title="Peter Pellegrini" label="Peter Pellegrini"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="3877" end="3888" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q45369" start="3904" end="3918" title="Prime Minister of Slovakia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q57606" start="3920" end="3931" title="Robert Fico" label="Robert Fico"/>
<link wikidata="Q821929" start="3933" end="3937" title="Direction – Social Democracy" label="Smer"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="4122" end="4138" title="Two-round system" label="two round system"/>
<link wikidata="Q26273268" start="4177" end="4192" title="Zuzana Čaputová" label="Zuzana Čaputová"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468838" start="4225" end="4246" title="President of Slovakia" label="President of Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q821929" start="4697" end="4701" title="Direction – Social Democracy" label="Smer"/>
<link wikidata="Q221480" start="4703" end="4706" title="Slovak National Party" label="SNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q828392" start="4711" end="4715" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party – Movement for a Democratic Slovakia" label="HZDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q837296" start="4799" end="4803" title="Slovak Democratic and Christian Union – Democratic Party" label="SDKÚ"/>
<link wikidata="Q904070" start="4805" end="4808" title="Christian Democratic Movement" label="KDH"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068853" start="4809" end="4817" title="Most–Híd" label="Most–Híd"/>
<link wikidata="Q220847" start="4832" end="4854" title="Freedom and Solidarity" label="Freedom and Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17325619" start="5028" end="5062" title="2016 Slovak parliamentary election" label="2016 Slovak parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q24971703" start="5129" end="5163" title="2020 Slovak parliamentary election" label="2020 Slovak parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q372043" start="5169" end="5214" title="Ordinary People and Independent Personalities" label="Ordinary People and Independent Personalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q552706" start="5236" end="5248" title="Igor Matovič" label="Igor Matovič"/>
<link wikidata="Q46227987" start="5306" end="5318" title="Eduard Heger" label="Eduard Heger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4181433" start="5502" end="5533" title="List of speakers of Slovak parliaments" label="Speaker of the National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q17330556" start="5535" end="5551" title="Peter Pellegrini" label="Peter Pellegrini"/>
<link wikidata="Q96754424" start="5553" end="5557" title="Voice - Social Democracy" label="Hlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139204" start="5659" end="5698" title="National Council of the Slovak Republic" label="National Council of the Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="5755" end="5782" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680969" start="6033" end="6076" title="Constitutional Court of the Slovak Republic" label="Constitutional Court of the Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="6596" end="6612" title="two-round system" label="two-round system"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="6844" end="6878" title="Proportional representation" label="proportional representation system"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="6885" end="6900" title="Netherlands" label="the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q701215" start="7002" end="7016" title="Open list" label="semi-open list"/>
<link wikidata="Q217032" start="7022" end="7040" title="election threshold" label="election threshold"/>
<link wikidata="Q61355665" start="7138" end="7183" title="2019 European Parliament election in Slovakia" label="2019 European Parliament election in Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q509581" start="7207" end="7228" title="Elections in Slovakia" label="Elections in Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325836" start="7354" end="7357" title="Communist Party of Slovakia" label="KSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q221480" start="7381" end="7384" title="Slovak National Party" label="SNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q24649" start="7498" end="7524" title="European political party" label="European political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q107224161" start="7578" end="7581" title="Party of the Hungarian Coalition" label="SMK"/>
<link wikidata="Q602700" start="7609" end="7618" title="Hungarians in Slovakia" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q828392" start="7754" end="7758" title="HZDS" label="HZDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q821929" start="7827" end="7855" title="Direction - Social Democracy" label="Direction - Social Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q837296" start="7860" end="7916" title="Slovak Democratic and Christian Union - Democratic Party" label="Slovak Democratic and Christian Union - Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q190752" start="8057" end="8070" title="Supreme court" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680969" start="8354" end="8386" title="Constitutional Court of Slovakia" label="Constitutional Court of Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826590" start="9095" end="9099" title="Agence de Coopération Culturelle et Technique" label="ACCT"/>
<link wikidata="Q782942" start="9112" end="9127" title="Australia Group" label="Australia Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q309195" start="9129" end="9132" title="Bank for International Settlements" label="BIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q380340" start="9134" end="9138" title="Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation" label="BSEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="9151" end="9153" title="Council of Europe" label="CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q392805" start="9155" end="9158" title="Central European Initiative" label="CEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q42944" start="9160" end="9164" title="CERN" label="CERN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377229" start="9166" end="9198" title="European Audiovisual Observatory" label="European Audiovisual Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374456" start="9200" end="9204" title="Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council" label="EAPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q488981" start="9206" end="9210" title="European Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="EBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q192247" start="9212" end="9215" title="European Investment Bank" label="EIB"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="9217" end="9219" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="9221" end="9224" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="FAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="9226" end="9230" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="IAEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="9232" end="9236" title="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="IBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="9238" end="9242" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="ICAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="9249" end="9253" title="International Criminal Court" label="ICCt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="9255" end="9259" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="ICRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q827525" start="9261" end="9264" title="International Development Association" label="IDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q826700" start="9266" end="9269" title="International Energy Agency" label="IEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q656801" start="9271" end="9274" title="International Finance Corporation" label="IFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069175" start="9276" end="9281" title="International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies" label="IFRCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="9283" end="9286" title="International Labour Organization" label="ILO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="9288" end="9291" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="9293" end="9296" title="International Maritime Organization" label="IMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="9298" end="9306" title="Interpol (organization)" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="9308" end="9311" title="International Olympic Committee" label="IOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q472311" start="9313" end="9316" title="International Organization for Migration" label="IOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="9318" end="9321" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="9323" end="9326" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="ITU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071706" start="9328" end="9332" title="International Trade Union Confederation" label="ITUC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9334" end="9338" title="Multilateral Investment Geographic Agency" label="MIGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="9340" end="9343" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="NAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="9353" end="9357" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q369760" start="9359" end="9362" title="Nuclear Energy Agency" label="NEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480793" start="9364" end="9367" title="Nuclear Suppliers Group" label="NSG"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="9385" end="9389" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="9391" end="9395" title="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons" label="OPCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="9397" end="9401" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="OSCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045198" start="9403" end="9406" title="Permanent Court of Arbitration" label="PCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="9408" end="9410" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q643988" start="9412" end="9419" title="United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone" label="UNAMSIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="9421" end="9427" title="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development" label="UNCTAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428532" start="9429" end="9434" title="United Nations Disengagement Observer Force Zone" label="UNDOF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="9436" end="9442" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q694772" start="9444" end="9451" title="United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus" label="UNFICYP"/>
<link wikidata="Q386120" start="9453" end="9458" title="United Nations Industrial Development Organization" label="UNIDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q699036" start="9460" end="9465" title="United Nations Truce Supervision Organization" label="UNTSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="9467" end="9470" title="Universal Postal Union" label="UPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q244323" start="9472" end="9486" title="Visegrád Group" label="Visegrád Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q605326" start="9488" end="9491" title="World Customs Organization" label="WCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q189946" start="9493" end="9496" title="Western European Union" label="WEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q748999" start="9518" end="9522" title="World Federation of Trade Unions" label="WFTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="9524" end="9527" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q177773" start="9529" end="9533" title="World Intellectual Property Organization" label="WIPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="9535" end="9538" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="WMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q61923" start="9540" end="9544" title="World Tourism Organization" label="WToO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="9546" end="9549" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q146905" start="9551" end="9553" title="Zangger Committee" label="ZC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992662" start="9892" end="9944" title="Confederation of Trade Unions of the Slovak Republic" label="Confederation of Trade Unions of the Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050317" start="10258" end="10284" title="Slovak Academy of Sciences" label="Slovak Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581587" start="10763" end="10800" title="List of political parties in Slovakia" label="List of political parties in Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597241" start="10803" end="10829" title="List of Slovak politicians" label="List of Slovak politicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541586" start="10832" end="10857" title="Slovak political scandals" label="Slovak political scandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246279" start="10860" end="10885" title="Privatization in Slovakia" label="Privatization in Slovakia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27332" wikidata="Q850631" url="?curid=27332" title="Economy of Slovakia">
<text>The economy of Slovakia is based upon Slovakia becoming an EU member state in 2004, and adopting the euro at the beginning of 2009. Its capital, Bratislava, is the largest financial centre in Slovakia. As of Q1 2018, the unemployment rate was 5.72%.

Whereas between 1970 and 1985 real incomes increased by about 50%, they fell in the 1990s. The gross domestic product only returned to its 1989 level in 2007.

Due to the Slovak GDP growing very strongly from 2000 until 2008 – e.g. 10.4% GDP growth in 2007 – the Slovak economy was referred to as the Tatra Tiger.

==History==
Since the establishment of the Slovak Republic in January 1993, Slovakia has undergone a transition from a centrally planned economy to a free market economy, a process which some observers were to believe was slowed in the 1994–98 period due to the crony capitalism and other fiscal policies of Prime Minister Vladimír Mečiar&#x27;s government. While economic growth and other fundamentals improved steadily during Mečiar&#x27;s term, public and private debt and trade deficits also rose, and privatization was uneven. Real annual GDP growth peaked at 6.5% in 1995 but declined to 1.3% in 1999.

Two governments of the &quot;liberal-conservative&quot; Prime Minister Mikuláš Dzurinda (1998–2006) pursued policies of macroeconomic stabilization and market-oriented structural reforms. Nearly the entire economy has now been privatized, and foreign investment has picked up. Economic growth exceeded expectations in the early 2000s, despite recession in key export markets. In 2001 policies of macroeconomic stabilization and structural reform led to spiraling unemployment. Unemployment peaked at 19.2% (Eurostat regional indicators) in 2001. Solid domestic demand boosted economic growth to 4.1% in 2002. Strong export growth, in turn, pushed economic growth to a still-strong 4.2% in 2003 and 5.4% in 2004, despite a downturn in household consumption. Multiple reasons entailed a GDP growth of 6% in 2005. Headline consumer price inflation dropped from 26% in 1993 to an average rate of 7.5% in 2004, though this was boosted by hikes in subsidized utilities prices ahead of Slovakia&#x27;s accession to the European Union. In July 2005, the inflation rate dropped to 2.0% and is projected at less than 3% in 2005 and 2.5% in 2006. In 2006, Slovakia reached the highest economic growth (8.9%) among the members of OECD and the third highest in the EU (just behind Estonia and Latvia). The country has had difficulties addressing regional imbalances in wealth and employment. GDP per capita ranges from 188% of EU average in Bratislava to only 54% in Eastern Slovakia.

About 10% of the Slovak labour force is expatriate in 2014. The country has one of the highest levels of long-term unemployment in Europe, with 7.1% of the labour force unemployed for more than a year in 2017.

99.9% of Slovak firms are small and medium-sized enterprises and they account for 73.3% of all jobs in the country. 

==Foreign investments==
Foreign direct investment (FDI) in Slovakia has increased dramatically. Cheap and skilled labor, a 19% flat tax rate for both businesses and individuals, no dividend taxes, a weak labor code, and a favorable geographical location are Slovakia&#x27;s main advantages for foreign investors. FDI inflow grew more than 600% from 2000 and cumulatively reached an all-time high of, US$17.3 billion in 2006, or around $18,000 per capita by the end of 2006. The total inflow of FDI in 2006 was $2.54 billion. In October 2005 new investment stimuli introduced – more favorable conditions to IT and research centers, especially to be located in the east part of the country (where there is more unemployment), to bring more added value and not to be logistically demanding.
Origin of foreign investment 1996–2005 – the Netherlands 24.3%; Germany 19.4%, Austria 14.1%; Italy 7.5%, United States (8th largest investor) 4.0%. Top investors by companies: Deutsche Telekom (Germany), Neusiedler (Austria), Gaz de France (France), Gazprom (Russia), U.S.Steel (U.S.), MOL (Hungary), ENEL (Italy), E.ON (Germany).

Foreign investment sectors – industry 38.4%; banking and insurance 22.2%; wholesale and retail trade 13.1%; production of electricity, gas and water 10.5%; transport and telecommunications 9.2%.

Former minister (1998-2002) Brigita Schmögnerová explains that: &quot;There is still a consensus among leaders on social dumping. Since the enlargement of the European Union, foreign companies have been looking for the cheapest labour, but instead of joining forces, governments in the region compete to offer the lowest possible level of taxes. When Slovakia joined the European Union in 2004, it became the first OECD country to introduce a full flat tax rate of 19% on both corporate profits and income or consumer goods. The lack of tax progressivity leads to a sharp increase in inequality. Spending on health, education or housing is below the EU average.

==Services==
Slovak service sector grew rapidly during the last 10 years and now employs about 69% of the population and contributes with over 61% to GDP. Slovakia&#x27;s tourism has been rising in recent years, income has doubled from US$640 million in 2001 to US$1.2 billion in 2005.

==Industry==
Slovakia became industrialized mostly in the second half of the 20th century. Heavy industry (including coal mining and the production of machinery and steel) was built for strategic reasons because Slovakia was less exposed to the military threat than the western parts of Czechoslovakia. After the end of the Cold War, the importance of industry, and especially of heavy industry, declined. In 2010, industry (including construction) accounted for 35.6% of GDP, compared with 49% in 1990. Nowadays, building on a long-standing tradition and a highly skilled labor force, main industries with potential of growth are following sectors: Automotive, Electronics, Mechanical engineering, Chemical engineering, Information technology.

The automotive sector is among the fastest growing sectors in Slovakia due to the recent large investments of Volkswagen (Bratislava), Peugeot (Trnava), Kia Motors (Žilina) and since 2018 also Jaguar Land Rover in Nitra. Passenger car production was 1,040,000 units in 2016, what makes Slovakia the largest automobile producer in produced cars per capita. Other big industrial companies include U.S. Steel (metallurgy), Slovnaft (oil industry), Samsung Electronics (electronics), Foxconn (electronics), Mondi SCP (paper), Slovalco (aluminum production), Hyundai Mobis (automotive), Continental Matador (automotive) and Whirlpool Corporation. In 2006, machinery accounted for more than a half of Slovakia&#x27;s export.

===Largest companies by revenue===
===Largest companies by profit===
==GDP growth==
The development of Slovakia&#x27;s GDP according to the World Bank:

In 2007, Slovakia obtained the highest GDP growth among the members of OECD and the EU, with the record level of 14.3% in the fourth quarter. In 2014, GDP growth was 2.4% and in 2015 and 2016 Slovakia&#x27;s economy grew 3.6% and 3.3% respectively.

==Agriculture==
In 2016, agriculture accounted for 3.6% of GDP (compared to 6.9% in 1993) and occupied about 3.9% of the labor force (down from 10.2% in 1994). Over 40% of the land in Slovakia is cultivated. The southern part of Slovakia (bordering with Hungary) is known for its rich farmland. Growing wheat, rye, corn, potatoes, sugar beets, grains, fruits and sunflowers. Vineyards are concentrated in Little Carpathians, Tokaj, and other southern regions. The breeding of livestock, including pigs, cattle, sheep, and poultry is also important.

Slovakia produced in 2018:

* 1.9 million tons of wheat;
* 1.5 million tons of maize;
* 1.3 million tons of sugar beet (the beet is used to manufacture sugar and ethanol);
* 486 thousand tons of barley;
* 480 thousand tons of rapeseed;
* 201 thousand tons of sunflower seed;
* 169 thousand tons of potato;
* 104 thousand tons of soybean;

In addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products, like grape (52 thousand tons).

==Information technology==
In recent years, service and high-tech-oriented businesses have prospered in Slovakia. Many global companies, including IBM, Dell, Lenovo, AT&amp;T, SAP, Amazon, Johnson Controls, Swiss Re and Accenture, have built outsourcing and service centres in Bratislava and Košice (T-Systems, Cisco Systems, Ness, Deloitte). Slovak IT companies, including ESET, Sygic and Pixel Federation have headquarters in Bratislava.

==Innovation==
According to a recent report by the European Commission, Slovakia (along with some other Central and Eastern European economies) is low on the list of EU states in terms of innovation (Slovakia ranks 22nd). Within the EU, it ranks next to last on knowledge creation and last for innovation and entrepreneurship. In the process of transition to a knowledge economy, it particularly lacks investment into education and a broader application of IT. The World Bank urges Slovakia to upgrade information infrastructure and reform the education system. The OECD states that a stronger product market competition would help.

In March 2006, the Slovak government introduced new measures to implement the Action Plan for R&amp;D and Innovation. The program covers the period from 2006 to 2010. The RDA is expected to launch at least one call for the expression of interests related to this program each year. The annual budget for the program will be set by the RDA. The overall amount available for the program depends on annual national budget resources and is likely to vary from year to year. Following an increase of around 50% in budget resources, the RDA disposes of a total budget of €19.31 million in 2006.

==Labour==
The minimum wage in Slovakia in 2023 is set at €700 per month, the average salary for 2021 was € 1211 per month, in the Bratislava region in 2021 the average salary was €1520 per month. As of June 2023 the unemployment rate stood at 6.2%.

==Statistics==
Currency switch to the euro

Slovakia switched its currency from the Slovak crown (SK – slovenská koruna) to the Euro on 1 January 2009, at a rate of 30.1260 korunas to the euro.

Foreign trade
==Companies==
In 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in Slovakia is Services with 227,424 companies followed by Retail Trade and Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate with 39,324 and 37,784 companies respectively.

==See also==
*Tatra Tiger
*List of Slovak regions by GDP
*List of Slovak companies
*Economy of Europe

==References==

==External links==
* OECD&#x27;s Slovakia country Web site and OECD Economic Survey of Slovakia
* Economy of Slovakia from The World Factbook
* Slovakia report (monitor 2005)
* (Index of Economic Freedom)
* Slovakia in selected macro-economic numbers
* Background note Slovakia (incl. economy)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q850631" start="4" end="23" title="Economy of Slovakia" label="economy of Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="38" end="46" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="59" end="74" title="EU member state" label="EU member state"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="101" end="105" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="145" end="155" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="346" end="368" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688236" start="552" end="563" title="Tatra Tiger" label="Tatra Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="695" end="710" title="planned economy" label="planned economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="716" end="735" title="free market economy" label="free market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937479" start="828" end="844" title="crony capitalism" label="crony capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q316526" start="889" end="904" title="Vladimír Mečiar" label="Vladimír Mečiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192796" start="1042" end="1055" title="trade deficit" label="trade deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="1072" end="1085" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q212765" start="1246" end="1262" title="Mikuláš Dzurinda" label="Mikuláš Dzurinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q176494" start="1518" end="1527" title="recession" label="recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="2187" end="2201" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="2393" end="2397" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410778" start="2443" end="2450" title="Economy of Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902255" start="2455" end="2461" title="Economy of Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q622439" start="2885" end="2907" title="Small and medium-sized enterprises" label="small and medium-sized"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="3001" end="3026" title="Foreign direct investment" label="Foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q440874" start="4322" end="4342" title="Brigita Schmögnerová" label="Brigita Schmögnerová"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166064" start="4408" end="4422" title="social dumping" label="social dumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="4665" end="4679" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="4709" end="4713" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q840785" start="5112" end="5135" title="Tourism in Slovakia" label="Slovakia&amp;#x27;s tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q622662" start="5335" end="5349" title="Heavy industry" label="Heavy industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="6100" end="6110" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742" start="6125" end="6132" title="Peugeot" label="Peugeot"/>
<link wikidata="Q26175" start="6134" end="6140" title="Trnava" label="Trnava"/>
<link wikidata="Q35349" start="6143" end="6153" title="Kia Motors" label="Kia Motors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6155" end="6161" title="Kia Design and Manufacturing Facilities#Žilina Plant" label="Žilina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122893" start="6183" end="6200" title="Jaguar Land Rover" label="Jaguar Land Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q26397" start="6204" end="6209" title="Nitra" label="Nitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q72539" start="6385" end="6395" title="U.S. Steel" label="U.S. Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587563" start="6410" end="6418" title="Slovnaft" label="Slovnaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718" start="6435" end="6454" title="Samsung Electronics" label="Samsung Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q463094" start="6470" end="6477" title="Foxconn" label="Foxconn"/>
<link wikidata="Q779252" start="6493" end="6502" title="Mondi" label="Mondi SCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541681" start="6512" end="6520" title="Slovalco" label="Slovalco"/>
<link wikidata="Q497534" start="6544" end="6557" title="Hyundai Mobis" label="Hyundai Mobis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908026" start="6572" end="6591" title="Matador (company)" label="Continental Matador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471346" start="6609" end="6630" title="Whirlpool Corporation" label="Whirlpool Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="6850" end="6860" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="6934" end="6938" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q22715" start="7488" end="7496" title="Vineyard" label="Vineyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q426712" start="7518" end="7536" title="Little Carpathians" label="Little Carpathians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950186" start="7538" end="7543" title="Tokaj (Slovakia)" label="Tokaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="7713" end="7718" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="7742" end="7747" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q151964" start="7771" end="7781" title="sugar beet" label="sugar beet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="7815" end="7820" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="7825" end="7832" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="7858" end="7864" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q177932" start="7889" end="7897" title="rapeseed" label="rapeseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076906" start="7922" end="7936" title="sunflower seed" label="sunflower seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="7961" end="7967" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="7992" end="7999" title="soybean" label="soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="8074" end="8079" title="grape" label="grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="8145" end="8152" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="service"/>
<link wikidata="Q466410" start="8157" end="8166" title="High tech" label="high-tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="8248" end="8251" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q30873" start="8253" end="8257" title="Dell" label="Dell"/>
<link wikidata="Q14799" start="8259" end="8265" title="Lenovo" label="Lenovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="8267" end="8275" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q552581" start="8277" end="8280" title="SAP AG" label="SAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="8282" end="8288" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q667865" start="8290" end="8306" title="Johnson Controls" label="Johnson Controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q605565" start="8308" end="8316" title="Swiss Re" label="Swiss Re"/>
<link wikidata="Q338825" start="8321" end="8330" title="Accenture" label="Accenture"/>
<link wikidata="Q61515" start="8343" end="8354" title="outsourcing" label="outsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="8378" end="8388" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q25409" start="8393" end="8399" title="Košice" label="Košice"/>
<link wikidata="Q565423" start="8401" end="8410" title="T-Systems" label="T-Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q173395" start="8412" end="8425" title="Cisco Systems" label="Cisco Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778271" start="8427" end="8431" title="Ness Digital Engineering" label="Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q491748" start="8433" end="8441" title="Deloitte" label="Deloitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q817209" start="8475" end="8479" title="ESET" label="ESET"/>
<link wikidata="Q3979061" start="8481" end="8486" title="Sygic" label="Sygic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56151982" start="8491" end="8507" title="Pixel Federation" label="Pixel Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="8593" end="8612" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q830170" start="8903" end="8920" title="knowledge economy" label="knowledge economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="9007" end="9017" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="9108" end="9112" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688236" start="10482" end="10493" title="Tatra Tiger" label="Tatra Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q60519028" start="10495" end="10524" title="List of Slovak regions by GDP" label="List of Slovak regions by GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860764" start="10526" end="10550" title="List of Slovak companies" label="List of Slovak companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226947" start="10552" end="10569" title="Economy of Europe" label="Economy of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="10710" end="10728" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931610" start="10765" end="10790" title="Index of Economic Freedom" label="Index of Economic Freedom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27333" wikidata="Q14476323" url="?curid=27333" title="Telecommunications in Slovakia">
<text>Telecommunications in Slovakia includes fixed and mobile telephones, radio, television, and the Internet.

==Telephone==

===Fixed lines===
Slovak Telecom Inc. (former Slovenské Telekomunikácie, a.s.) was privatised on 18 July 2000. The 51% package of shares was purchased by the German Deutsche Telecom AG for 1 bln. EUR (more than 44 bln. SKK at that time). The outstanding 49% of the shares are still owned by the Slovak government through the Department of Transport, Construction and Regional Development of the Slovak Republic (34%) and the National Property Fund (15%). Slovak Telecom was rebranded to T-Com in the year 2003. In 2010 there were more than 100 companies licensed to provide public fixed line telephone service, although many of these do not offer commercial service to the wider public. The most notable country-wide providers are T-Com, Orange, Dial Telecom, SWAN and UPC. Several regional providers also operate in the market. Many of these offer triple-play services consisting of a fixed line service, broadband internet access and access to television programmes. The number of triple-play customers has doubled since the service was introduced and currently peaks at 78,049 subscribers.

Due to strong penetration of the Slovak market by mobile phones, the fixed lines sector has decreased dramatically in recent years. While there were 1,655,380 fixed lines in use in 1999, their number decreased by 60% to 994,421 in 2010.

;Key figures of the fixed lines sector

*Fixed lines: 1.1 million lines, 75th in the world (2011).
*Density: 18.31 lines per 100 inhabitants (2010).
*Lines connected to digital exchanges: 100% (2010).
*Households with fixed lines: 39.0% (2010).

===Mobile cellular===
Mobile communication in Slovakia first became available in the early 1990s when the first NMT network operator, EuroTel Bratislava, a.s., a subsidiary of the then state owned Slovenské Telekomunikácie a.s. EuroTel, introduced the first GSM service to public in 1997. EuroTel was privatised together with its parent company and was rebranded as T-Mobile on 3 May 2005. It is now fully integrated as part of the international T-Mobile brand. The second GSM network operator started its operation on 15 January 1997 under the name GlobTel a.s. It was acquired by France Télécom (through Atlas Services Belgium, 100% shares) and rebranded to Orange Slovensko on 27 March 2002. Telefónica Europe, the third mobile operator in Slovakia, entered the market in February 2007 under the O2 brand.

Virtual providers are active in the Slovak market, the most notable being Tesco Mobile (associated with Tesco Stores) and FunFón (a virtual operator associated with a popular FM radio station).

Key figures of the mobile cellular sector

* Active mobile cellular: 6.0 million subscribers, 99th in the world (2011).
* Density: 105.12 subscriptions per 100 inhabitants (2010).
* Land coverage of land (GSM): 95.9% of the land area (2010).
* Population coverage (GSM): 99.6% of the population (2010).

===Telephone system===
* International country code: +421, three international exchanges, one in Bratislava and two in Banská Bystrica.
* Emergency call numbers:
** 112 - EU standard integrated emergency service (one nationwide call centre directly connected to police, EMS, firefighters, Mountain Rescue Service and others)
** 158 - direct call centre - Police
** 155 - direct call centre - EMS (features doctors available for consultations online)
** 150 - direct call centre - Firefighters
** 18300 - direct call centre - Mountain Rescue Service

==Radio==
* Radio and Television of Slovakia (RTVS), the state-owned public broadcaster, operates multiple national and regional radio networks (2008).
* Privately owned radio stations: more than 20 (2008).
* Radios: 3.12 million (1997).
* List of most-listened-to radio stations as of June 2012:
** Rádio Expres - 19.5% listened-to yesterday
** Rádio Slovensko - 17.0% listened-to yesterday
** Fun Rádio - 12.3% listened-to yesterday
** Jemné Melódie - 8.2% listened-to yesterday
** Rádio Europa 2 - 7.7% listened-to yesterday
** Rádio Regina - 6.3% listened-to yesterday
** Rádio Viva - 5.4% listened-to yesterday

==Television==
* Radio and Television of Slovakia (RTVS), the state-owned public broadcaster, operates 3 national TV stations (2008).
* Privately owned TV stations: 35 operating nationally, regionally, and locally (2008).
* Cable or satellite TV: ~ 40% of households are connected to multi-channel cable or satellite TV (2008).
* Televisions: 2.62 million (1997).

==Internet==

Slovakia has one of the highest Internet penetration rates in the world and the highest penetration rate in Central and Eastern Europe. Slovakia has a large number of full-area ISP&#x27;s that offer wired broadband Internet connections, including Slovak Telekom, Orange Slovensko and UPC. They offer a range of connections, from ADSL / ADSL2+ to fiber optic. ADSL or ADSL2+, VDSL is available in almost every town and village in Slovakia.

;Key figures of the Internet sector
* Internet country code (TLD): .sk
* Internet users: ~ 80% of the population, ~ 4.4 million (2012).
* Internet hosts: 1.4 million, 41st in the world (2012).

===Internet censorship and surveillance===
There are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without judicial oversight; however, police monitor Web sites containing hate speech and attempt to arrest or fine the authors.

The constitution and the law provide for freedom of speech and press. While the government mostly respects these rights in practice, in some instances, it limits these rights to impede criticism and limit actions of groups it considers extremist. The law prohibits the defamation of nationalities, punishable by up to three years in prison, and denial of the Holocaust, which carries a sentence of six months to three years in prison. Criminal penalties for defamation are rarely used. The constitution and the law prohibit arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence and the government generally respects these prohibitions in practice. Police must present a warrant before conducting a search or within 24 hours afterwards.

A new draft law under consideration in 2011 would allow the nation&#x27;s tax office to block web servers that provide online gambling without a Slovak license. Opponents argue that the economic interests served by the law are not sufficient to justify online censorship.

==See also==

* Telephone numbers in Slovakia
* Piano Media, a subscription-based payment system enabling paid content and services on Slovak media websites.

==Notes==
== References ==


==External links==
* Department of Transport, Construction and Regional Development of the Slovak Republic
* Telecommunications Regulatory Authority of the Slovak Republic
* SK-NIC, Slovak TLD registry 
* Slovak Internet Exchange (SIX) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14476323" start="0" end="30" title="Telecommunications in Slovakia" label="Telecommunications in Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q540733" start="140" end="159" title="Slovak Telecom" label="Slovak Telecom Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="205" end="215" title="Privatization" label="privatised"/>
<link wikidata="Q9396" start="287" end="306" title="Deutsche Telekom" label="Deutsche Telecom AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495267" start="417" end="434" title="Government of Slovakia" label="Slovak government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142340" start="971" end="991" title="Triple play (telecommunications)" label="triple-play services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472399" start="1028" end="1053" title="Internet access" label="broadband internet access"/>
<link wikidata="Q854862" start="1812" end="1823" title="Nordic Mobile Telephone" label="NMT network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413853" start="1928" end="1935" title="Eurotel" label="EuroTel"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="1958" end="1961" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q327634" start="2146" end="2154" title="T-Mobile International AG" label="T-Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198815" start="2360" end="2376" title="Orange Slovensko" label="Orange Slovensko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759255" start="2395" end="2412" title="Telefónica Europe" label="Telefónica Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159252" start="2499" end="2501" title="Telefónica Slovakia" label="O2"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="2910" end="2913" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="2970" end="2973" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="3106" end="3116" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q144983" start="3128" end="3143" title="Banská Bystrica" label="Banská Bystrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061257" start="3174" end="3177" title="112 (emergency telephone number)" label="112"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="3180" end="3182" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q9283807" start="3298" end="3321" title="Mountain Rescue Service (Slovakia)" label="Mountain Rescue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q860447" start="3401" end="3404" title="Emergency medical services" label="EMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q9283807" start="3534" end="3557" title="Mountain Rescue Service (Slovakia)" label="Mountain Rescue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454138" start="3859" end="3871" title="Rádio Expres" label="Rádio Expres"/>
<link wikidata="Q9396" start="4802" end="4816" title="Deutsche Telekom" label="Slovak Telekom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198815" start="4818" end="4834" title="Orange Slovensko" label="Orange Slovensko"/>
<link wikidata="Q643277" start="4839" end="4842" title="UPC Broadband" label="UPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027795" start="4901" end="4912" title="Passive optical network" label="fiber optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="4914" end="4918" title="Asymmetric digital subscriber line" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q431344" start="4922" end="4928" title="ADSL2+" label="ADSL2+"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="4984" end="4992" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="5056" end="5059" title="Top-level domain" label="TLD"/>
<link wikidata="Q41529" start="5062" end="5065" title=".sk" label=".sk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="5335" end="5341" title="e-mail" label="e-mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q574577" start="5354" end="5364" title="chat rooms" label="chat rooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q653347" start="5438" end="5449" title="hate speech" label="hate speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="5763" end="5773" title="defamation" label="defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="5839" end="5862" title="Holocaust denial" label="denial of the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696661" start="6535" end="6564" title="Telephone numbers in Slovakia" label="Telephone numbers in Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190127" start="6567" end="6578" title="Piano Media" label="Piano Media"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27334" wikidata="Q2526647" url="?curid=27334" title="Transport in Slovakia">
<text>Transport in Slovakia is possible by rail, road, air, or rivers. Slovakia is a developed Central European country with a well-developed rail network (3,662 km) and a highway system (854 km). The main international airport is the M. R. Štefánik Airport in the capital, Bratislava. The most important waterway is the river Danube, which is used by passenger, cargo, and freight ships. The two most important harbours in Slovakia are Komarno harbour and Bratislava harbour.

== Railways ==


* &quot;Total:&quot; 3,662 km (2008)
** &quot;Broad gauge:&quot; 99 km of gauge - used for freight transport only, see Uzhhorod - Košice broad gauge track
** &quot;Standard gauge:&quot; 3,473 km of gauge (1,588 km electrified; 1,011 km double track)
** &quot;Narrow gauge:&quot; 50 km (45 km of gauge; 5 km of gauge)

Slovakia has a range of railway connections that provide access to all of Slovakia in the country and from the rest of Europe. There are many railway operators that control railways across the country, with the main railway operator being ZSSK. The railway network is very dense in the western and eastern parts of Slovakia but is less accessible in central Slovakia. The singular high-speed rail line in Slovakia is the Rychlik between Bratislava and Kosice (Via Zillina). The top speed of the line is . The Rychlik was established in 2002 after ZSSK took over ZSR. Most of the country&#x27;s railways run on Tas REX (Regional Express) which operates at speeds between .

=== Train operators ===

; Passenger
* ZSSK Rychlik - High-speed rail passenger trains
* ZSSK REX - Regional express trains
* Leo Express - Intercity railway
* Regio jet - Intercity trains
* Railjet - High-speed rail passenger trains operated by the OBB

; Cargo 
The main cargo train operator for the cargo freight rail in Slovakia is ZSSK cargo.

== Roads ==

* &quot;Total:&quot; 43,761 km
* &quot;Paved:&quot; 38,085 km (including 384 km of express-ways)
* &quot;Unpaved:&quot; 5,676 km 

Slovakia has a total of 43,761 km of roads in the country with 3,336.6 km being main or national roads, 13,958.7 km being secondary and regional roads, and being highways, with the rest being other types of roads.

=== Highways ===


 Motorways in Slovakia
 (2022)
* D1: Bratislava - Trnava - Trenčín - Považská Bystrica - Žilina, Liptovský Mikuláš - Jánovce, Prešov - Košice - Záhor(SK/UA border)
* D2: Kúty (CZ/SK border) - Malacky - Bratislava - Jarovce (SK/H border)
* D3: Dolný Hričov - Žilina - Čadca - Skalité(SK/PL border)
* D4: Jarovce - (SK/A border)

 Expressways in Slovakia 
* R1: Trnava - Nitra - Zvolen - Banská Bystrica
* R2: (SK/CZ border) - Trenčín - Prievidza - Zvolen - Rimavská Sobota - Košice
* R3: (SK/H border) - Zvolen - Martin - (SK/PL border)
* R4: (SK/H border) - Košice - Prešov - Svidník - (SK/PL border)
* R5: Svrčinovec - (SK/CZ border)
* R6: Beluša - Púchov - (SK/CZ border)
* R7: Bratislava - Nové Zámky - Krupina - Lučenec
* R8: Nitra - Topoľčany - Bánovce nad Bebravou

== Airports ==


Slovakia has three international airports. Bratislava Airport is the main and largest international airport. It is located northeast of the city centre. It serves civil and governmental, scheduled and unscheduled domestic and international flights. The current runways support the landing of all common types of aircraft currently used. The airport has enjoyed rapidly growing passenger traffic in recent years; it served 279,028 passengers in 2000 and 2,292,712 in 2018. 

Košice International Airport is an airport serving Košice. It is the second-largest international airport in Slovakia. 

The Poprad–Tatry Airport is the third busiest airport, the airport is located 5 km west-northwest of Poprad. It is an airport with one of the highest elevations in Central Europe, at 718 m, which is 150 m higher than Innsbruck Airport in Austria.

== Ports and harbours ==

* Port of Bratislava
* Port of Komárno

== Waterways ==
* The Danube waterway is 172 km and is used by passenger, cargo, and freight ships of nearly all sizes.

== Pipelines ==
* Petroleum products 416 km; natural gas 6,769 km (2010)
* Gas pipelines 162 km Poland Slovakia interconnector
* Crude oil 19 km Druzhba pipeline

== Public transport ==
=== Buses and trolleybuses ===

Most towns and cities in Slovakia have well-developed bus networks. Most of the buses are operated by the city or town council but most regional buses are operated by private operators with the permission of local authorities and/or the county council. There is also a trolleybus system which only operates in large cities and is operated by the town council. They are more of an ecological system of transport than a standard bus.

=== Tram ===


Trams are only found in Bratislava and Košice. The first tram to arrive in Slovakia was in 1895 in Bratislava and then later on in 1913 trams arrived in Košice. Today the tram network is expanding rapidly in both cities.

== See also ==
* Slovakia
* Rail transport in Slovakia
* Highways in Slovakia
* List of airports in Slovakia

== References ==

== External links ==
*Highways in Slovakia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2526647" start="0" end="21" title="Transport in Slovakia" label="Transport in Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="65" end="73" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="89" end="103" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q828379" start="229" end="251" title="M. R. Štefánik Airport" label="M. R. Štefánik Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="268" end="278" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="321" end="327" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="418" end="426" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q586056" start="431" end="438" title="Komárno District" label="Komarno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="451" end="461" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q803375" start="608" end="643" title="Uzhhorod - Košice broad gauge track" label="Uzhhorod - Košice broad gauge track"/>
<link wikidata="Q388201" start="703" end="714" title="Railway electrification system" label="electrified"/>
<link wikidata="Q962977" start="725" end="737" title="double track" label="double track"/>
<link wikidata="Q393557" start="1046" end="1050" title="Železničná spoločnosť Slovensko" label="ZSSK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="1244" end="1254" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q25409" start="1259" end="1265" title="Košice" label="Kosice"/>
<link wikidata="Q25797" start="1271" end="1278" title="Žilina" label="Zillina"/>
<link wikidata="Q393557" start="1354" end="1358" title="Železničná spoločnosť Slovensko" label="ZSSK"/>
<link wikidata="Q393524" start="1369" end="1372" title="Railways of the Slovak Republic" label="ZSR"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1417" end="1424" title="Tas REX" label="Tas REX"/>
<link wikidata="Q393557" start="1519" end="1523" title="Železničná spoločnosť Slovensko" label="ZSSK"/>
<link wikidata="Q393557" start="1569" end="1573" title="Železničná spoločnosť Slovensko" label="ZSSK"/>
<link wikidata="Q851963" start="1606" end="1617" title="Leo Express" label="Leo Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q221186" start="1640" end="1649" title="RegioJet" label="Regio jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q327051" start="1671" end="1678" title="Railjet" label="Railjet"/>
<link wikidata="Q351342" start="1730" end="1733" title="ÖBB rolling stock" label="OBB"/>
<link wikidata="Q393549" start="1816" end="1826" title="Železničná spoločnosť Cargo Slovakia" label="ZSSK cargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="2208" end="2217" title="Controlled-access highway" label="Motorways"/>
<link wikidata="Q763202" start="2240" end="2242" title="Motorway D1 (Slovakia)" label="D1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="2244" end="2254" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q26175" start="2257" end="2263" title="Trnava" label="Trnava"/>
<link wikidata="Q145002" start="2266" end="2273" title="Trenčín" label="Trenčín"/>
<link wikidata="Q319787" start="2276" end="2293" title="Považská Bystrica" label="Považská Bystrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q25797" start="2296" end="2302" title="Žilina" label="Žilina"/>
<link wikidata="Q272040" start="2304" end="2321" title="Liptovský Mikuláš" label="Liptovský Mikuláš"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093865" start="2324" end="2331" title="Jánovce" label="Jánovce"/>
<link wikidata="Q26119" start="2333" end="2339" title="Prešov" label="Prešov"/>
<link wikidata="Q25409" start="2342" end="2348" title="Košice" label="Košice"/>
<link wikidata="Q611948" start="2351" end="2356" title="Záhor" label="Záhor"/>
<link wikidata="Q900758" start="2373" end="2375" title="Motorway D2 (Slovakia)" label="D2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018849" start="2377" end="2381" title="Kúty" label="Kúty"/>
<link wikidata="Q837464" start="2399" end="2406" title="Malacky" label="Malacky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="2409" end="2419" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055697" start="2422" end="2429" title="Jarovce" label="Jarovce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209281" start="2446" end="2448" title="Motorway D3 (Slovakia)" label="D3"/>
<link wikidata="Q430636" start="2450" end="2462" title="Dolný Hričov" label="Dolný Hričov"/>
<link wikidata="Q25797" start="2465" end="2471" title="Žilina" label="Žilina"/>
<link wikidata="Q337478" start="2474" end="2479" title="Čadca" label="Čadca"/>
<link wikidata="Q946079" start="2482" end="2489" title="Skalité" label="Skalité"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209288" start="2506" end="2508" title="Motorway D4 (Slovakia)" label="D4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055697" start="2510" end="2517" title="Jarovce" label="Jarovce"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875255" start="2536" end="2547" title="Limited-access road" label="Expressways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478472" start="2563" end="2565" title="R1 expressway (Slovakia)" label="R1"/>
<link wikidata="Q26175" start="2567" end="2573" title="Trnava" label="Trnava"/>
<link wikidata="Q26397" start="2576" end="2581" title="Nitra" label="Nitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11874" start="2584" end="2590" title="Zvolen" label="Zvolen"/>
<link wikidata="Q144983" start="2593" end="2608" title="Banská Bystrica" label="Banská Bystrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q137807" start="2611" end="2613" title="R2 expressway (Slovakia)" label="R2"/>
<link wikidata="Q145002" start="2632" end="2639" title="Trenčín" label="Trenčín"/>
<link wikidata="Q208750" start="2642" end="2651" title="Prievidza" label="Prievidza"/>
<link wikidata="Q11874" start="2654" end="2660" title="Zvolen" label="Zvolen"/>
<link wikidata="Q829812" start="2663" end="2678" title="Rimavská Sobota" label="Rimavská Sobota"/>
<link wikidata="Q25409" start="2681" end="2687" title="Košice" label="Košice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139911" start="2690" end="2692" title="R3 expressway (Slovakia)" label="R3"/>
<link wikidata="Q11874" start="2710" end="2716" title="Zvolen" label="Zvolen"/>
<link wikidata="Q27001" start="2719" end="2725" title="Martin, Slovakia" label="Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q900574" start="2745" end="2747" title="R4 expressway (Slovakia)" label="R4"/>
<link wikidata="Q25409" start="2765" end="2771" title="Košice" label="Košice"/>
<link wikidata="Q26119" start="2774" end="2780" title="Prešov" label="Prešov"/>
<link wikidata="Q833845" start="2783" end="2790" title="Svidník" label="Svidník"/>
<link wikidata="Q957482" start="2810" end="2812" title="R5 expressway (Slovakia)" label="R5"/>
<link wikidata="Q653391" start="2814" end="2824" title="Svrčinovec" label="Svrčinovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q944438" start="2844" end="2846" title="R6 expressway (Slovakia)" label="R6"/>
<link wikidata="Q520872" start="2848" end="2854" title="Beluša" label="Beluša"/>
<link wikidata="Q258481" start="2857" end="2863" title="Púchov" label="Púchov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139900" start="2883" end="2885" title="R7 expressway (Slovakia)" label="R7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="2887" end="2897" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q276362" start="2900" end="2910" title="Nové Zámky" label="Nové Zámky"/>
<link wikidata="Q756667" start="2913" end="2920" title="Krupina" label="Krupina"/>
<link wikidata="Q728965" start="2923" end="2930" title="Lučenec" label="Lučenec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204174" start="2933" end="2935" title="R8 expressway (Slovakia)" label="R8"/>
<link wikidata="Q26397" start="2937" end="2942" title="Nitra" label="Nitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q750423" start="2945" end="2954" title="Topoľčany" label="Topoľčany"/>
<link wikidata="Q549849" start="2957" end="2977" title="Bánovce nad Bebravou" label="Bánovce nad Bebravou"/>
<link wikidata="Q828379" start="3039" end="3057" title="Bratislava Airport" label="Bratislava Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q644371" start="3082" end="3103" title="international airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q777774" start="3470" end="3498" title="Košice International Airport" label="Košice International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q25409" start="3521" end="3527" title="Košice" label="Košice"/>
<link wikidata="Q644371" start="3554" end="3575" title="international airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432421" start="3595" end="3615" title="Poprad–Tatry Airport" label="Poprad–Tatry Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q26393" start="3692" end="3698" title="Poprad" label="Poprad"/>
<link wikidata="Q694434" start="3808" end="3825" title="Innsbruck Airport" label="Innsbruck Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q139413" start="3867" end="3885" title="Port of Bratislava" label="Port of Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3888" end="3903" title="Port of Komárno" label="Port of Komárno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="3927" end="3933" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="4044" end="4053" title="Petroleum" label="Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="4071" end="4082" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841394" start="4101" end="4114" title="Pipeline transport" label="Gas pipelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="4155" end="4164" title="Petroleum" label="Crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q315654" start="4171" end="4187" title="Druzhba pipeline" label="Druzhba pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509410" start="4716" end="4726" title="Transport in Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q104904552" start="4731" end="4737" title="Public transport in Košice" label="Košice"/>
<link wikidata="Q104904552" start="4845" end="4851" title="Public transport in Košice" label="Košice"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="4931" end="4939" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q837019" start="4942" end="4968" title="Rail transport in Slovakia" label="Rail transport in Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q115934465" start="4971" end="4991" title="Highways in Slovakia" label="Highways in Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q206373" start="4994" end="5022" title="List of airports in Slovakia" label="List of airports in Slovakia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27335" wikidata="Q500707" url="?curid=27335" title="Slovak Armed Forces">
<text>The Armed Forces of the [[Slovakia|Slovak Republic]] were divided from the Czechoslovak Army after dissolution of Czechoslovakia on 1 January 1993. Slovakia joined NATO on 29 March 2004. From 2006 the army transformed into a fully professional organization and compulsory military service was abolished. Slovak armed forces numbered 19,500 uniformed personnel and 4,208 civilians in 2022.

== Organization ==
=== Joint Operational Command ===
Joint Operational Command in Banská Bystrica
(Commander: 2 Star General)

=== Ground forces ===

* 1st Mechanized Brigade
* 2nd Mechanized Brigade
* 5th Artillery Regiment
* 91st Engineer Regiment
* 65th Reconnaissance Battalion
* 71st Command Support Battalion
* 103rd Nuclear, Biological and Chemical Defence Battalion

=== Air force ===

The Slovak Air Force, officially the &quot;Air Force of the Armed Forces of the Slovak Republic&quot;, has been defending Slovak airspace since independence in 1993. The Slovak Air Force currently comprises one wing of fighters, one wing of utility helicopters, one wing of transport aircraft, and one SAM brigade. It operates around 20 combat aircraft, as well as 10 helicopters from 3 air bases: Malacky/Kuchyňa Air Base, Sliač Air Base, Prešov Air Base. The Air Force is currently part of the NATO Integrated Air and Missiles Defense System – NATINADS.

=== Special Operations Forces ===
* 5th Special Forces Regiment
* 51st Training Base in Žilina
* 52nd Airborne Battalion in Trebišov
* 57th Separate Section in Martin

=== Joint Support Brigade ===
* 3rd Command Support Company, in Trenčín
* 4th Logistic Regiment, in Trenčín
** 41st Supply Base, in Nemšová
** 42nd Supply Base, in Martin, Slovakia
** 43rd Supply Base, in Zemianske Kostoľany
** 53rd Field Services Battalion, in Hlohovec
** 405th Maintenance Battalion, in Martin
* 6th Signal Regiment, in Trenčín
** 61st Signal Battalion, in Trenčín
** 62nd Signal Battalion, in Ružomberok
* Topographic Institute, in Banská Bystrica
* 701st Military Transport Center, in Bratislava
* Training and Mobilization Replenishment Base, in Martin

=== Military Medical Command ===
Military Medical Command in Ružomberok
* HQ
* Department of Management and Medical Analysis
* Department of Planning and Training
* Department of Logistic
* Department of Military Healthcare Development
* Department of Veterinary Support
* Department of Field Medical Units
** Field Mobil Medical Unit ROLE 2E
** Field Mobil Medical Unit ROLE 2B
* Logistic Battalion of Military Medical Command
** HQ
** Material Support Company 
** Technical Support Company

== Ranks ==
== Equipment ==
List of equipment of the Slovak Army

== Uniforms ==
==Missions==
As of 2021, Slovakia has 169 military personnel deployed in Cyprus for UNFICYP United Nations led peace support operations and 41 troops deployed in Bosnia and Herzegovina for EUFOR Althea.

The country has been an active participant in US- and NATO-led military actions and involved in many United Nations peacekeeping military missions: UNPROFOR in the Yugoslavia (1992–1995), UNOMUR in Uganda and Rwanda (1993-1994), UNAMIR in Rwanda (1993-1996), UNTAES in Croatia (1996-1998), UNOMIL in Liberia (1993-1997), MONUA in Angola (1997-1999), SFOR in Bosnia and Herzegovina (1999-2003), OSCE mission in Moldova (1998-2002), OSCE mission in Albania (1999), KFOR in Kosovo (1999-2002), UNGCI in Iraq (2000-2003), UNMEE in Ethiopia and Eritrea (2000-2004), UNMISET in East Timor (2001), EUFOR Concordia in Macedonia (2003), UNAMSIL in Sierra Leone (1999-2005), EU supporting action to African Union in Darfur (2006), Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan (2002-2005), Operation Iraqi Freedom in Iraq (2003-2007) and UNDOF at the borders of Israel and Syria (1998-2008).

Since the independence of Slovakia in 1993, there have been 60 uniformed personnel deaths in the line of service to the United Nations and NATO (as of 30 April 2018).

==Gallery==
==References==
== External links ==

*V armáde SR bude pôsobiť viac vojakov, bude mať aj viac húfnic či BVP
*Official homepage of the Ministry of Defence
*Armed Forces of the Slovak Republic </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q500707" start="4" end="52" title="Slovak Armed Forces" label="Armed Forces of the [[Slovakia|Slovak Republic]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505574" start="75" end="92" title="Czechoslovak Army" label="Czechoslovak Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="114" end="128" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="164" end="168" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q144983" start="472" end="487" title="Banská Bystrica" label="Banská Bystrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q16009153" start="500" end="514" title="Generalmajor" label="2 Star General"/>
<link wikidata="Q12761496" start="542" end="564" title="1st Mechanized Brigade (Slovakia)" label="1st Mechanized Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959203" start="567" end="589" title="2nd Mechanized Brigade (Slovakia)" label="2nd Mechanized Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q45364" start="995" end="999" title="Wing (military unit)" label="wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="1003" end="1011" title="Fighter aircraft" label="fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="1033" end="1043" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="1086" end="1089" title="Surface-to-air missile" label="SAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139015" start="1330" end="1338" title="NATINADS" label="NATINADS"/>
<link wikidata="Q225316" start="1377" end="1404" title="5th Special Forces Regiment (Slovakia)" label="5th Special Forces Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q25797" start="1429" end="1435" title="Žilina" label="Žilina"/>
<link wikidata="Q256301" start="1465" end="1473" title="Trebišov" label="Trebišov"/>
<link wikidata="Q27001" start="1501" end="1507" title="Martin, Slovakia" label="Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q145002" start="1573" end="1580" title="Trenčín" label="Trenčín"/>
<link wikidata="Q145002" start="1609" end="1616" title="Trenčín" label="Trenčín"/>
<link wikidata="Q389942" start="1641" end="1648" title="Nemšová" label="Nemšová"/>
<link wikidata="Q27001" start="1673" end="1689" title="Martin, Slovakia" label="Martin, Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189354" start="1714" end="1733" title="Zemianske Kostoľany" label="Zemianske Kostoľany"/>
<link wikidata="Q754773" start="1771" end="1779" title="Hlohovec" label="Hlohovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q27001" start="1815" end="1821" title="Martin, Slovakia" label="Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q145002" start="1848" end="1855" title="Trenčín" label="Trenčín"/>
<link wikidata="Q145002" start="1885" end="1892" title="Trenčín" label="Trenčín"/>
<link wikidata="Q27541" start="1922" end="1932" title="Ružomberok" label="Ružomberok"/>
<link wikidata="Q144983" start="1961" end="1976" title="Banská Bystrica" label="Banská Bystrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="2015" end="2025" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q27001" start="2077" end="2083" title="Martin, Slovakia" label="Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27541" start="2146" end="2156" title="Ružomberok" label="Ružomberok"/>
<link wikidata="Q113144814" start="2606" end="2642" title="List of equipment of the Slovak Army" label="List of equipment of the Slovak Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="2732" end="2738" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q694772" start="2743" end="2750" title="UNFICYP" label="UNFICYP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2751" end="2765" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="2770" end="2793" title="Peacekeeping" label="peace support operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="2821" end="2843" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q691042" start="2848" end="2860" title="EUFOR Althea" label="EUFOR Althea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077987" start="2964" end="3009" title="List of United Nations peacekeeping missions" label="United Nations peacekeeping military missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q170245" start="3011" end="3037" title="United Nations Protection Force" label="UNPROFOR in the Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q740737" start="3051" end="3078" title="United Nations Observer Mission Uganda–Rwanda" label="UNOMUR in Uganda and Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q262779" start="3092" end="3108" title="United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda" label="UNAMIR in Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257607" start="3122" end="3139" title="United Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium" label="UNTAES in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457461" start="3153" end="3170" title="United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia" label="UNOMIL in Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q818556" start="3184" end="3199" title="United Nations Observer Mission in Angola" label="MONUA in Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q313440" start="3213" end="3243" title="Stabilisation Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="SFOR in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="3257" end="3280" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="OSCE mission in Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="3294" end="3317" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="OSCE mission in Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q159470" start="3326" end="3340" title="Kosovo Force" label="KFOR in Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865267" start="3354" end="3367" title="UNGCI" label="UNGCI in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q487381" start="3381" end="3410" title="United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea" label="UNMEE in Ethiopia and Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141705" start="3424" end="3445" title="United Nations Mission of Support to East Timor" label="UNMISET in East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324540" start="3454" end="3482" title="European Union Military Operation in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia" label="EUFOR Concordia in Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q643988" start="3491" end="3514" title="United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone" label="UNAMSIL in Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3891998" start="3528" end="3575" title="International response to the War in Darfur" label="EU supporting action to African Union in Darfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q326668" start="3584" end="3610" title="Operation Enduring Freedom" label="Operation Enduring Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="3639" end="3662" title="Operation Iraqi Freedom" label="Operation Iraqi Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428532" start="3687" end="3727" title="United Nations Disengagement Observer Force" label="UNDOF at the borders of Israel and Syria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27336" wikidata="Q3115663" url="?curid=27336" title="Foreign relations of Slovakia">
<text>The Slovak Republic has been a member of European Union since 2004. Slovakia has been an active participant in U.S.- and NATO-led military actions. There is a joint Czech-Slovak peacekeeping force in Kosovo. After the September 11, 2001 Terrorist Attack on the United States, the government opened its airspace to coalition planes. In June 2002, Slovakia announced that they would send an engineering brigade to Afghanistan.

Slovak Republic is a member of the United Nations and participates in its specialized agencies. It is a member of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the World Trade Organization (WTO), and the OECD. It also is part of the Visegrád Group (Slovakia, Hungary, Czech Republic, and Poland), a forum for discussing areas of common concern. Slovak Republic and the Czech Republic entered into a Customs Union upon the division of Czechoslovakia in 1993, which facilitates a relatively free flow of goods and services. Slovak Republic maintains diplomatic relations with 188 countries.

==International disputes==
===Liechtenstein===
Liechtenstein claims restitution of land in Slovakia confiscated from its princely family in 1918 by the then newly established state of Czechoslovakia, the predecessor of the Slovak Republic. The Slovak Republic insists that the power to claim restitution does not go back before February 1948, when the Communists seized power. Slovakia and Liechtenstein established diplomatic relations on 9 December 2009.

===Hungary===
Bilateral government, legal, technical and economic working group negotiations continued in 2006 between Slovakia and Hungary over Hungary&#x27;s completion of its portion of the Gabcikovo-Nagymaros hydroelectric dam project along the Danube.

==Multilateral agreements==
In July 2022 after the Russian invasion of Ukraine the Prime Minister of Slovakia Eduard Heger made it known that he had entered discussions with the Czech Republic over the protection of Slovak airspace by Czech warplanes in the event that the Slovaks were to donate to Ukraine the remnants of the Slovak MiG-29 fighter jet fleet, in advance of the fleet&#x27;s replacement and renewal (at the earliest in 2023) by American F-16 warplanes. The transaction would also include the remnants of Slovakia&#x27;s Soviet-era T-72 tanks. Czech PM Peter Fiala agreed with this initiative, which had been proposed by Ukrainian President Zelensky. The transaction was set to occur in September 2022. In April 2023 it was confirmed that 13 Mig-29 fighters and 30 BVP-1 infantry fighting vehicles were delivered to Ukraine by Slovakia.

==International human rights criticism==

In June 2020, Slovakia openly opposed the Hong Kong national security law.

==Diplomatic relations==
List of countries which Slovakia maintains diplomatic relations with:
==Bilateral relations== 
===Multilateral===

===Africa===
===Americas===
===Asia===
===Europe===
===Oceania===
==See also==
* List of diplomatic missions in Slovakia
* Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Slovakia)
* Slovak passport

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="4" end="19" title="Slovak Republic" label="Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="41" end="55" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="218" end="253" title="September 11, 2001 Terrorist Attack" label="September 11, 2001 Terrorist Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="261" end="274" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="412" end="423" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="426" end="441" title="Slovak Republic" label="Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="461" end="475" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="544" end="595" title="Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="608" end="632" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="648" end="652" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q244323" start="677" end="691" title="Visegrád Group" label="Visegrád Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="703" end="710" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="712" end="726" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="732" end="738" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="789" end="804" title="Slovak Republic" label="Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q218819" start="843" end="856" title="Customs Union" label="Customs Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="966" end="981" title="Slovak Republic" label="Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889" start="992" end="1012" title="diplomacy" label="diplomatic relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="1081" end="1094" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="1218" end="1232" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="1257" end="1272" title="Slovak Republic" label="Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="1278" end="1293" title="Slovak Republic" label="Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q224693" start="1685" end="1722" title="Gabčíkovo - Nagymaros Dams" label="Gabcikovo-Nagymaros hydroelectric dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="1741" end="1747" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="1801" end="1828" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46227987" start="1860" end="1872" title="Eduard Heger" label="Eduard Heger"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="1928" end="1942" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="2049" end="2056" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q130681" start="2084" end="2090" title="MiG-29" label="MiG-29"/>
<link wikidata="Q100026" start="2203" end="2207" title="F-16" label="F-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q155658" start="2297" end="2301" title="T-72" label="T-72"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377548" start="2318" end="2329" title="Peter Fiala" label="Peter Fiala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874799" start="2396" end="2414" title="President Zelensky" label="President Zelensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q95976070" start="2687" end="2718" title="2020 Hong Kong national security law" label="Hong Kong national security law"/>
<link wikidata="Q12278794" start="2942" end="2981" title="List of diplomatic missions in Slovakia" label="List of diplomatic missions in Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499939" start="2984" end="3022" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Slovakia)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Slovakia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281493" start="3025" end="3040" title="Slovak passport" label="Slovak passport"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27337" wikidata="Q103917" url="?curid=27337" title="Steven Soderbergh">
<text>Steven Andrew Soderbergh ( ; born January 14, 1963) is an American film director, producer, screenwriter, cinematographer, and editor. A pioneer of modern independent cinema, Soderbergh later drew acclaim for formally inventive films made within the studio system.

Soderbergh&#x27;s directorial breakthrough, the indie drama &quot;Sex, Lies, and Videotape&quot; (1989), lifted him into the public spotlight as a notable presence in the film industry. At 26, Soderbergh became the youngest solo director to win the Palme d&#x27;Or at the Cannes Film Festival, and the film garnered worldwide commercial success, as well as numerous accolades. His next five films, including the critically lauded &quot;King of the Hill&quot; (1993), found limited commercial success. He pivoted into more mainstream fare with the crime comedy &quot;Out of Sight&quot; (1998), the biopic &quot;Erin Brockovich&quot; (2000) and the crime drama &quot;Traffic&quot; (2000). For &quot;Traffic&quot;, he won the Academy Award for Best Director.

Soderbergh found further popular and critical success with the &quot;Ocean&#x27;s&quot; trilogy and film franchise (2001–18), &quot;Che&quot; (2008), &quot;The Informant!&quot; (2009), &quot;Contagion&quot; (2011), &quot;Haywire&quot; (2011), the &quot;Magic Mike&quot; trilogy (2012-23), &quot;Side Effects&quot; (2013), &quot;Behind the Candelabra&quot; (2013), &quot;Logan Lucky&quot; (2017), &quot;Unsane&quot; (2018), &quot;Let Them All Talk&quot; (2020), &quot;No Sudden Move&quot; (2021), and &quot;Kimi&quot; (2022). His film career spans a multitude of genres but his specialties are psychological, crime, and heist films. His films have grossed over US$2.2 billion worldwide and garnered fourteen Academy Award nominations, winning five.

Soderbergh&#x27;s films often revolve around familiar concepts which are regularly used for big-budget Hollywood movies, but he routinely employs an avant-garde arthouse approach. They center on themes of shifting personal identities, vengeance, sexuality, morality, and the human condition. His feature films are often distinctive in the realm of cinematography as a result of his having been influenced by avant-garde cinema, coupled with his use of unconventional film and camera formats. Many of Soderbergh&#x27;s films are anchored by multi-dimensional storylines with plot twists, nonlinear storytelling, experimental sequencing, suspenseful soundscapes, and third-person vantage points.

==Early life==
Soderbergh was born on January 14, 1963, in Atlanta, Georgia, to Mary Ann () and Peter Andrew Soderbergh, who was a university administrator and educator. Soderbergh has Swedish, Irish, and Italian roots. His paternal grandfather immigrated to the U.S. from Stockholm.

As a child, he moved with his family to Charlottesville, Virginia, where he lived during his adolescence, and then to Baton Rouge, Louisiana, where his father became Dean of Education at Louisiana State University (LSU). Soderbergh discovered filmmaking as a teenager and directed short films with a Super 8 and 16 mm cameras. He attended the Louisiana State University Laboratory School for high school before graduating and moving to Hollywood to pursue professional filmmaking.

In his first job, he worked as a game show composer and cue card holder; soon after which he found work as a freelance film editor. During this time, he directed the concert video &quot;9012Live&quot; for the rock band Yes in 1985, for which he received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Music Video, Long Form.

== Career ==
=== 1989: directorial debut ===
After Soderbergh returned to Baton Rouge, he wrote the screenplay for &quot;Sex, Lies, and Videotape&quot; on a legal pad during an eight-day cross-country drive. The film tells the story of a troubled man who videotapes women discussing their lives and sexuality, and his impact on the relationship of a married couple. Soderbergh submitted &quot;Sex, Lies, and Videotape&quot; to the 1989 Cannes Film Festival where, at age 26, he became the youngest solo director to win the Palme d&#x27;Or, the top prize. Its critical performance led it to become a worldwide commercial success, grossing $36.7 million on a $1.2 million budget.

&quot;Sex, Lies, and Videotape&quot; is considered to be the most influential catalyst of the 1990s Independent Cinema movement. Film critic Roger Ebert called Soderbergh the &quot;poster boy of the Sundance generation&quot;. His relative youth and sudden rise to prominence in the film industry had him referred to as a &quot;sensation&quot; and a prodigy. In 2006, &quot;Sex, Lies, and Videotape&quot; was selected by the Library of Congress for preservation in the United States National Film Registry, being deemed &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant&quot; and the American Film Institute nominated it as one of the greatest movies ever made.

=== 1990–1997: critical and commercial downturn ===

Soderbergh&#x27;s directorial debut was followed by a series of low-budget box-office disappointments. In 1991, he directed &quot;Kafka,&quot; a biographical film of Franz Kafka written by Lem Dobbs and starring Jeremy Irons. The film returned one tenth of its budget and received mixed reviews from critics. Roger Ebert&#x27;s review stated: &quot;Soderbergh does demonstrate again here that he&#x27;s a gifted director, however unwise in his choice of project&quot;. Two years later, he directed the drama &quot;King of the Hill&quot; (1993), which again underperformed commercially, but fared well with critics. Based on the memoir of writer A. E. Hotchner, the film is set during the Great Depression and follows a young boy (played by Jesse Bradford) struggling to survive on his own in a hotel in St. Louis after his mother falls ill and his father is away on business trips. Also in 1995, he directed a remake of Robert Siodmak&#x27;s 1949 film noir &quot;Criss Cross&quot;, titled &quot;The Underneath&quot;, which grossed $536,020 on a $6.5 million budget and was widely panned by critics. Soderbergh has since called the film &quot;dead on arrival&quot; and described the making of it as his bottoming out.

Soderbergh, formerly a member of Writers Guild of America West, left and maintained financial core status in 1995.

Soderbergh directed &quot;Schizopolis&quot; in 1996, a comedy which he starred in, wrote, composed and shot as well as directed. The film was submitted to the Cannes Film Festival to such a &quot;chilly response&quot; that he reworked the entire introduction and conclusion before releasing it commercially. In the movie&#x27;s introduction, he said: &quot;In the event that you find certain sequences or events confusing, please bear in mind this is your fault, not ours. You will need to see the picture again and again until you understand everything&quot;. He starred in &quot;Schizopolis&quot; as Fletcher Munson, a spokesman for a Scientology-esque lifestyle cult, and again as Dr. Jeffrey Korchek, a dentist having an affair with Munson&#x27;s wife. The film switched languages multiple times mid-scene without subtitles, leaving large parts of it incomprehensible. It was viewed by a critic as a &quot;directorial palate cleanse&quot; for Soderbergh. During the months following his debut of &quot;Schizopolis&quot;, he released a small, edited version of the Spalding Gray monologue film &quot;Gray&#x27;s Anatomy.&quot; Soderbergh would later refer to &quot;Schizopolis&quot; as his &quot;artistic wake-up call&quot;. Soderbergh co-wrote the script for the 1997 horror-thriller &quot;Nightwatch&quot; with Danish filmmaker Ole Bornedal. &quot;Nightwatch&quot; is an English-language remake of Bornedal&#x27;s own film of the same name, which was produced three years earlier in Denmark.

===1998–2008: reemergence and &quot;Ocean&#x27;s&quot; trilogy===
Soderbergh&#x27;s reemergence began in 1998 with &quot;Out of Sight&quot;, a stylized adaptation of an Elmore Leonard novel, written by Scott Frank and starring George Clooney and Jennifer Lopez. The film was widely praised, though only a moderate box-office success. The critical reception of the movie began a multi-movie artistic partnership between Clooney and Soderbergh. Soderbergh followed up on the success of &quot;Out of Sight&quot; by making another crime caper, &quot;The Limey&quot; (1999), from a screenplay by Lem Dobbs and starring actors Terence Stamp and Peter Fonda. The film was well-received and established him within the cinematic niche of thriller and heist films. He ventured into his first biographical film in 2000 when he directed &quot;Erin Brockovich&quot;, written by Susannah Grant and starring Julia Roberts in her Oscar-winning role as a single mother taking on industry in a civil action. In late 2000, Soderbergh released &quot;Traffic&quot;, a social drama written by Stephen Gaghan and featuring an ensemble cast. &quot;Time&quot; compared him to a baseball player hitting home runs with &quot;Erin Brockovich&quot; and &quot;Traffic&quot;. Both films would be nominated at the 2001 Academy Awards, making him the first director to have been nominated in the same year for Best Director for two different films since Michael Curtiz in 1938. He was awarded the Academy Award for Best Director for &quot;Traffic&quot; and received best director nominations at the year&#x27;s Golden Globe and the Directors Guild of America Awards.
In early 2001, he was approached to direct &quot;Ocean&#x27;s Eleven&quot;, a reboot of the 1960s Rat Pack-movie &quot;Ocean&#x27;s 11&quot; written by Ted Griffin. After Griffin wrote the screenplay, Soderbergh signed on to direct. The film opened to critical acclaim and widespread commercial success. It quickly became Soderbergh&#x27;s highest-grossing movie to date, grossing more than $183 million domestically and more than $450 million worldwide. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; credited the movie with &quot;[spawning] a new era of heist movies&quot;. In the same year, Soderbergh made &quot;Full Frontal&quot;, which was shot mostly on digital video in an improvisational style that deliberately blurred the line between which actors were playing characters and which were playing fictionalized versions of themselves. A year later, he was asked by executives at Warner Bros Studios to direct the psychological thriller &quot;Insomnia&quot; (2002), starring Academy Award winners Al Pacino, Robin Williams, and Hilary Swank. Despite their insistence, Soderbergh declined, preferring to see it directed by up-and-coming director Christopher Nolan.

Before returning to the &quot;Ocean&#x27;s&quot; series, Soderbergh directed &quot;K Street&quot; (2003), a ten-part political HBO series he co-produced with George Clooney. The series was both partially improvised and each episode being produced in the five days prior to airing to take advantage of topical events that could be worked into the fictional narrative. Actual political players appeared as themselves, either in cameos or portraying fictionalized versions of themselves, notably James Carville and Mary Matalin. Soderbergh directed &quot;Ocean&#x27;s Twelve&quot;, a sequel to &quot;Ocean&#x27;s Eleven&quot;, in 2004. The second installment received muted critical reviews, and was another commercially successful film, grossing $362.7 million on a $110 million budget. Matt Singer of &quot;IndieWire&quot; called it a &quot;Great Sequel About How Hard It Is to Make a Great Sequel.&quot; Also in 2004, Soderbergh produced and co-wrote the adapted screenplay for the film &quot;Criminal&quot;—a remake of the Argentine film &quot;Nine Queens&quot;—with his longtime assistant director Gregory Jacobs, who made his directorial debut with the film.

A year later, Soderbergh directed &quot;Bubble&quot; (2005), a $1.6 million film featuring a cast of nonprofessional actors. It opened in selected theaters and HDNet simultaneously, and four days later on DVD. Industry heads were reportedly watching how the film performed, as its unusual release schedule could have implications for future feature films. Theater-owners, who at the time had been suffering from dropping attendance rates, did not welcome so-called &quot;day-and-date&quot; movies. National Association of Theatre Owners chief executive John Fithian indirectly called the film&#x27;s release model &quot;the biggest threat to the viability of the cinema industry today.&quot; Soderbergh&#x27;s response to such criticism: &quot;I don&#x27;t think it&#x27;s going to destroy the movie-going experience any more than the ability to get takeout has destroyed the restaurant business.&quot; A romantic drama set in post-war Berlin, &quot;The Good German&quot;, starring Cate Blanchett and Clooney, was released in late 2006. The film performed poorly commercially grossing $5.9 million worldwide against a budget of $32 million.

Soderbergh next directed &quot;Ocean&#x27;s Thirteen&quot;, which was released in June 2007 to further commercial success and increased critical acclaim. Grossing $311.3 million on an $85 million budget, it is the second highest-grossing film of his career after the first &quot;Ocean&#x27;s&quot;. The film concluded what would later be known as the &quot;Ocean&#x27;s&quot; trilogy, a collection of heist movies that would go on to be described as defining a new era of heist films. Soderbergh directed &quot;Che&quot;, which was released in theaters in two parts, titled &quot;The Argentine&quot; and &quot;Guerrilla&quot;, and was presented in the main competition of the 2008 Cannes Film Festival, on May 22. Benicio del Toro played the Argentine guerrilla Ernesto &quot;Che&quot; Guevara in an epic four-hour double bill which looks first at his role in the Cuban Revolution before moving to his campaign and eventual death in Bolivia. Soderbergh shot his feature film &quot;The Girlfriend Experience&quot; in New York in 2008. Soderbergh cast adult film star Sasha Grey as the film&#x27;s lead actress to great reception and controversy.

===2009–2016: mainstream success and brief hiatus===
Soderbergh&#x27;s first film of 2009 was &quot;The Informant!&quot;, a black comedy starring Matt Damon as corporate whistleblower Mark Whitacre. Whitacre wore a wire for years for the FBI as a high-level executive at a Fortune 500 company, Archer Daniels Midland (ADM), in one of the largest price-fixing cases in history. The film was released on September 18, 2009. The script for the movie was written by Scott Z. Burns based on Kurt Eichenwald&#x27;s book, &quot;The Informant&quot;. The film grossed $41 million on a $22 million budget and received generally favorable reviews from critics. Also in 2009, Soderbergh shot a small improvised film with the cast of the play, &quot;The Last Time I Saw Michael Gregg&quot;, a comedy about a theatre company staging Chekhov&#x27;s &quot;Three Sisters&quot;. He has stated that he does not want it seen by the public, and only intended it for the cast. Soderbergh nearly filmed a feature adaptation of the baseball book &quot;&quot;, starring Brad Pitt and Jonah Hill. The book, by Michael Lewis, tells of how Billy Beane, general manager of Oakland Athletics, used statistical analysis to make up for what he lacked in funds to beat the odds and lead his team to a series of notable wins in 2002. Disagreements between Sony and Soderbergh about revisions to Steven Zaillian&#x27;s version of the screenplay led to Soderbergh&#x27;s dismissal from the project only days prior to filming in June 2009. In 2010, Soderbergh shot the action-thriller &quot;Haywire&quot;, starring Gina Carano, Ewan McGregor, Michael Fassbender and Channing Tatum which, even though was shot in early 2010, was not released until January 2012.
In 2010, Soderbergh shot the epic virus thriller &quot;Contagion&quot;, written by Scott Z. Burns. With a cast including Matt Damon, Kate Winslet, Gwyneth Paltrow, Laurence Fishburne, Marion Cotillard and Jude Law, the film follows the outbreak of a lethal pandemic across the globe and the efforts of doctors and scientists to discover the cause and develop a cure. Soderbergh premiered it at the 68th Venice Film Festival in Venice, Italy on September 3, 2011, and released it to the general public six days later to commercial success and widespread critical acclaim. Grossing $135.5 million on a $60 million budget, Manohla Dargis of &quot;The New York Times&quot; called his film a &quot;smart, spooky thriller about a thicket of contemporary plagues—a killer virus, rampaging fear, an unscrupulous blogger—is as ruthlessly effective as the malady at its cool, cool center.&quot;

In August 2011, Soderbergh served as a second unit director on &quot;The Hunger Games&quot; and filmed much of the District 11 riot scene. In September and October 2011, he shot &quot;Magic Mike&quot;, a film starring Channing Tatum, about the actor&#x27;s experiences working as a male stripper in his youth. Tatum played the title mentor character, while Alex Pettyfer played a character based on Tatum. The film was released on June 29, 2012, to a strong commercial performance and favorable critical acclaim. Throughout 2012, Soderbergh had announced his intention to retire from feature filmmaking. He stated that &quot;when you reach the point where you&#x27;re saying, &#x27;If I have to get into a van to do another scout, I&#x27;m just going to shoot myself,&#x27; it&#x27;s time to let somebody who&#x27;s still excited about getting in the van, get in the van.&quot; Soderbergh later said that he would retire from filmmaking and begin to explore painting. A few weeks later, Soderbergh played down his earlier comments, saying a filmmaking &quot;sabbatical&quot; was more accurate. For his then-final feature film, he directed the psychological thriller &quot;Side Effects&quot;, which starred Jude Law, Rooney Mara, Channing Tatum and Catherine Zeta-Jones. It was shot in April 2012 and was released on February 8, 2013. Screened at the 63rd Berlin International Film Festival, A. O. Scott of &quot;The New York Times&quot; stated that Soderbergh &quot;[handled] it brilliantly, serving notice once again that he is a crackerjack genre technician.&quot; In the end, while promoting &quot;Side Effects&quot; in early 2013, he clarified that he had a five-year plan that saw him transitioning away from making feature films around his fiftieth birthday. Around that time, he gave a much publicized speech at the San Francisco International Film Festival, detailing the obstacles facing filmmakers in the current corporate Hollywood environment.

Soderbergh had planned to commence production in early 2012 on a feature version of &quot;The Man from U.N.C.L.E.&quot;, also written by Scott Z. Burns. George Clooney was set for the lead role of Napoleon Solo but had to drop out due to a recurring back injury suffered while filming &quot;Syriana&quot;. In November 2011 Soderbergh withdrew from the project due to budget and casting conflicts, and was eventually replaced by Guy Ritchie. His final televised project before heading into retirement was &quot;Behind the Candelabra&quot;. Shot in the summer of 2012, it starred Michael Douglas as legendarily flamboyant pianist Liberace and Matt Damon as his lover Scott Thorson. The film is written by Richard LaGravenese, based on Thorson&#x27;s book &quot;Behind the Candelabra: My Life with Liberace&quot;, and produced by HBO Films. It was selected to compete for the Palme d&#x27;Or at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival.

In May 2013—only months into his retirement—Soderbergh announced that he would direct a ten-part miniseries for Cinemax called &quot;The Knick&quot;. The series followed doctors at a fictionalized version of the Knickerbocker Hospital in Manhattan in the early twentieth century. The series starred Clive Owen, Andre Holland, Jeremy Bobb, Juliet Rylance, Eve Hewson and Michael Angarano and was filmed in 2013. It began airing in August 2014 to critical acclaim. After completing the second season, Soderbergh revealed he was finished directing for the show, and said: &quot;I told them [Cinemax] that I&#x27;m going to do the first two years and then we are going to break out the story for seasons 3 and 4 and try and find a filmmaker or filmmakers to do this the way that I did. This is how we want to do this so that every two years, whoever comes on, has the freedom to create their universe.&quot; 

After his work with &quot;The Knick&quot;, Soderbergh began working on a variety of personal projects starting with directing an Off-Broadway play titled &quot;The Library&quot;, starring Chloë Grace Moretz in January 2014. 
On February 24, 2014, Soderbergh released a mash-up of Alfred Hitchcock&#x27;s &quot;Psycho&quot; (1960) and Gus Van Sant&#x27;s 1998 shot-by-shot remake on his website, titled &quot;Psychos&quot;.
On April 21, 2014, Soderbergh released an alternate cut of Michael Cimino&#x27;s controversial 1980 Western &quot;Heaven&#x27;s Gate&quot; on his website. Credited to his pseudonym Mary Ann Bernard and dubbed &quot;The Butcher&#x27;s Cut&quot;, Soderbergh&#x27;s version runs 108 minutes. On September 22, 2014, he uploaded a black-and-white silent version of &quot;Raiders of the Lost Ark&quot;, with Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross&#x27;s score of &quot;The Social Network&quot;. The purpose of it is to study the aspects of staging in filmmaking. It was announced in June 2014 that Soderbergh would be executive producing a series based on his earlier film &quot;The Girlfriend Experience&quot; for the Starz network, to premiere sometime in 2016. In September 2015, Soderbergh was announced to be directing &quot;Mosaic&quot;, a series for HBO. Starring Sharon Stone, it was a dual-media project; it was released as both an interactive movie app in November 2017 and as a six-part miniseries airing in January 2018.

=== 2016–present: return to filmmaking ===
In February 2016, Soderbergh officially came out of his retirement to direct a NASCAR heist film, &quot;Logan Lucky&quot;, starring Channing Tatum, Adam Driver, and Daniel Craig, among others. The film was produced entirely by Soderbergh, with no studio involved in anything other than theatrical distribution. The film was released on August 18, 2017, by Bleecker Street and Fingerprint Releasing, his own distribution and production company. &quot;Logan Lucky&quot; was met with widespread critical acclaim, Matt Zoller Seitz writing for RogerEbert.com stated: &quot;The odds seem stacked in &quot;Logan Lucky&quot;&#x27;s favor the instant you spot &#x27;Directed by Steven Soderbergh&#x27; in the opening credits&quot;.

In July 2017, it was revealed that Soderbergh had also secretly shot a horror film using iPhones titled &quot;Unsane&quot;, and starring Claire Foy and Juno Temple. The film was released on March 23, 2018 and was well received by critics, with Scott Meslow of &quot;GQ&quot; noting its relevance to the modern plight of women in patriarchal societies, and called it a &quot;nerve-jangling modern-day Kafka story&quot;. His usage of an iPhone in 4K to film the movie was considered &quot;inspirational to aspiring filmmakers&quot; for breaking down the perceived costs associated with producing a feature film in the United States.

In 2018, Soderbergh directed &quot;High Flying Bird&quot;, starring Andre Holland who played the role of a sports agent representing his rookie client with an intriguing and controversial business opportunity during an NBA lockout. The film began production in February 2018 and was released on February 8, 2019, by Netflix. Soderbergh&#x27;s film &quot;The Laundromat&quot; is a political thriller about the international leak of the Panama Papers, written by Scott Z. Burns and based on the book &quot;Secrecy World&quot;, by Pulitzer Prize-winner Jake Bernstein. It stars Meryl Streep, Gary Oldman, Antonio Banderas, Jeffrey Wright, Matthias Schoenaerts, James Cromwell and Sharon Stone and premiered at the Venice Film Festival on September 1, 2019 before airing on Netflix. Soderbergh&#x27;s 2020 film &quot;Let Them All Talk&quot;, was written by Deborah Eisenberg, and starred Meryl Streep, Candice Bergen, Gemma Chan, Lucas Hedges and Dianne Wiest. It was shot in 2019, primarily aboard the ocean liner , and also in New York and the UK, and premiered on December 10, 2020, on HBO Max.

&quot;No Sudden Move&quot; (formerly &quot;Kill Switch&quot;) is a 1950s period crime film shot in Detroit from September to November 2020. From &quot;Mosaic&quot; writer Ed Solomon, it stars Don Cheadle, Benicio del Toro, David Harbour, Amy Seimetz, Jon Hamm, Ray Liotta, Kieran Culkin, Brendan Fraser, Noah Jupe, Bill Duke, Frankie Shaw and Julia Fox. It had its world premiere at the Tribeca Film Festival on June 18, 2021. It was released on HBO Max on July 1, 2021. &quot;Kimi&quot;, released on HBO Max in 2022, was shot in Seattle and Los Angeles in April and May 2021. It stars Zoë Kravitz as an agoraphobic tech worker who discovers evidence of a violent crime, and reunites Soderbergh with &quot;Traffic&quot; actors Erika Christensen and Jacob Vargas. &quot;Magic Mike&#x27;s Last Dance&quot;, was filmed in London in early 2022. This third episode in the &quot;Magic Mike&quot; franchise brought back Channing Tatum and also introduced Salma Hayek to the series. The film was originally set to premiere on HBO Max, but was instead released in theaters on February 10, 2023.

&quot;Full Circle&quot; is a six-part miniseries starring Zazie Beetz, Claire Danes, Jharrel Jerome and Timothy Olyphant. It was written by Ed Solomon, who also wrote &quot;Mosaic&quot;, and follows &quot;an investigation into a botched kidnapping&quot; that &quot;uncovers long-held secrets connecting multiple characters and cultures in present-day New York City&quot;. It premiered on Max on July 13, 2023. Also in July 2023, Soderbergh debuted his science fiction web series &quot;Command Z&quot;, which is inspired by Kurt Andersen&#x27;s 2020 book, &quot;Evil Geniuses: The Unmaking of America&quot;. His film, &quot;Presence&quot;, a haunted house thriller starring Lucy Liu and Julia Fox, premiered at the 2024 Sundance Film Festival. Soderbergh filmed the upcoming spy thriller &quot;Black Bag&quot;, written by &quot;Kimi&quot; and &quot;Presence&quot; screenwriter David Koepp and starring Cate Blanchett and Michael Fassbender, from May to June 2024 in London. He also produced the off-broadway play &quot;The Fears&quot;, his first stage credit. His next film, &quot;The Christophers&quot;, a dark comedy from &quot;Full Circle&quot; writer Solomon, starts filming in London in February 2025, starring Ian McKellen, Michaela Coel and James Corden.

== Filmmaking ==
===Style===

Soderbergh&#x27;s visual style often emphasizes wealthy urban settings, natural lighting, and fast-paced working environments. Film critic Drew Morton has categorized his stylistic approach to films akin to the French New Wave movement in filmmaking. Soderbergh&#x27;s experimental style and tendency to reject mainstream film standards stems from his belief that &quot;[filmmakers] are always, in essence, at the beginning of infinity... there is always another iteration... always will be.&quot;

On a technical level, Soderbergh prefers sustained close-ups, tracking shots, jump cuts, experimental sequencing and frequently skips establishing shots in favor of audio and alternative visuals. Many of his films are noted for a milieu of suspense through the usage of third-person vantage points and a variety of over-the-shoulder shots. In his film &quot;Contagion&quot; (2011), he used a multi-narrative &quot;hyperlink cinema&quot; style, first established within the &quot;Ocean&#x27;s&quot; trilogy&quot;.&quot; He is known for tracking aesthetic transitions with a variety of colored washes, most notably yellow to symbolize open, socially acceptable situations while blue washes typically symbolize illegal or socially illicit endeavors. In line with these washes, Soderbergh is liberal in his usage of montages as he believes that they are equally important story-telling as dialogue.

Soderbergh is known for having a combative relationship with Hollywood and the standards of studio filmmaking. Film critic Roger Ebert has commented in this stylistic antagonism, &quot;Every once in a while, perhaps as an exercise in humility, Steven Soderbergh makes a truly inexplicable film... A film so amateurish that only the professionalism of some of the actors makes it watchable... It&#x27;s the kind of film where you need the director telling you what he meant to do and what went wrong and how the actors screwed up and how there was no money for retakes, etc.&quot;

In &quot;Ocean&#x27;s Twelve&quot; (2004), he had actress Julia Roberts play the part of Tess, a character then forced to play a fictionalized version of Roberts. During the production stages of &quot;The Girlfriend Experience&quot; (2009) he cast adult film star Sasha Grey in the lead role. In &quot;Haywire&quot; (2011), Soderbergh cast and eventually launched the film career of professional mixed martial arts (MMA) fighter Gina Carano. Soderbergh&#x27;s &quot;Logan Lucky&quot; (2017) made reference to his trilogy by alluding to an &quot;Ocean&#x27;s 7–11&quot;, noting the trilogy&#x27;s influence on the Southern heist film. 

Soderbergh&#x27;s films are centered on suspenseful and ambient soundscapes. A primary way he achieves suspenseful soundscapes is by introducing audio before visuals in cut scenes, alerting the viewer of a sudden change in tone. His frequent collaborations with composers Cliff Martinez, David Holmes, and most recently Thomas Newman, provide his films with &quot;the thematic and sonic landscapes into which he inserts his characters.&quot;

=== Method ===

Soderbergh&#x27;s early films—on account of his youth and lack of resources—were primarily filmed on Super 8 and 16 mm film formats. A variety of his feature films have been shot using a diverse range of camera equipment. He filmed all of &quot;The Girlfriend Experience&quot; (2009) on a Red One camera, which has retailed for $17,500—a relatively inexpensive camera for a movie produced for $1.3 million. Soderbergh filmed the entirety of &quot;Unsane&quot; (2018) on an iPhone 7 Plus with its 4K digital camera using the app FiLMiC Pro. He filmed with three rotating iPhones using a DJI stabiliser to hold the phone in place. In January 2018, he expressed an interest in filming other productions solely with iPhones going forward. He then filmed the entirety of 2019&#x27;s &quot;High Flying Bird&quot; on an iPhone 8.

In addition to his directing, he is frequently a screenwriter for his films. Scott Tobias of &quot;The A. V. Club&quot; has noted his method of experimental filmmaking as &quot;rigorously conceived, like a mathematician working out a byzantine equation&quot;. Starting in 2000 with his film &quot;Traffic&quot;, when directing films Soderbergh has used various pseudonyms in order to hide the fact that he edits, writes, and arranges.

When working with actors, Soderbergh prefers to pursue a non-intrusive directorial style. &quot;I try and make sure they&#x27;re OK, and when they&#x27;re in the zone, I leave them alone. I don&#x27;t get in their way&quot;. This method has attracted repeat performances by many high-profile movie stars which has established a reoccurring collaboration between them and Soderbergh.

=== Themes ===
Soderbergh&#x27;s films often center the themes of shifting personal identities, sexuality, and the human condition. Richard Brody of &quot;The New Yorker&quot; stated that Soderbergh is focused on the process of presenting ideas through film rather than their actual realization. In line with this actual realization, he presents themes to critically evaluate political and corporate institutions such as money and capitalism. Film critic A. O. Scott has noted that Soderbergh has a critical interest in exploring the impact capitalist economies have on living an ethical life and the detractions associated with materialism. Money is central to many of his movies as Soderbergh believes that it serves as an obsession unrivaled by any other. 

Starting with &quot;Out of Sight&quot; (1998), Soderbergh&#x27;s heist films explore themes of vengeance, characters on a mission, and the morality of crime. He is generally said to have a cinematic niche in these types of films. &quot;I&#x27;ve always had an attraction to caper movies, and certainly there are analogies to making a film. You have to put the right crew together, and if you lose, you go to movie jail&quot;, the director noted in 2017.

=== Influences ===
When asked about the top eleven films he regarded among the best, Soderbergh listed the following, in order: &quot;The 5,000 Fingers of Dr. T.&quot; (1953), &quot;All The President&#x27;s Men&quot; (1976), &quot;Annie Hall&quot; (1977), &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; (1941), &quot;The Conversation&quot; (1974), &quot;The Godfather&quot; (1972), &quot;The Godfather Part II&quot; (1974), &quot;Jaws&quot; (1975), &quot;The Last Picture Show&quot; (1971), &quot;Sunset Boulevard&quot; (1950) and &quot;The Third Man&quot; (1949). His directorial debut, &quot;Sex, Lies, and Videotape&quot; (1989), was influenced by Mike Nichols&#x27; 1971 American comedy-drama &quot;Carnal Knowledge&quot;. He has said that Peter Yates&#x27; 1972 crime-comedy &quot;The Hot Rock&quot; inspired the tone of the &quot;Ocean&#x27;s&quot; films. Soderbergh listed Costa-Gavras&#x27;s film, &quot;Z&quot; as an inspiration on his film &quot;Traffic&quot; and even stated that he: &quot;wanted to make it like [Costa-Gavras]&#x27;s &quot;Z&quot;&quot;. Soderbergh also cites the Swiss-French director Jean-Luc Godard as &quot;...a constant source of inspiration. Before I do anything, I go back and look at as many of his films as I can, as a reminder of what&#x27;s possible&quot;.

== Entrepreneurship ==
In 2018, Soderbergh launched a Bolivian grape spirit brand called &quot;Singani 63&quot;. In 2014, he had teamed up with a distillery based in Tarija, Casa Real and became the sole exporter of the spirit from the mountains of Bolivia. Singani is a traditional spirit of Bolivia, and Soderbergh doesn&#x27;t like to label singani a brandy, because he says, &quot;Millennials hate brandy.&quot; To demonstrate this, he created a very short iPhone/YouTube video, &quot;Brandy VS Singani 63&quot;, that asks people to give their thoughts regarding brandy and Singani 63.

== Recurring collaborators ==

Soderbergh has worked with various actors, composers, and screenwriters throughout his filmmaking career. His most prolific collaborators are considered to be George Clooney (who started Section Eight Productions with him and has appeared in six of his films), Matt Damon (his most frequent collaborator, who has appeared in nine of his films), Brad Pitt, Julia Roberts, Don Cheadle, and Channing Tatum. Other actors who have appeared in numerous Soderbergh films include Luis Guzmán, Jude Law, Ann Dowd, Joe Chrest, Benicio Del Toro, Catherine Zeta-Jones, Michael Douglas and Albert Finney. Among those who have won awards for their work with Soderbergh, Roberts won an Academy Award for Best Actress for her lead in &quot;Erin Brockovich&quot;; Benicio del Toro also won an Academy Award for his work in &quot;Traffic&quot;, and later starred as the title role in &quot;Che&quot;. Catherine Zeta-Jones received a Golden Globe nomination for her portrayal of Helena in &quot;Traffic&quot; and reteamed with him for &quot;Ocean&#x27;s Twelve&quot; and &quot;Side Effects&quot;.

Soderbergh has frequently relied on Jerry Weintraub to produce many of his films. Composer Cliff Martinez has scored eleven Soderbergh films starting with &quot;Sex, Lies, and Videotape&quot; (1989) and ending with &quot;Kimi&quot; (2022). Northern Irish composer David Holmes joined him in 1998 to score &quot;Out of Sight&quot; and rejoined him in scoring his &quot;Ocean&#x27;s&quot; trilogy. Soderbergh rejected Holmes&#x27; score for his 2006 film &quot;The Good German&quot;, but brought him back for subsequent movies, most recently &quot;Logan Lucky&quot; (2017). Starting in 2000, composer Thomas Newman has worked with four Soderbergh films, most recently in 2020 with &quot;Let Them All Talk&quot;. Often editing the films himself, he also works with editor Stephen Mirrione and frequently collaborates with screenwriters Scott Z. Burns, Lem Dobbs and Ed Solomon.

==Views on film industry ==
Soderbergh is a vocal proponent of the preservation of artistic merit in the face of Hollywood corporatism. He believes that &quot;cinema is under assault by the studios and, from what I can tell, with the full support of the audience&quot;. He claims that he no longer reads reviews of his movies. &quot;After &quot;Traffic&quot; I just stopped completely&quot;, said the director. &quot;After winning the LA and New York film critics awards, I really felt like, this can only get worse&quot;.

Soderbergh is not a fan of possessory credits, and prefers not to have his name front and center at the start of a film. &quot;The fact that I&#x27;m not an identifiable brand is very freeing,&quot; says Soderbergh, &quot;because people get tired of brands and they switch brands. I&#x27;ve never had a desire to be out in front of anything, which is why I don&#x27;t take a possessory credit.&quot; He often takes cinematography credits on his feature films under the alias Peter Andrews, the given name of his father, and editing credits under Mary Ann Bernard, that of his mother.

In 2009, Soderbergh appeared before the U.S. House Committee on Foreign Affairs, and &quot;cited the French initiative in asking lawmakers to deputize the American film industry to pursue copyright pirates,&quot; indicating he supports anti-piracy laws and Internet regulation.

==Personal life==

Soderbergh married actress Betsy Brantley in 1989; the couple had a daughter together before their 1994 divorce. He has been married to Jules Asner since 2003, whom he often credits for influencing his female characters. He has a daughter, born in 2010, with a woman in Australia, where he was working during a separation from Asner. Soderbergh lives in New York City. His 2023 web series &quot;Command Z&quot; was filmed inside his own home.

In 2009, Soderbergh signed a petition in support of film director Roman Polanski, calling for his release after Polanski was arrested in Switzerland in relation to his 1977 sexual abuse case.

==Filmography==

== Accolades ==
Soderbergh&#x27;s entire filmography is routinely analyzed and debated by fans, critics, film academics, and other film directors. His early work—particularly his 1989 film, &quot;Sex, Lies, and Videotape&quot;—has been noted as foundational to the Independent Cinema movement. After directing his first film, Soderbergh&#x27;s relative youth and sudden rise to prominence in the film industry had him referred to as a &quot;sensation&quot;, a prodigy, and a poster boy of the genre&#x27;s generation. In 2002, he was elected first Vice President of the Directors Guild of America.

After screening &quot;Sex, Lies, and Videotape&quot; at the 1989 Cannes Film Festival, Soderbergh was given the festival&#x27;s top award, the Palme d&#x27;Or. At 26, he was the youngest solo director to win the award and second-youngest director after French directors Louis Malle and co-director Jacques Cousteau (Malle won it aged 23). For his script, Soderbergh received a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay at the 62nd Academy Awards.

Soderbergh was nominated twice for Best Director for two separate films at the 73rd Academy Awards, the first occurrence of such an event since 1938. Apart from his first nomination (&quot;Erin Brockovich&quot;), he won the award for &quot;Traffic&quot;. When the same thing happened at the Directors Guild of America Awards, the Associated Press called the category a &quot;Soderbergh vs. Soderbergh&quot; contest.

For his work of &quot;Erin Brockovich&quot; and &quot;Traffic&quot;, Soderbergh became one of the five directors (alongside Quentin Tarantino, Curtis Hanson, David Fincher, and Barry Jenkins) to ever sweep &quot;The Big Four&quot; critics awards (LAFCA, NBR, NYFCC, NSFC).

==See also==
* Steven Soderbergh&#x27;s unrealized projects

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Waxman, Sharon (2005). &quot;Rebels on the Backlot: Six Maverick Directors and How They Conquered the Hollywood Studio System&quot;. New York: HarperEntertainment. .
* deWaard, Andrew, and R. Colin Tait (2013). &quot;The Cinema of Steven Soderbergh: Indie Sex, Corporate Lies, and Digital Videotape&quot;. New York: Wallflower/Columbia University Press.
* Baker, Aaron (2011). &quot;Steven Soderbergh&quot;. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
* Gallagher, Mark (2013). &quot;Another Steven Soderbergh Experience: Authorship and Contemporary Hollywood&quot;. Austin: University of Texas Press.
* Wood, Jason (2002). &quot;Steven Soderbergh&quot;. Harpenden, UK: Pocket Essentials.
* Palmer, R. Barton, and Steven Sanders (2011). &quot;The Philosophy of Steven Soderbergh&quot;. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky.

==External links==
* 
* 
* Steven Soderbergh Bibliography (via UC Berkeley)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q103917" start="0" end="24" title="Steven Soderbergh" label="Steven Andrew Soderbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="155" end="173" title="Independent film" label="independent cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q11307668" start="250" end="263" title="studio system" label="studio system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367548" start="332" end="356" title="Sex, Lies, and Videotape" label="Sex, Lies, and Videotape"/>
<link wikidata="Q179808" start="515" end="530" title="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="538" end="558" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="623" end="641" title="Sex, Lies, and Videotape#Accolades" label="numerous accolades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630996" start="696" end="724" title="King of the Hill (1993 film)" label="&amp;quot;King of the Hill&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q571183" start="832" end="844" title="Out of Sight" label="Out of Sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q220955" start="876" end="891" title="Erin Brockovich (film)" label="Erin Brockovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q142292" start="931" end="938" title="Traffic (2000 film)" label="Traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="989" end="1020" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Academy Award for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q4463076" start="1086" end="1137" title="Ocean&amp;#x27;s (film series)" label="&amp;quot;Ocean&amp;#x27;s&amp;quot; trilogy and film franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q28039175" start="1155" end="1158" title="Che (2008 film)" label="Che"/>
<link wikidata="Q604083" start="1179" end="1193" title="The Informant!" label="The Informant!"/>
<link wikidata="Q730888" start="1214" end="1223" title="Contagion (2011 film)" label="Contagion"/>
<link wikidata="Q249350" start="1244" end="1251" title="Haywire (2011 film)" label="Haywire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197932" start="1276" end="1286" title="Magic Mike" label="Magic Mike"/>
<link wikidata="Q334763" start="1318" end="1330" title="Side Effects (2013 film)" label="Side Effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893887" start="1351" end="1372" title="Behind the Candelabra" label="Behind the Candelabra"/>
<link wikidata="Q24576050" start="1393" end="1404" title="Logan Lucky" label="Logan Lucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q39071240" start="1425" end="1431" title="Unsane (film)" label="Unsane"/>
<link wikidata="Q66828800" start="1452" end="1469" title="Let Them All Talk (film)" label="Let Them All Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q99796333" start="1490" end="1504" title="No Sudden Move" label="No Sudden Move"/>
<link wikidata="Q106363032" start="1529" end="1533" title="Kimi (film)" label="Kimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q590103" start="1616" end="1629" title="psychological thriller" label="psychological"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937792" start="1631" end="1636" title="Crime fiction" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q496523" start="1642" end="1652" title="heist film" label="heist film"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="1730" end="1743" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="1921" end="1932" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135802" start="1933" end="1941" title="art film" label="arthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254571" start="1986" end="2005" title="Personal identity" label="personal identities"/>
<link wikidata="Q154136" start="2018" end="2027" title="Human sexuality" label="sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124515" start="2047" end="2062" title="human condition" label="human condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q590870" start="2120" end="2134" title="cinematography" label="cinematography"/>
<link wikidata="Q790192" start="2180" end="2198" title="Experimental film" label="avant-garde cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q759853" start="2239" end="2243" title="Film format" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q15328" start="2248" end="2262" title="Camera" label="camera formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321123" start="2346" end="2356" title="plot twist" label="plot twist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894685" start="2359" end="2381" title="Nonlinear narrative" label="nonlinear storytelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q790192" start="2383" end="2406" title="Experimental film" label="experimental sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358257" start="2420" end="2430" title="soundscape" label="soundscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="2526" end="2533" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="2652" end="2659" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="2661" end="2666" title="Irish-American" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2672" end="2679" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="2740" end="2749" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q123766" start="2792" end="2817" title="Charlottesville, Virginia" label="Charlottesville, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28218" start="2870" end="2892" title="Baton Rouge, Louisiana" label="Baton Rouge, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521725" start="2939" end="2965" title="Louisiana State University" label="Louisiana State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642124" start="3052" end="3059" title="Super 8 film camera" label="Super 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q194383" start="3064" end="3077" title="16 mm film" label="16 mm cameras"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689305" start="3095" end="3139" title="Louisiana State University Laboratory School" label="Louisiana State University Laboratory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="3188" end="3197" title="Hollywood (film industry)" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q492264" start="3277" end="3285" title="Film score" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600098" start="3420" end="3428" title="9012Live (video)" label="9012Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q184386" start="3453" end="3456" title="Yes (band)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="3490" end="3502" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992254" start="3518" end="3545" title="Grammy Award for Best Music Film" label="Best Music Video, Long Form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367548" start="3669" end="3693" title="Sex, Lies, and Videotape" label="Sex, Lies, and Videotape"/>
<link wikidata="Q43013" start="3705" end="3714" title="legal pad" label="legal pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q304162" start="3979" end="4004" title="1989 Cannes Film Festival" label="1989 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q179808" start="4071" end="4086" title="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="4327" end="4345" title="Independent film" label="Independent Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="4368" end="4379" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234157" start="4408" end="4418" title="Poster child" label="poster boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="4426" end="4434" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="4651" end="4670" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="4709" end="4731" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="4821" end="4844" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721087" start="5083" end="5088" title="Kafka (film)" label="Kafka"/>
<link wikidata="Q905" start="5119" end="5130" title="Franz Kafka" label="Franz Kafka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816752" start="5142" end="5151" title="Lem Dobbs" label="Lem Dobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q171745" start="5165" end="5177" title="Jeremy Irons" label="Jeremy Irons"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="5262" end="5273" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630996" start="5467" end="5483" title="King of the Hill (1993 film)" label="King of the Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647725" start="5598" end="5612" title="A. E. Hotchner" label="A. E. Hotchner"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="5641" end="5657" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q461238" start="5693" end="5707" title="Jesse Bradford" label="Jesse Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="5756" end="5765" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q51498" start="5873" end="5887" title="Robert Siodmak" label="Robert Siodmak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077169" start="5916" end="5927" title="Criss Cross (1949 film)" label="Criss Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625478" start="5948" end="5962" title="The Underneath (film)" label="The Underneath"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038459" start="6204" end="6233" title="Writers Guild of America West" label="Writers Guild of America West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449698" start="6255" end="6269" title="financial core" label="financial core"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082586" start="6313" end="6324" title="Schizopolis" label="Schizopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="6446" end="6466" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q131036" start="6924" end="6935" title="Scientology" label="Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q321917" start="7355" end="7368" title="Spalding Gray" label="Spalding Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388774" start="7390" end="7409" title="Gray&amp;#x27;s Anatomy (film)" label="Gray&amp;#x27;s Anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265650" start="7581" end="7591" title="Nightwatch (1997 film)" label="Nightwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387470" start="7620" end="7632" title="Ole Bornedal" label="Ole Bornedal"/>
<link wikidata="Q764783" start="7710" end="7731" title="Nightwatch (1994 film)" label="film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q571183" start="7906" end="7918" title="Out of Sight" label="Out of Sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q336519" start="7954" end="7968" title="Elmore Leonard" label="Elmore Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q557208" start="7987" end="7998" title="Scott Frank" label="Scott Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q23844" start="8012" end="8026" title="George Clooney" label="George Clooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q40715" start="8031" end="8045" title="Jennifer Lopez" label="Jennifer Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382199" start="8331" end="8340" title="The Limey" label="The Limey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816752" start="8376" end="8385" title="Lem Dobbs" label="Lem Dobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q77298" start="8406" end="8419" title="Terence Stamp" label="Terence Stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q210148" start="8424" end="8435" title="Peter Fonda" label="Peter Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q201658" start="8495" end="8510" title="Film genre" label="cinematic niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q220955" start="8616" end="8631" title="Erin Brockovich (film)" label="Erin Brockovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q462348" start="8650" end="8664" title="Susannah Grant" label="Susannah Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q40523" start="8678" end="8691" title="Julia Roberts" label="Julia Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="8699" end="8704" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q142292" start="8815" end="8822" title="Traffic (2000 film)" label="Traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971984" start="8856" end="8870" title="Stephen Gaghan" label="Stephen Gaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="8909" end="8913" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="8962" end="8970" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q751924" start="9067" end="9086" title="73rd Academy Awards" label="2001 Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="9162" end="9175" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="9249" end="9280" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Academy Award for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="9363" end="9375" title="Golden Globes" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227533" start="9384" end="9410" title="Directors Guild of America" label="Directors Guild of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q205447" start="9468" end="9487" title="Ocean&amp;#x27;s Eleven" label="Ocean&amp;#x27;s Eleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129029" start="9517" end="9525" title="Rat Pack" label="Rat Pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q464933" start="9538" end="9553" title="Ocean&amp;#x27;s 11" label="Ocean&amp;#x27;s 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517027" start="9571" end="9582" title="Ted Griffin" label="Ted Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="9880" end="9893" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432710" start="10014" end="10026" title="Full Frontal (film)" label="Full Frontal"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="10286" end="10297" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros"/>
<link wikidata="Q429969" start="10349" end="10357" title="Insomnia (2002 film)" label="Insomnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41163" start="10403" end="10412" title="Al Pacino" label="Al Pacino"/>
<link wikidata="Q83338" start="10414" end="10428" title="Robin Williams" label="Robin Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q93187" start="10434" end="10446" title="Hilary Swank" label="Hilary Swank"/>
<link wikidata="Q25191" start="10551" end="10568" title="Christopher Nolan" label="Christopher Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072827" start="10654" end="10662" title="K Street (TV series)" label="K Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="10698" end="10701" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="10997" end="11003" title="Cameo appearance" label="cameos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281204" start="11064" end="11078" title="James Carville" label="James Carville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780270" start="11083" end="11095" title="Mary Matalin" label="Mary Matalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q504053" start="11123" end="11142" title="Ocean&amp;#x27;s Twelve" label="Ocean&amp;#x27;s Twelve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024460" start="11377" end="11386" title="IndieWire" label="IndieWire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271467" start="11564" end="11572" title="Criminal (2004 film)" label="Criminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404323" start="11616" end="11627" title="Nine Queens" label="Nine Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657044" start="11671" end="11685" title="Gregory Jacobs" label="Gregory Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620666" start="11774" end="11780" title="Bubble (2005 film)" label="Bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655211" start="11894" end="11899" title="HDNet" label="HDNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="11939" end="11942" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521373" start="12205" end="12217" title="Simultaneous release" label="day-and-date"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076915" start="12232" end="12270" title="National Association of Theatre Owners" label="National Association of Theatre Owners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415395" start="12397" end="12412" title="Film industry" label="cinema industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470342" start="12684" end="12699" title="The Good German" label="The Good German"/>
<link wikidata="Q80966" start="12716" end="12730" title="Cate Blanchett" label="Cate Blanchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q635632" start="12907" end="12928" title="Ocean&amp;#x27;s Thirteen" label="Ocean&amp;#x27;s Thirteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4463076" start="13227" end="13259" title="Ocean&amp;#x27;s (film series)" label="&amp;quot;Ocean&amp;#x27;s&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28039175" start="13387" end="13390" title="Che (2008 film)" label="Che"/>
<link wikidata="Q193668" start="13590" end="13606" title="Benicio del Toro" label="Benicio del Toro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809" start="13638" end="13669" title="Che Guevara" label="Ernesto &amp;quot;Che&amp;quot; Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264" start="13740" end="13756" title="Cuban Revolution" label="Cuban Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735164" start="13857" end="13882" title="The Girlfriend Experience" label="The Girlfriend Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709" start="13942" end="13952" title="Sasha Grey" label="Sasha Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q604083" start="14122" end="14136" title="The Informant!" label="The Informant!"/>
<link wikidata="Q175535" start="14168" end="14178" title="Matt Damon" label="Matt Damon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294282" start="14206" end="14219" title="Mark Whitacre" label="Mark Whitacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="14260" end="14263" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="14295" end="14306" title="Fortune 500" label="Fortune 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q632694" start="14316" end="14338" title="Archer Daniels Midland" label="Archer Daniels Midland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200230" start="14368" end="14380" title="price-fixing" label="price-fixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446710" start="14508" end="14523" title="Kurt Eichenwald" label="Kurt Eichenwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742003" start="14543" end="14556" title="The Informant (book)" label="The Informant"/>
<link wikidata="Q477823" start="14862" end="14875" title="Three Sisters (play)" label="Three Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q35332" start="15067" end="15076" title="Brad Pitt" label="Brad Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q313388" start="15081" end="15091" title="Jonah Hill" label="Jonah Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q311654" start="15106" end="15119" title="Michael Lewis (author)" label="Michael Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q26122" start="15134" end="15145" title="Billy Beane" label="Billy Beane"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="15166" end="15183" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="15190" end="15210" title="Statistics" label="statistical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q291141" start="15383" end="15398" title="Steven Zaillian" label="Steven Zaillian"/>
<link wikidata="Q249350" start="15576" end="15583" title="Haywire (2011 film)" label="Haywire"/>
<link wikidata="Q233017" start="15600" end="15611" title="Gina Carano" label="Gina Carano"/>
<link wikidata="Q165518" start="15613" end="15626" title="Ewan McGregor" label="Ewan McGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q57147" start="15628" end="15646" title="Michael Fassbender" label="Michael Fassbender"/>
<link wikidata="Q212064" start="15651" end="15665" title="Channing Tatum" label="Channing Tatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q730888" start="15801" end="15810" title="Contagion (2011 film)" label="Contagion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481763" start="15829" end="15843" title="Scott Z. Burns" label="Scott Z. Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q175535" start="15867" end="15877" title="Matt Damon" label="Matt Damon"/>
<link wikidata="Q202765" start="15879" end="15891" title="Kate Winslet" label="Kate Winslet"/>
<link wikidata="Q34460" start="15893" end="15908" title="Gwyneth Paltrow" label="Gwyneth Paltrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q193048" start="15910" end="15928" title="Laurence Fishburne" label="Laurence Fishburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8927" start="15930" end="15946" title="Marion Cotillard" label="Marion Cotillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q160432" start="15951" end="15959" title="Jude Law" label="Jude Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184" start="16003" end="16011" title="pandemic" label="pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337021" start="16144" end="16169" title="68th Venice Film Festival" label="68th Venice Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q730888" start="16288" end="16315" title="Contagion (2011 film)" label="widespread critical acclaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q441327" start="16366" end="16380" title="Manohla Dargis" label="Manohla Dargis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="16390" end="16408" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754994" start="16671" end="16691" title="second unit director" label="second unit director"/>
<link wikidata="Q212965" start="16701" end="16717" title="The Hunger Games (film)" label="The Hunger Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197932" start="16816" end="16826" title="Magic Mike" label="Magic Mike"/>
<link wikidata="Q212064" start="16850" end="16864" title="Channing Tatum" label="Channing Tatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q295592" start="16989" end="17002" title="Alex Pettyfer" label="Alex Pettyfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141246" start="17690" end="17700" title="sabbatical" label="sabbatical"/>
<link wikidata="Q334763" start="17804" end="17816" title="Side Effects (2013 film)" label="Side Effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q160432" start="17838" end="17846" title="Jude Law" label="Jude Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q228766" start="17848" end="17859" title="Rooney Mara" label="Rooney Mara"/>
<link wikidata="Q212064" start="17861" end="17875" title="Channing Tatum" label="Channing Tatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q47664" start="17880" end="17900" title="Catherine Zeta-Jones" label="Catherine Zeta-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090945" start="17982" end="18021" title="63rd Berlin International Film Festival" label="63rd Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q38351" start="18023" end="18034" title="A. O. Scott" label="A. O. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="18044" end="18062" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q334763" start="18233" end="18245" title="Side Effects (2013 film)" label="Side Effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q579634" start="18455" end="18496" title="San Francisco International Film Festival" label="San Francisco International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264983" start="18679" end="18702" title="The Man from U.N.C.L.E." label="The Man from U.N.C.L.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q2481763" start="18726" end="18740" title="Scott Z. Burns" label="Scott Z. Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q23844" start="18742" end="18756" title="George Clooney" label="George Clooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965049" start="18786" end="18799" title="Napoleon Solo" label="Napoleon Solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q687040" start="18880" end="18887" title="Syriana" label="Syriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q192990" start="19017" end="19028" title="Guy Ritchie" label="Guy Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893887" start="19099" end="19120" title="Behind the Candelabra" label="Behind the Candelabra"/>
<link wikidata="Q119798" start="19167" end="19182" title="Michael Douglas" label="Michael Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q347528" start="19217" end="19225" title="Liberace" label="Liberace"/>
<link wikidata="Q175535" start="19230" end="19240" title="Matt Damon" label="Matt Damon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261061" start="19254" end="19267" title="Scott Thorson" label="Scott Thorson"/>
<link wikidata="Q269670" start="19292" end="19311" title="Richard LaGravenese" label="Richard LaGravenese"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19348" end="19392" title="Behind the Candelabra: My Life with Liberace" label="Behind the Candelabra: My Life with Liberace"/>
<link wikidata="Q662081" start="19416" end="19425" title="HBO Films" label="HBO Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q179808" start="19462" end="19477" title="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891443" start="19485" end="19510" title="2013 Cannes Film Festival" label="2013 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q249892" start="19625" end="19632" title="Cinemax" label="Cinemax"/>
<link wikidata="Q16943599" start="19646" end="19655" title="The Knick" label="The Knick"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153206" start="19725" end="19747" title="Knickerbocker Hospital" label="Knickerbocker Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q183178" start="19812" end="19822" title="Clive Owen" label="Clive Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4754805" start="19824" end="19837" title="Andre Holland" label="Andre Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17486466" start="19839" end="19850" title="Jeremy Bobb" label="Jeremy Bobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308903" start="19852" end="19866" title="Juliet Rylance" label="Juliet Rylance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735288" start="19868" end="19878" title="Eve Hewson" label="Eve Hewson"/>
<link wikidata="Q317024" start="19883" end="19899" title="Michael Angarano" label="Michael Angarano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="20548" end="20560" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q48744017" start="20579" end="20590" title="The Library (play)" label="The Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q4509" start="20607" end="20625" title="Chloë Grace Moretz" label="Chloë Grace Moretz"/>
<link wikidata="Q163038" start="20723" end="20748" title="Psycho (1960 film)" label="&amp;quot;Psycho&amp;quot; (1960)"/>
<link wikidata="Q979196" start="20773" end="20777" title="Psycho (1998 film)" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q59129" start="20901" end="20915" title="Michael Cimino" label="Michael Cimino"/>
<link wikidata="Q148204" start="20956" end="20974" title="Heaven&amp;#x27;s Gate (film)" label="Heaven&amp;#x27;s Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q174284" start="21208" end="21231" title="Raiders of the Lost Ark" label="Raiders of the Lost Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q282722" start="21244" end="21256" title="Trent Reznor" label="Trent Reznor"/>
<link wikidata="Q520346" start="21261" end="21273" title="Atticus Ross" label="Atticus Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q185888" start="21296" end="21314" title="The Social Network" label="The Social Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508687" start="21367" end="21374" title="Staging (theatre)" label="staging"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735164" start="21506" end="21531" title="The Girlfriend Experience" label="The Girlfriend Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422698" start="21546" end="21551" title="Starz" label="Starz"/>
<link wikidata="Q43541058" start="21657" end="21663" title="Mosaic (murder mystery)" label="Mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q62975" start="21698" end="21710" title="Sharon Stone" label="Sharon Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635956" start="21768" end="21785" title="interactive movie" label="interactive movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="21983" end="21989" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q24576050" start="22008" end="22019" title="Logan Lucky" label="Logan Lucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q212064" start="22036" end="22050" title="Channing Tatum" label="Channing Tatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678990" start="22052" end="22063" title="Adam Driver" label="Adam Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547" start="22069" end="22081" title="Daniel Craig" label="Daniel Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415356" start="22190" end="22213" title="Film distribution" label="theatrical distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985957" start="22260" end="22275" title="Bleecker Street (company)" label="Bleecker Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q16226322" start="22414" end="22431" title="Matt Zoller Seitz" label="Matt Zoller Seitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588211" start="22444" end="22458" title="RogerEbert.com" label="RogerEbert.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q635115" start="22605" end="22620" title="opening credits" label="opening credits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="22718" end="22725" title="IPhone" label="iPhones"/>
<link wikidata="Q39071240" start="22739" end="22745" title="Unsane" label="Unsane"/>
<link wikidata="Q258999" start="22766" end="22776" title="Claire Foy" label="Claire Foy"/>
<link wikidata="Q234434" start="22781" end="22792" title="Juno Temple" label="Juno Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="22895" end="22897" title="GQ" label="GQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q181339" start="22958" end="22969" title="Patriarchy" label="patriarchal"/>
<link wikidata="Q905" start="23029" end="23034" title="Franz Kafka" label="Kafka"/>
<link wikidata="Q238162" start="23074" end="23076" title="4K resolution" label="4K"/>
<link wikidata="Q50649485" start="23296" end="23312" title="High Flying Bird" label="High Flying Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q4754805" start="23329" end="23342" title="André Holland" label="Andre Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="23480" end="23483" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="23577" end="23584" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q57273426" start="23615" end="23629" title="The Laundromat (2019 film)" label="The Laundromat"/>
<link wikidata="Q23702848" start="23696" end="23709" title="Panama Papers" label="Panama Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481763" start="23722" end="23736" title="Scott Z. Burns" label="Scott Z. Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q25189651" start="23811" end="23825" title="Jake Bernstein (journalist)" label="Jake Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q873" start="23836" end="23848" title="Meryl Streep" label="Meryl Streep"/>
<link wikidata="Q83492" start="23850" end="23861" title="Gary Oldman" label="Gary Oldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q41548" start="23863" end="23879" title="Antonio Banderas" label="Antonio Banderas"/>
<link wikidata="Q343059" start="23881" end="23895" title="Jeffrey Wright" label="Jeffrey Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q427019" start="23897" end="23917" title="Matthias Schoenaerts" label="Matthias Schoenaerts"/>
<link wikidata="Q299483" start="23919" end="23933" title="James Cromwell" label="James Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q62975" start="23938" end="23950" title="Sharon Stone" label="Sharon Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q49024" start="23972" end="23992" title="Venice Film Festival" label="Venice Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q66828800" start="24074" end="24091" title="Let Them All Talk (film)" label="Let Them All Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q528096" start="24114" end="24131" title="Deborah Eisenberg" label="Deborah Eisenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q873" start="24145" end="24157" title="Meryl Streep" label="Meryl Streep"/>
<link wikidata="Q106942" start="24159" end="24173" title="Candice Bergen" label="Candice Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530706" start="24175" end="24185" title="Gemma Chan" label="Gemma Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17488953" start="24187" end="24199" title="Lucas Hedges" label="Lucas Hedges"/>
<link wikidata="Q217573" start="24204" end="24216" title="Dianne Wiest" label="Dianne Wiest"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078710" start="24346" end="24353" title="HBO Max" label="HBO Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q99796333" start="24362" end="24376" title="No Sudden Move" label="No Sudden Move"/>
<link wikidata="Q43541058" start="24501" end="24519" title="Mosaic (murder mystery)" label="&amp;quot;Mosaic&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q513402" start="24527" end="24537" title="Ed Solomon" label="Ed Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q272019" start="24548" end="24559" title="Don Cheadle" label="Don Cheadle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193668" start="24561" end="24577" title="Benicio del Toro" label="Benicio del Toro"/>
<link wikidata="Q391359" start="24579" end="24592" title="David Harbour" label="David Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749378" start="24594" end="24605" title="Amy Seimetz" label="Amy Seimetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q313107" start="24607" end="24615" title="Jon Hamm" label="Jon Hamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q211280" start="24617" end="24627" title="Ray Liotta" label="Ray Liotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q313204" start="24629" end="24642" title="Kieran Culkin" label="Kieran Culkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193555" start="24644" end="24658" title="Brendan Fraser" label="Brendan Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q38410137" start="24660" end="24669" title="Noah Jupe" label="Noah Jupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q722312" start="24671" end="24680" title="Bill Duke" label="Bill Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q11837094" start="24682" end="24694" title="Frankie Shaw" label="Frankie Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q79055374" start="24699" end="24708" title="Julia Fox" label="Julia Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q853325" start="24743" end="24764" title="Tribeca Film Festival" label="Tribeca Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078710" start="24802" end="24809" title="HBO Max" label="HBO Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q106363032" start="24833" end="24837" title="Kimi (film)" label="Kimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q227129" start="24942" end="24953" title="Zoë Kravitz" label="Zoë Kravitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q234564" start="25083" end="25100" title="Erika Christensen" label="Erika Christensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q962944" start="25105" end="25117" title="Jacob Vargas" label="Jacob Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q114876189" start="25125" end="25153" title="Magic Mike&amp;#x27;s Last Dance" label="Magic Mike&amp;#x27;s Last Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197932" start="25229" end="25239" title="Magic Mike" label="Magic Mike"/>
<link wikidata="Q125106" start="25304" end="25315" title="Salma Hayek" label="Salma Hayek"/>
<link wikidata="Q116986914" start="25449" end="25460" title="Full Circle (miniseries)" label="Full Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q26997611" start="25501" end="25512" title="Zazie Beetz" label="Zazie Beetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q867813" start="25514" end="25526" title="Claire Danes" label="Claire Danes"/>
<link wikidata="Q27442165" start="25528" end="25542" title="Jharrel Jerome" label="Jharrel Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q309835" start="25547" end="25563" title="Timothy Olyphant" label="Timothy Olyphant"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078710" start="25831" end="25834" title="Max (streaming service)" label="Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q120667207" start="25928" end="25937" title="Command Z" label="Command Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446589" start="25966" end="25979" title="Kurt Andersen" label="Kurt Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26004" end="26042" title="Evil Geniuses: The Unmaking of America" label="Evil Geniuses: The Unmaking of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q123690382" start="26066" end="26074" title="Presence (2024 film)" label="Presence"/>
<link wikidata="Q188375" start="26116" end="26124" title="Lucy Liu" label="Lucy Liu"/>
<link wikidata="Q79055374" start="26129" end="26138" title="Julia Fox" label="Julia Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q118297011" start="26157" end="26184" title="2024 Sundance Film Festival" label="2024 Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q124373035" start="26236" end="26245" title="Black Bag (film)" label="Black Bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q270178" start="26319" end="26330" title="David Koepp" label="David Koepp"/>
<link wikidata="Q80966" start="26344" end="26358" title="Cate Blanchett" label="Cate Blanchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q57147" start="26363" end="26381" title="Michael Fassbender" label="Michael Fassbender"/>
<link wikidata="Q170510" start="26658" end="26670" title="Ian McKellen" label="Ian McKellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18637243" start="26672" end="26685" title="Michaela Coel" label="Michaela Coel"/>
<link wikidata="Q767499" start="26690" end="26702" title="James Corden" label="James Corden"/>
<link wikidata="Q193541" start="26946" end="26961" title="French New Wave" label="French New Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="27046" end="27071" title="Cinema of the United States" label="mainstream film standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q296001" start="27285" end="27293" title="close-up" label="close-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528025" start="27296" end="27309" title="tracking shot" label="tracking shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q744083" start="27312" end="27320" title="jump cut" label="jump cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361924" start="27368" end="27385" title="establishing shot" label="establishing shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130222" start="27504" end="27516" title="Third-person effect" label="third-person"/>
<link wikidata="Q3799045" start="27549" end="27572" title="Over the shoulder shot" label="over-the-shoulder shots"/>
<link wikidata="Q730888" start="27592" end="27601" title="Contagion (2011 film)" label="Contagion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072031" start="27626" end="27676" title="Hyperlink cinema" label="multi-narrative &amp;quot;hyperlink cinema&amp;quot; style"/>
<link wikidata="Q4463076" start="27703" end="27739" title="Ocean&amp;#x27;s (film series)" label="the &amp;quot;Ocean&amp;#x27;s&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148653" start="27818" end="27832" title="Color wash" label="colored washes"/>
<link wikidata="Q239298" start="28046" end="28054" title="Montage (filmmaking)" label="montages"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="28191" end="28200" title="Hollywood (film industry)" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q375336" start="28222" end="28239" title="Film studio" label="studio filmmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="28253" end="28264" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q504053" start="28720" end="28739" title="Ocean&amp;#x27;s Twelve" label="Ocean&amp;#x27;s Twelve"/>
<link wikidata="Q40523" start="28769" end="28782" title="Julia Roberts" label="Julia Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735164" start="28912" end="28937" title="The Girlfriend Experience" label="The Girlfriend Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709" start="28975" end="28985" title="Sasha Grey" label="Sasha Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q249350" start="29013" end="29020" title="Haywire (2011 film)" label="Haywire"/>
<link wikidata="Q114466" start="29107" end="29125" title="mixed martial arts" label="mixed martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q233017" start="29140" end="29151" title="Gina Carano" label="Gina Carano"/>
<link wikidata="Q24576050" start="29177" end="29188" title="Logan Lucky" label="Logan Lucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q259340" start="29269" end="29273" title="7-Eleven" label="7–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358257" start="29411" end="29421" title="soundscape" label="soundscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q455964" start="29619" end="29633" title="Cliff Martinez" label="Cliff Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174756" start="29635" end="29647" title="David Holmes (musician)" label="David Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q319996" start="29667" end="29680" title="Thomas Newman" label="Thomas Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412320" start="29907" end="29914" title="Super 8 film" label="Super 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q194383" start="29919" end="29929" title="16 mm film" label="16 mm film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735164" start="30051" end="30076" title="The Girlfriend Experience" label="The Girlfriend Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257270" start="30095" end="30102" title="Red Digital Cinema" label="Red One"/>
<link wikidata="Q39071240" start="30253" end="30259" title="Unsane (film)" label="Unsane"/>
<link wikidata="Q26831164" start="30279" end="30292" title="iPhone 7 Plus" label="iPhone 7 Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q761706" start="30302" end="30319" title="Digital cinema" label="4K digital camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q683906" start="30392" end="30406" title="Tripod (photography)" label="DJI stabiliser"/>
<link wikidata="Q50649485" start="30590" end="30606" title="High Flying Bird" label="High Flying Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q29480689" start="30619" end="30627" title="iPhone 8" label="iPhone 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233970" start="30723" end="30749" title="The A.V. Club" label="&amp;quot;The A. V. Club&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q790192" start="30774" end="30791" title="experimental film" label="experimental film"/>
<link wikidata="Q142292" start="30927" end="30934" title="Traffic (2000 film)" label="Traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254571" start="31525" end="31544" title="Personal identity" label="personal identities"/>
<link wikidata="Q154136" start="31546" end="31555" title="Human sexuality" label="sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124515" start="31565" end="31580" title="human condition" label="human condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q19539028" start="31582" end="31595" title="Richard Brody" label="Richard Brody"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="31605" end="31619" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="31881" end="31891" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38351" start="31905" end="31916" title="A. O. Scott" label="A. O. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q33233" start="32079" end="32090" title="Economic materialism" label="materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q571183" start="32231" end="32243" title="Out of Sight" label="Out of Sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q201658" start="32400" end="32415" title="Film genre" label="cinematic niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210771" start="32800" end="32827" title="The 5,000 Fingers of Dr. T." label="The 5,000 Fingers of Dr. T."/>
<link wikidata="Q466781" start="32842" end="32882" title="All the President&amp;#x27;s Men (film)" label="&amp;quot;All The President&amp;#x27;s Men&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q233464" start="32897" end="32907" title="Annie Hall" label="Annie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q24815" start="32928" end="32940" title="Citizen Kane" label="Citizen Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009788" start="32961" end="32977" title="The Conversation" label="The Conversation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47703" start="32998" end="33011" title="The Godfather" label="The Godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q184768" start="33032" end="33053" title="The Godfather Part II" label="The Godfather Part II"/>
<link wikidata="Q189505" start="33074" end="33078" title="Jaws (film)" label="Jaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218959" start="33099" end="33120" title="The Last Picture Show" label="The Last Picture Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q193570" start="33141" end="33157" title="Sunset Boulevard (film)" label="Sunset Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q271830" start="33181" end="33194" title="The Third Man" label="The Third Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q51537" start="33295" end="33307" title="Mike Nichols" label="Mike Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703964" start="33347" end="33363" title="Carnal Knowledge (film)" label="Carnal Knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q314301" start="33388" end="33399" title="Peter Yates" label="Peter Yates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546058" start="33430" end="33442" title="The Hot Rock (film)" label="The Hot Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q296698" start="33524" end="33536" title="Costa-Gavras" label="Costa-Gavras"/>
<link wikidata="Q136605" start="33556" end="33557" title="Z (1969 film)" label="Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q142292" start="33600" end="33607" title="Traffic (2000 film)" label="Traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q53001" start="33759" end="33774" title="Jean-Luc Godard" label="Jean-Luc Godard"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="33996" end="34004" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivian"/>
<link wikidata="Q101017" start="34088" end="34098" title="Distillation" label="distillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q35004" start="34108" end="34114" title="Tarija" label="Tarija"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400661" start="34200" end="34207" title="Singani" label="Singani"/>
<link wikidata="Q146470" start="34296" end="34302" title="brandy" label="brandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23844" start="34723" end="34737" title="George Clooney" label="George Clooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152369" start="34751" end="34776" title="Section Eight Productions" label="Section Eight Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q175535" start="34825" end="34835" title="Matt Damon" label="Matt Damon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35332" start="34909" end="34918" title="Brad Pitt" label="Brad Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q40523" start="34920" end="34933" title="Julia Roberts" label="Julia Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q272019" start="34935" end="34946" title="Don Cheadle" label="Don Cheadle"/>
<link wikidata="Q212064" start="34952" end="34966" title="Channing Tatum" label="Channing Tatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q347395" start="35036" end="35047" title="Luis Guzmán" label="Luis Guzmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q160432" start="35049" end="35057" title="Jude Law" label="Jude Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558129" start="35059" end="35067" title="Ann Dowd" label="Ann Dowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q22680869" start="35069" end="35079" title="Joe Chrest" label="Joe Chrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q193668" start="35081" end="35097" title="Benicio Del Toro" label="Benicio Del Toro"/>
<link wikidata="Q47664" start="35099" end="35119" title="Catherine Zeta-Jones" label="Catherine Zeta-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q119798" start="35121" end="35136" title="Michael Douglas" label="Michael Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q219546" start="35141" end="35154" title="Albert Finney" label="Albert Finney"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="35235" end="35265" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q193668" start="35311" end="35327" title="Benicio del Toro" label="Benicio del Toro"/>
<link wikidata="Q47664" start="35447" end="35467" title="Catherine Zeta-Jones" label="Catherine Zeta-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="35479" end="35491" title="Golden Globe" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q365844" start="35679" end="35694" title="Jerry Weintraub" label="Jerry Weintraub"/>
<link wikidata="Q455964" start="35734" end="35748" title="Cliff Martinez" label="Cliff Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174756" start="35907" end="35919" title="David Holmes (musician)" label="David Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q319996" start="36242" end="36255" title="Thomas Newman" label="Thomas Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q328379" start="36412" end="36428" title="Stephen Mirrione" label="Stephen Mirrione"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481763" start="36476" end="36490" title="Scott Z. Burns" label="Scott Z. Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816752" start="36492" end="36501" title="Lem Dobbs" label="Lem Dobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q513402" start="36506" end="36516" title="Ed Solomon" label="Ed Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="36678" end="36684" title="Cinema of the United States" label="cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233412" start="37070" end="37087" title="possessory credit" label="possessory credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973577" start="37668" end="37707" title="U.S. House Committee on Foreign Affairs" label="U.S. House Committee on Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q540235" start="37953" end="37967" title="Betsy Brantley" label="Betsy Brantley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6305724" start="38062" end="38073" title="Jules Asner" label="Jules Asner"/>
<link wikidata="Q120667207" start="38321" end="38330" title="Command Z" label="Command Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q51552" start="38436" end="38450" title="Roman Polanski" label="Roman Polanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q16968672" start="38538" end="38560" title="Roman Polanski sexual abuse case" label="1977 sexual abuse case"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999960" start="38636" end="38666" title="Steven Soderbergh bibliography" label="routinely analyzed and debated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415395" start="38685" end="38699" title="Film industry" label="film academics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367548" start="38776" end="38800" title="Sex, Lies, and Videotape" label="Sex, Lies, and Videotape"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="38845" end="38863" title="Independent film" label="Independent Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q205178" start="39040" end="39047" title="Child prodigy" label="prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234157" start="39055" end="39065" title="Poster child" label="poster boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227533" start="39150" end="39176" title="Directors Guild of America" label="Directors Guild of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367548" start="39201" end="39225" title="Sex, Lies, and Videotape" label="Sex, Lies, and Videotape"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="39244" end="39264" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q179808" start="39322" end="39337" title="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q55392" start="39449" end="39460" title="Louis Malle" label="Louis Malle"/>
<link wikidata="Q83233" start="39477" end="39493" title="Jacques Cousteau" label="Jacques Cousteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q41417" start="39575" end="39617" title="Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay" label="Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q910864" start="39625" end="39644" title="62nd Academy Awards" label="62nd Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="39682" end="39695" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q751924" start="39726" end="39745" title="73rd Academy Awards" label="73rd Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227533" start="39938" end="39964" title="Directors Guild of America" label="Directors Guild of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="39977" end="39993" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q220955" start="40086" end="40101" title="Erin Brockovich (film)" label="Erin Brockovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q142292" start="40118" end="40125" title="Traffic (2000 film)" label="Traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772" start="40188" end="40205" title="Quentin Tarantino" label="Quentin Tarantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q263486" start="40207" end="40220" title="Curtis Hanson" label="Curtis Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q184903" start="40222" end="40235" title="David Fincher" label="David Fincher"/>
<link wikidata="Q26821227" start="40241" end="40254" title="Barry Jenkins" label="Barry Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638418" start="40311" end="40316" title="Los Angeles Film Critics Association" label="LAFCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133614" start="40318" end="40321" title="National Board of Review" label="NBR"/>
<link wikidata="Q226003" start="40323" end="40328" title="New York Film Critics Circle" label="NYFCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206671" start="40330" end="40334" title="National Society of Film Critics" label="NSFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q124803081" start="40353" end="40397" title="Steven Soderbergh&amp;#x27;s unrealized projects" label="Steven Soderbergh&amp;#x27;s unrealized projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481533" start="40433" end="40447" title="Sharon Waxman" label="Waxman, Sharon"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="40576" end="40595" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperEntertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080179" start="40760" end="40785" title="Columbia University Press" label="Columbia University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080232" start="40849" end="40877" title="University of Illinois Press" label="University of Illinois Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005866" start="41002" end="41027" title="University of Texas Press" label="University of Texas Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757553" start="41097" end="41114" title="The Pocket Essentials" label="Pocket Essentials"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551345" start="41224" end="41252" title="University Press of Kentucky" label="University Press of Kentucky"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27338" wikidata="Q215" url="?curid=27338" title="Slovenia">
<text>Slovenia, officially the Republic of Slovenia, is a country in Central Europe. It borders Italy to the west, Austria to the north, Hungary to the northeast, Croatia to the south and southeast, and a short coastline within the Adriatic Sea to the southwest, which is part of the Mediterranean sea. Slovenia is mostly mountainous and forested, covers , and has a population of approximately 2.1 million. Slovene is the official language. Slovenia has a predominantly temperate continental climate, with the exception of the Slovene Littoral and the Julian Alps. Ljubljana, the capital and largest city of Slovenia, is geographically situated near the centre of the country. Other larger urban centers are Maribor, Kranj, Celje and Koper.

Slovenia&#x27;s territory has been part of many different states: the Roman Empire, the Byzantine Empire, the Carolingian Empire, the Holy Roman Empire, the Kingdom of Hungary, the Republic of Venice, the Illyrian Provinces of Napoleon&#x27;s First French Empire and the Habsburg Empire. In October 1918, the Slovenes co-founded the State of Slovenes, Croats, and Serbs. In December 1918, they merged with the Kingdom of Montenegro and the Kingdom of Serbia into the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. During World War II, Germany, Italy, and Hungary occupied and annexed Slovenia, with a tiny area transferred to the Independent State of Croatia, a newly declared Nazi puppet state. In 1945, it again became part of Yugoslavia. Post-war, Yugoslavia was allied with the Eastern Bloc, but after the Tito–Stalin split of 1948, it never subscribed to the Warsaw Pact, and in 1961 it became one of the founders of the Non-Aligned Movement. In June 1991, Slovenia declared independence from Yugoslavia and became an independent sovereign state.

Slovenia is a developed country, with a high-income economy characterized by a mixture of both traditional industries, such as manufacturing and agriculture, and modern sectors, such as information technology and financial service. The economy is highly dependent on foreign trade, with exports accounting for a significant portion of the country&#x27;s GDP. Slovenia is a member of the Council of Europe, the European Union, the United Nations, NATO, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, and other associations in the global community.

==Etymology==
The name &quot;Slovenia&quot; etymologically means &#x27;land of the Slavs&#x27;. The origin of the name itself remains uncertain. The suffix &quot;-en&quot; forms a demonym.

==History==
=== Prehistory to Slavic settlement ===

==== Prehistory ====

Present-day Slovenia has been inhabited since prehistoric times. There is evidence of human habitation from around 250,000 years ago. A pierced cave bear bone, dating from 43100 ± 700 BP, found in 1995 in Divje Babe cave near Cerkno, is considered a kind of flute, and possibly the oldest musical instrument discovered in the world. In the 1920s and 1930s, artifacts belonging to the Cro-Magnon, such as pierced bones, bone points, and a needle were found by archaeologist Srečko Brodar in Potok Cave.

In 2002, remains of pile dwellings over 4,500 years old were discovered in the Ljubljana Marsh, now protected as a UNESCO World Heritage Site, along with the Ljubljana Marshes Wooden Wheel, the oldest wooden wheel in the world. It shows that wooden wheels appeared almost simultaneously in Mesopotamia and Europe. In the transition period between the Bronze Age to the Iron Age, the Urnfield culture flourished. Archaeological remains dating from the Hallstatt period have been found, particularly in southeastern Slovenia, among them a number of situlas in Novo Mesto, the &quot;Town of Situlas&quot;.

==== Roman era ====
The area that is present-day Slovenia was in Roman times shared between &quot;Venetia et Histria&quot; (region X of Roman Italia in the classification of Augustus) and the provinces Pannonia and Noricum. The Romans established posts at Emona (Ljubljana), Poetovio (Ptuj), and Celeia (Celje); and constructed trade and military roads that ran across Slovene territory from Italy to Pannonia. In the 5th and 6th centuries, the area was subject to invasions by the Huns and Germanic tribes during their incursions into Italy. A part of the inner state was protected with a defensive line of towers and walls called &quot;Claustra Alpium Iuliarum&quot;. A crucial battle between Theodosius I and Eugenius took place in the Vipava Valley in 394.

==== Slavic settlement ====
The Slavic tribes migrated to the Alpine area after the westward departure of the Lombards (the last Germanic tribe) in 568, and, under pressure from Avars, established a Slavic settlement in the Eastern Alps. From 623 to 624 or possibly 626 onwards, King Samo united the Alpine and Western Slavs against the Avars and Germanic peoples and established what is referred to as Samo&#x27;s Kingdom. After its disintegration following Samo&#x27;s death in 658 or 659, the ancestors of the Slovenes located in present-day Carinthia formed the independent duchy of Carantania, and Carniola, later duchy Carniola. Other parts of present-day Slovenia were again ruled by Avars before Charlemagne&#x27;s victory over them in 803.

=== Middle Ages ===
The Carantanians, one of the ancestral groups of the modern Slovenes, particularly the Carinthian Slovenes, were the first Slavic people to accept Christianity. They were mostly Christianized by Irish missionaries, among them Modestus, known as the &quot;Apostle of Carantanians&quot;. This process, together with the Christianization of the Bavarians, was later described in the memorandum known as the Conversio Bagoariorum et Carantanorum, which is thought to have overemphasized the role of the Church of Salzburg in the Christianization process over similar efforts of the Patriarchate of Aquileia.

In the mid-8th century, Carantania became a vassal duchy under the rule of the Bavarians, who began spreading Christianity. Three decades later, the Carantanians were incorporated, together with the Bavarians, into the Carolingian Empire. During the same period Carniola, too, came under the Franks, and was Christianised from Aquileia. Following the anti-Frankish rebellion of Liudewit at the beginning of the 9th century, the Franks removed the Carantanian princes, replacing them with their own border dukes. Consequently, the Frankish feudal system reached the Slovene territory.

After the victory of Emperor Otto I over the Magyars in 955, Slovene territory was divided into a number of border regions of the Holy Roman Empire. Carantania was elevated into the Duchy of Carinthia in 976.

By the 11th century, the Germanization of what is now Lower Austria, effectively isolated the Slovene-inhabited territory from the other western Slavs, speeding up the development of the Slavs of Carantania and of Carniola into an independent Carantanian/Carniolans/Slovene ethnic group. By the High Middle Ages, the historic provinces of Carniola, Styria, Carinthia, Gorizia, Trieste, and Istria developed from the border regions and were incorporated into the medieval Holy Roman Empire. The consolidation and formation of these historical lands took place in a long period between the 11th and 14th centuries, and were led by a number of important feudal families, such as the Dukes of Spanheim, the Counts of Gorizia, the Counts of Celje, and, finally, the House of Habsburg. In a parallel process, an intensive Germanization significantly diminished the extent of Slovene-speaking areas. By the 15th century, the Slovene ethnic territory was reduced to its present size.

In 1335, Henry of Gorizia, Duke of Carinthia, Landgrave of Carniola and Count of Tyrol died without a male heir, his daughter Margaret was able to keep the County of Tyrol, while the Wittelsbach emperor Louis IV passed Carinthia and Carniolan march to the Habsburg duke Albert II of Austria, whose mother, Elisabeth of Carinthia is a sister of the late duke Henry of Gorizia. Therefore, most of the territory of present-day Slovenia became a hereditary land of the Habsburg monarchy. As with the other component parts of the Habsburg monarchy, Carinthia and Carniola remained a semi-autonomous state with its own constitutional structure for a long time. The counts of Celje, a feudal family from this area who in 1436 acquired the title of state princes, were Habsburgs&#x27; powerful competitors for some time. This large dynasty, important at a European political level, had its seat in Slovene territory but died out in 1456. Its numerous large estates subsequently became the property of the Habsburgs, who retained control of the area right up until the beginning of the 20th century. Patria del Friuli ruled present western Slovenia until Venetian takeover in 1420.
At the end of the Middle Ages, the Slovene Lands suffered a serious economic and demographic setback because of the Turkish raids. In 1515, a peasant revolt spread across nearly the whole Slovene territory. In 1572 and 1573 the Croatian-Slovenian peasant revolt wrought havoc throughout the wider region. Such uprisings, which often met with bloody defeats, continued throughout the 17th century.

=== Early modern period ===
After the dissolution of the Republic of Venice in 1797, the Venetian Slovenia was passed to the Austrian Empire. The Slovene Lands were part of the French-administered Illyrian Provinces established by Napoleon, the Austrian Empire and Austria-Hungary. Slovenes inhabited most of Carniola, the southern part of the duchies of Carinthia and Styria, the northern and eastern areas of the Austrian Littoral, as well as Prekmurje in the Kingdom of Hungary. Industrialization was accompanied by construction of railroads to link cities and markets, but the urbanization was limited.

Due to limited opportunities, between 1880 and 1910 there was extensive emigration; around 300,000 Slovenes (1 in 6) emigrated to other countries, mostly to the US, but also to South America (the main part to Argentina), Germany, Egypt, and to larger cities in Austria-Hungary, especially Vienna and Graz. Despite this emigration, the population of Slovenia increased significantly. Literacy was exceptionally high, at 80–90%.

The 19th century also saw a revival of culture in Slovene, accompanied by a Romantic nationalist quest for cultural and political autonomy. The idea of a United Slovenia, first advanced during the revolutions of 1848, became the common platform of most Slovenian parties and political movements in Austria-Hungary. During the same period, Yugoslavism, an ideology stressing the unity of all South Slavic peoples, spread as a reaction to Pan-German nationalism and Italian irredentism.

=== World War I ===
World War I brought heavy casualties to Slovenes, particularly the twelve Battles of the Isonzo, which took place in present-day Slovenia&#x27;s western border area with Italy. Hundreds of thousands of Slovene conscripts were drafted into the Austro-Hungarian Army, and over 30,000 of them died. Hundreds of thousands of Slovenes from Princely County of Gorizia and Gradisca were resettled in refugee camps in Italy and Austria. While the refugees in Austria received decent treatment, the Slovene refugees in Italian camps were treated as state enemies, and several thousand died of malnutrition and diseases between 1915 and 1918. Entire areas of the Slovene Littoral were destroyed.

The Treaty of Rapallo of 1920 left approximately 327,000 out of the total population of 1.3 million Slovenes in Italy. After the fascists took power in Italy, they were subjected to a policy of violent Fascist Italianization. This caused the mass emigration of Slovenes, especially the middle class, from the Slovene Littoral and Trieste to Yugoslavia and South America. Those who remained organized several connected networks of both passive and armed resistance. The best known was the militant anti-fascist organization TIGR, formed in 1927 to fight Fascist oppression of the Slovene and Croat populations in the Julian March.

=== Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes (later the Kingdom of Yugoslavia) ===
The Slovene People&#x27;s Party launched a movement for self-determination, demanding the creation of a semi-independent South Slavic state under Habsburg rule. The proposal was picked up by most Slovene parties, and a mass mobilization of Slovene civil society, known as the Declaration Movement, followed. This demand was rejected by the Austrian political elites; but following the dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire in the aftermath of the First World War, the National Council of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs took power in Zagreb on 6 October 1918. On 29 October, independence was declared by a national gathering in Ljubljana, and by the Croatian parliament, declaring the establishment of the new State of Slovenes, Croats, and Serbs.

On 1 December 1918, the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs merged with Serbia, becoming part of the new Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes; in 1929 it was renamed the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. The main territory of Slovenia, being the most industrialized and westernized compared to other less developed parts of Yugoslavia, became the main centre of industrial production: Compared to Serbia, for example, Slovenian industrial production was four times greater; and it was 22 times greater than in North Macedonia. The interwar period brought further industrialization in Slovenia, with rapid economic growth in the 1920s, followed by a relatively successful economic adjustment to the 1929 economic crisis and Great Depression.

Following a plebiscite in October 1920, the Slovene-speaking southern Carinthia was ceded to Austria. With the Treaty of Trianon, the Kingdom of Yugoslavia was awarded the mostly Slovene-inhabited Prekmurje region, formerly part of Austria-Hungary. Slovenes living in territories that fell under the rule of the neighboring states—Italy, Austria, and Hungary—were subjected to assimilation.

=== World War II ===



During World War II, Nazi Germany and Hungary annexed northern areas (brown and dark green areas, respectively), while Fascist Italy annexed the vertically hatched black area (solid black western part having been annexed by Italy in 1920 with the Treaty of Rapallo). Some villages were incorporated into the Independent State of Croatia. After 1943, Germany also occupied the area that Italy had annexed.

Slovenia was the only present-day European nation that was trisected and completely annexed into both Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy during World War II. In addition, the Prekmurje region in the east was annexed to Hungary, and some villages in the Lower Sava Valley were incorporated in the newly created Nazi puppet Independent State of Croatia (NDH). Axis forces invaded Yugoslavia in April 1941 and defeated the country in a few weeks. The southern part, including Ljubljana, was annexed to Italy, while the Nazis took over the northern and eastern parts of the country. The Nazis had a plan of ethnic cleansing of these areas, and they resettled or expelled the local Slovene civilian population to the puppet states of Nedić&#x27;s Serbia (7,500) and NDH (10,000). In addition, some 46,000 Slovenes were expelled to Germany, including children who were separated from their parents and allocated to German families. At the same time, the ethnic Germans in the Gottschee enclave in the Italian annexation zone were resettled to the Nazi-controlled areas cleansed of their Slovene population.
Around 30,000 to 40,000 Slovene men were drafted to the German Army and sent to the Eastern front. Slovene was banned from education, and its use in public life was limited.

In south-central Slovenia, annexed by Fascist Italy and renamed the Province of Ljubljana, the Slovenian National Liberation Front was organized in April 1941. Led by the Communist Party, it formed the Slovene Partisan units as part of the Yugoslav Partisans led by the Communist leader Josip Broz Tito.

After the resistance started in summer 1941, Italian violence against the Slovene civilian population escalated. The Italian authorities deported some 25,000 people to concentration camps, which equaled 7.5% of the population of their occupation zone. The most infamous ones were Rab and Gonars. To counter the Communist-led insurgence, the Italians sponsored local anti-guerrilla units, formed mostly by the local conservative Catholic Slovene population that resented the revolutionary violence of the partisans. After the Italian armistice of September 1943, the Germans took over both the Province of Ljubljana and the Slovenian Littoral, incorporating them into what was known as the Operation Zone of Adriatic Coastal Region. They united the Slovene anti-Communist counter-insurgence into the Slovene Home Guard and appointed a puppet regime in the Province of Ljubljana. The anti-Nazi resistance however expanded, creating its own administrative structures as the basis for Slovene statehood within a new, federal and socialist Yugoslavia.

In 1945, Yugoslavia was liberated by the partisan resistance and soon became a socialist federation known as the People&#x27;s Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The first Slovenian republic, named Federal Slovenia, was a constituent republic of the Yugoslavian federation, led by its own pro-Communist leadership.

Approximately 8% of the Slovene population died during World War II. The small Jewish community, mostly in the Prekmurje region, perished in 1944 in the holocaust of Hungarian Jews. The German-speaking minority, amounting to 2.5% of the Slovenian population prior to the war, was either expelled or killed in the aftermath of the war. Hundreds of Istrian Italians and Slovenes that were members of fascist and collaborationist forces, alongside civilians presumed to oppose communism, were killed in the foibe massacres, and more than 25,000 fled or were expelled from Slovenian Istria. Around 130,000 persons, mostly political and military opponents, were executed in May and June 1945.

=== Socialism ===
During the re-establishment of Yugoslavia in World War II, the first Slovenian republic, Federal Slovenia, was created and it became part of Federal Yugoslavia. It was a socialist state, but because of the Tito–Stalin split in 1948, economic and personal freedoms were much broader than in the Eastern Bloc countries. In 1947, the Slovene Littoral and the western half of Inner Carniola, which had been annexed by Italy after World War One, were annexed to Slovenia. 
After the failure of forced collectivisation that was attempted from 1949 to 1953, a policy of gradual economic liberalisation, known as workers self-management, was introduced under the advice and supervision of the Slovene Marxist theoretician and Communist leader Edvard Kardelj, the main ideologue of the Titoist path to socialism. Suspected opponents of this policy both from within and outside the Communist party were persecuted and thousands were sent to Goli otok.

The late 1950s saw a policy of liberalization in the cultural sphere as well, and unlimited border crossing into western countries was allowed, both for Yugoslav citizens and for foreigners. In 1956, Josip Broz Tito, together with other leaders, founded the Non-Aligned Movement. In the 1950s, Slovenia&#x27;s economy developed rapidly and was strongly industrialized. With further economic decentralization of Yugoslavia in 1965–66, Slovenia&#x27;s domestic product was 2.5 times the average of Yugoslav republics. While a Communist country, after the Tito–Stalin split Yugoslavia initiated a period of military neutrality and non-alignment. JAT Yugoslav Airlines was the flag carrier and during its existence it grew to become one of the leading airlines in Europe both by fleet and destinations. By the 1970s more airlines were created including Slovenian Adria Airways mostly focused in the growing tourist industry. Until the 1980s, Slovenia enjoyed relatively broad autonomy within the federation. It was the most liberal communist state in Europe, and the passport of the Yugoslavia Federation allowed Yugoslavians to travel to the most world countries of any socialist country during the Cold War. Many people worked in western countries, which reduced unemployment in their home country.

Opposition to the regime was mostly limited to intellectual and literary circles and became especially vocal after Tito&#x27;s death in 1980 when the economic and political situation in Yugoslavia became very strained. Political disputes around economic measures were echoed in the public sentiment, as many Slovenians felt they were being economically exploited, having to sustain an expensive and inefficient federal administration.

=== Slovenian Spring, democracy and independence ===
In 1987 a group of intellectuals demanded Slovene independence in the 57th edition of the magazine &quot;Nova revija&quot;. Demands for democratisation and more Slovenian independence were sparked off. A mass democratic movement, coordinated by the Committee for the Defence of Human Rights, pushed the Communists in the direction of democratic reforms.

In September 1989, numerous constitutional amendments were passed to introduce parliamentary democracy to Slovenia. On 7 March 1990, the Slovenian Assembly changed the official name of the state to the &quot;Republic of Slovenia&quot;. In April 1990, the first democratic election in Slovenia took place, and the united opposition movement DEMOS led by Jože Pučnik emerged victorious.

The initial revolutionary events in Slovenia pre-dated the Revolutions of 1989 in Eastern Europe by almost a year, but went largely unnoticed by international observers. On 23 December 1990, more than 88% of the electorate voted for a sovereign and independent Slovenia. On 25 June 1991, Slovenia became independent. On 27 June in the early morning, the Yugoslav People&#x27;s Army dispatched its forces to prevent further measures for the establishment of a new country, which led to the Ten-Day War. On 7 July, the Brijuni Agreement was signed, implementing a truce and a three-month halt of the enforcement of Slovenia&#x27;s independence. At the end of the month, the last soldiers of the Yugoslav Army left Slovenia.

In December 1991, a new constitution was adopted, followed in 1992 by the laws on denationalisation and privatisation. The members of the European Union recognised Slovenia as an independent state on 15 January 1992, and the United Nations accepted it as a member on 22 May 1992.

Slovenia joined the European Union on 1 May 2004. Slovenia has one Commissioner in the European Commission, and seven Slovene parliamentarians were elected to the European Parliament at elections on 13 June 2004. In 2004 Slovenia also joined NATO. Slovenia subsequently succeeded in meeting the Maastricht criteria and joined the Eurozone (the first transition country to do so) on 1 January 2007. It was the first post-Communist country to hold the Presidency of the Council of the European Union, for the first six months of 2008. On 21 July 2010, it became a member of the OECD.

The disillusionment with domestic socio-economic elites at municipal and national levels was expressed at the 2012–2013 Slovenian protests on a wider scale than in the smaller 15 October 2011 protests. In relation to the leading politicians&#x27; response to allegations made by the official Commission for the Prevention of Corruption of the Republic of Slovenia, legal experts expressed the need for changes in the system that would limit political arbitrariness.

== Geography ==
Slovenia is in Southern Europe touching the east Alps and bordering the Mediterranean Sea. This locates Slovenia within the Mediterranean basin. It lies between latitudes 45° and 47° N, and longitudes 13° and 17° E. The 15th meridian east almost corresponds to the middle line of the country in the direction west–east. The Geometric Centre of the Republic of Slovenia is located at coordinates 46°07&#x27;11.8&quot; N and 14°48&#x27;55.2&quot; E. It lies in Slivna in the Municipality of Litija. Slovenia&#x27;s highest peak is Triglav (); the country&#x27;s average height above sea level is .

Four major European geographic regions meet in Slovenia: the Alps, the Dinarides, the Pannonian Plain, and the Mediterranean Sea. Although on the shore of the Adriatic Sea near the Mediterranean Sea, most of Slovenia is in the Black Sea drainage basin. The Alps—including the Julian Alps, the Kamnik-Savinja Alps and the Karawank chain, as well as the Pohorje massif—dominate Northern Slovenia along its long border with Austria. Slovenia&#x27;s Adriatic coastline stretches approximately from Italy to Croatia.

The term &quot;Karst topography&quot; refers to that of southwestern Slovenia&#x27;s Karst Plateau, a limestone region of underground rivers, gorges, and caves, between Ljubljana and the Mediterranean Sea. On the Pannonian plain to the East and Northeast, toward the Croatian and Hungarian borders, the landscape is essentially flat. However, most of Slovenia is hilly or mountainous, with around 90% of its land surface or more above sea level.

More than half of Slovenia, which is , is forested; ranking it third in Europe, by percentage of area forested, after Finland and Sweden. The areas are covered mostly by beech, fir-beech and beech-oak forests and have a relatively high production capacity. Remnants of primeval forests are still to be found, the largest in the Kočevje area. Grassland covers and fields and gardens (). There are of orchards and of vineyards.

=== Geology ===

Slovenia is in a rather active seismic zone because of its position on the small Adriatic Plate, which is squeezed between the Eurasian Plate to the north and the African Plate to the south and rotates counter-clockwise. Thus the country is at the junction of three important geotectonic units: the Alps to the north, the Dinaric Alps to the south and the Pannonian Basin to the east. Scientists have been able to identify 60 destructive earthquakes in the past. Additionally, a network of seismic stations is active throughout the country.

Many parts of Slovenia have a carbonate bedrock and extensive cave systems have developed.

=== Natural regions ===
The first regionalisations of Slovenia were made by geographers Anton Melik (1935–1936) and Svetozar Ilešič (1968). The newer regionalisation by Ivan Gams divided Slovenia in the following macroregions:
* the Alps (&quot;Alpe&quot;)
* the subalpine landscapes (&quot;predalpski svet&quot;)
* the Slovene Littoral or Submediterranean Slovenia (&quot;Primorje&quot; or &quot;submediteranska Slovenija&quot;)
* the Dinaric plateaus of the continental Slovenia (&quot;dinarske planote celinske Slovenije&quot;)
* Subpannonian Slovenia (&quot;subpanonska Slovenija&quot;)

According to a newer natural geographic regionalisation, the country consists of four macroregions. These are the Alpine, the Mediterranean, the Dinaric, and the Pannonian landscapes. Macroregions are defined according to major relief units (the Alps, the Pannonian plain, the Dinaric mountains) and climate types (submediterranean, temperate continental, mountain climate). These are often quite interwoven.

Protected areas of Slovenia include national parks, regional parks, and nature parks, the largest of which is Triglav National Park. There are 286 Natura 2000 designated protected areas, which include 36% of the country&#x27;s land area, the largest percentage among European Union states. Additionally, according to Yale University&#x27;s Environmental Performance Index, Slovenia is considered a &quot;strong performer&quot; in environmental protection efforts.

=== Climate ===
Slovenia is located in temperate latitudes. The climate is also influenced by the variety of relief, and the influence of the Alps and the Adriatic Sea. In the northeast, the continental climate type with the greatest difference between winter and summer temperatures prevails. In the coastal region, there is a sub-Mediterranean climate. The effect of the sea on the temperature rates is also visible up the Soča Valley, while a severe Alpine climate is present in the high mountain regions. There is a strong interaction between these three climatic systems across most of the country.

Precipitation, often coming from the Gulf of Genoa, varies across the country as well, with over in some western regions and dropping down to in Prekmurje. Snow is quite frequent in winter and the record snow cover in Ljubljana was recorded in 1952 at .

Compared to Western Europe, Slovenia is not very windy, because it lies in the slipstream of the Alps. The average wind speeds are lower than in the plains of the nearby countries. Due to the rugged terrain, local vertical winds with daily periods are present. Besides these, there are three winds of particular regional importance: the bora, the jugo, and the foehn. The jugo and the bora are characteristic of the Littoral. Whereas the jugo is humid and warm, the bora is usually cold and gusty. The foehn is typical of the Alpine regions in the north of Slovenia. Generally present in Slovenia are the northeast wind, the southeast wind and the north wind.

=== Waters ===

The territory of Slovenia mainly (, i.e. 81%) belongs to the Black Sea basin, and a smaller part (, i.e. 19%) belongs to the Adriatic Sea basin. These two parts are divided into smaller units in regard to their central rivers, the Mura River basin, the Drava River basin, the Sava River basin with Kolpa River basin, and the basin of the Adriatic rivers. In comparison with other developed countries, water quality in Slovenia is considered to be among the highest in Europe. One of the reasons is undoubtedly that most of the rivers rise on the mountainous territory of Slovenia. However, this does not mean that Slovenia has no problems with surface water and groundwater quality, especially in areas with intensive farming.

=== Biodiversity ===

Slovenia signed the Rio Convention on Biological Diversity on 13 June 1992 and became a party to the convention on 9 July 1996. It subsequently produced a National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan, which was received by the convention on 30 May 2002.

Slovenia is distinguished by an exceptionally wide variety of habitats, due to the contact of geological units and biogeographical regions, and due to human influences. The country is home to four terrestrial ecoregions: Dinaric Mountains mixed forests, Pannonian mixed forests, Alps conifer and mixed forests, and Illyrian deciduous forests. Around 12.5% of the territory is protected with 35.5% in the Natura 2000 ecological network. Despite this, because of pollution and environmental degradation, diversity has been in decline. Slovenia had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 3.78/10, ranking it 140th globally out of 172 countries.

====Animals====
The biological diversity of the country is high, with 1% of the world&#x27;s organisms on 0.004% of the Earth&#x27;s surface area. There are 75 mammal species, among them marmots, Alpine ibex, and chamois. There are numerous deer, roe deer, boar, and hares. The edible dormouse is often found in the Slovenian beech forests. Trapping these animals is a long tradition and is a part of the Slovenian national identity.

Some important carnivores include the Eurasian lynx, European wild cats, foxes (especially the red fox), and European jackal. There are hedgehogs, martens, and snakes such as vipers and grass snakes. According to recent estimates, Slovenia has c. 40–60 wolves and about 450 brown bears.

Slovenia is home to an exceptionally diverse number of cave species, with a few tens of endemic species. Among the cave vertebrates, the only known one is the olm, living in Karst, Lower Carniola, and White Carniola.

The only regular species of cetaceans found in the northern Adriatic sea is the bottlenose dolphin (&quot;Tursiops truncatus&quot;).

There are a wide variety of birds, such as the tawny owl, the long-eared owl, the eagle owl, hawks, and short-toed eagles. Other birds of prey have been recorded, as well as a growing number of ravens, crows and magpies migrating into Ljubljana and Maribor where they thrive. Other birds include black and green woodpeckers and the white stork, which nests mainly in Prekmurje.
There are 13 domestic animals native to Slovenia, of eight species (hen, pig, dog, horse, sheep, goat, honey bee, and cattle). Among these are the Karst Shepherd, the Carniolan honeybee, and the Lipizzan horse. The marble trout or marmorata (&quot;Salmo marmoratus&quot;) is an indigenous Slovenian fish. Extensive breeding programmes have been introduced to repopulate the marble trout into lakes and streams invaded by non-indigenous species of trout. Slovenia is also home to the wels catfish.

More than 2,400 fungal species have been recorded from Slovenia and, since that figure does not include lichen-forming fungi, the total number of Slovenian fungi already known is undoubtedly much higher. Many more remain to be discovered.

Slovenia is the third most-forested country in Europe, with 58.3% of the territory covered by forests. The forests are an important natural resource, and logging is kept to a minimum. In the interior of the country are typical Central European forests, predominantly oak and beech. In the mountains, spruce, fir, and pine are more common. Pine trees grow on the Karst Plateau, although only one-third of the region is covered by pine forest. The lime/linden tree, common in Slovenian forests, is a national symbol. The tree line is at .

In the Alps, flowers such as &quot;Daphne blagayana&quot;, gentians (&quot;Gentiana clusii&quot;, &quot;Gentiana froelichii&quot;), &quot;Primula auricula&quot;, edelweiss (the symbol of Slovene mountaineering), &quot;Cypripedium calceolus&quot;, &quot;Fritillaria meleagris&quot; (snake&#x27;s head fritillary), and &quot;Pulsatilla grandis&quot; are found.

Slovenia harbors many plants of ethnobotanically useful groups. Of 59 known species of ethnobotanical importance, some species such as &quot;Aconitum napellus&quot;, &quot;Cannabis sativa&quot; and &quot;Taxus baccata&quot; are restricted for use as per the Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia.

== Government and politics ==


Slovenia is a parliamentary democracy republic with a multi-party system. The head of state is the president, who is elected by popular vote and has an important integrative role. The president is elected for five years and at maximum for two consecutive terms. The president has a representative role and is the commander-in-chief of the Slovenian armed forces.

The executive and administrative authority in Slovenia is held by the Government of Slovenia (&#x27;), headed by the Prime Minister and the council of ministers or cabinet, who are elected by the National Assembly (). The legislative authority is held by the bicameral Parliament of Slovenia, characterised by an asymmetric duality. The bulk of power is concentrated in the National Assembly, which consists of ninety members. Of those, 88 are elected by all the citizens in a system of proportional representation, whereas two are elected by the registered members of the autochthonous Hungarian and Italian minorities. Elections take place every four years. The National Council (&#x27;), consisting of forty members, appointed to represent social, economic, professional and local interest groups, has a limited advisory and control power.
The 1992–2004 period was marked by the rule of the Liberal Democracy of Slovenia, which was responsible for gradual transition from the Titoist economy to the capitalist market economy. It later attracted much criticism by neo-liberal economists, who demanded a less gradual approach. The party&#x27;s president Janez Drnovšek, who served as prime minister between 1992 and 2002, was one of the most influential Slovenian politicians of the 1990s, alongside President Milan Kučan (who served between 1990 and 2002).

The 2005–2008 period was characterized by over-enthusiasm after joining the EU. During the first term of Janez Janša&#x27;s government, for the first time after independence, the Slovenian banks saw their loan-deposit ratios veering out of control. There was over-borrowing from foreign banks and then over-crediting of customers, including local business magnates. After the onset of the Great Recession and European sovereign-debt crisis, the left-wing coalition that replaced Janša&#x27;s government in the 2008 elections, had to face the consequences of the 2005–2008 over-borrowing. Attempts to implement reforms that would help economic recovery were met by student protesters, led by a student who later became a member of Janez Janša&#x27;s SDS, and by the trade unions. The proposed reforms were postponed in a referendum. The left-wing government was ousted with a vote of no confidence.

In March 2020, Janez Janša became prime minister for third time in the new coalition government of SDS, the Modern Centre Party (SMC), New Slovenia (NSi) and Pensioners&#x27; Party (DeSUS). Janez Janša was known as a right-wing populist and a supporter of former US President Donald Trump and right-wing Prime Minister Viktor Orban of Hungary. In April 2022, liberal opposition, the Freedom Movement, won the parliamentary election. The Freedom Movement won 34.5% of the vote, compared with 23.6% for Janša&#x27;s Slovenian Democratic party. On 25 May 2022, Slovenia&#x27;s parliament voted to appoint the leader of Freedom Movement, Robert Golob, as the new Prime Minister of Slovenia.

=== Judiciary ===

Judicial powers in Slovenia are executed by judges, who are elected by the National Assembly. Judicial power in Slovenia is implemented by courts with general responsibilities and specialised courts that deal with matters relating to specific legal areas. The State Prosecutor is an independent state authority responsible for prosecuting cases brought against those suspected of committing criminal offences. The Constitutional Court, composed of nine judges elected for nine-year terms, decides on the conformity of laws with the Constitution; all laws and regulations must also conform with the general principles of international law and with ratified international agreements.

=== Military ===

The Slovenian Armed Forces provide military defence independently or within an alliance, in accordance with international agreements. Since conscription was abolished in 2003, it is organized as a fully professional standing army. The Commander-in-Chief is the President of the Republic of Slovenia, while operational command is in the domain of the Chief of the General Staff of the Slovenian Armed Forces. In 2016, military spending was an estimated 0.91% of the country&#x27;s GDP. Since joining NATO, the Slovenian Armed Forces have taken a more active part in supporting international peace. They have participated in peace support operations and humanitarian activities. Among others, Slovenian soldiers are a part of international forces serving in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, and Afghanistan. According to the 2024 Global Peace Index, the country is the 9th most peaceful country in the world.

=== Administrative divisions and traditional regions ===


==== Municipalities ====
Officially, Slovenia is subdivided into 212 municipalities (twelve of which have the status of urban municipalities). The municipalities are the only bodies of local autonomy in Slovenia. Each municipality is headed by a mayor (&quot;župan&quot;), elected every four years by popular vote, and a municipal council (&quot;občinski svet&quot;). In the majority of municipalities, the municipal council is elected through the system of proportional representation; only a few smaller municipalities use the plurality voting system. In the urban municipalities, the municipal councils are called town (or city) councils. Every municipality also has a Head of the Municipal Administration (&quot;načelnik občinske uprave&quot;), appointed by the mayor, who is responsible for the functioning of the local administration.

==== Administrative divisions ====
There is no official intermediate unit between the municipalities and the Republic of Slovenia. The 62 administrative districts, officially called &quot;Administrative Units&quot; (&quot;upravne enote&quot;), are only subdivisions of the national government administration and are named after their respective bases of government offices.

==== Traditional regions and identities ====
Slovenia&#x27;s traditional regions are based on the former Habsburg crown lands, which included Carniola, Carinthia, Styria, and the Littoral. Stronger than with either Carniola as a whole, or with Slovenia as a state, Slovenes tend to identify themselves with the traditional regions of the Slovene Littoral, Prekmurje, and traditional (sub)regions, such as Upper Carniola, Lower Carniola, and, to a lesser extent, Inner Carniola.

The capital city Ljubljana was historically the administrative seat of Carniola and belonged to Inner Carniola, except for the Šentvid district, which was in Upper Carniola and also where the border between German-annexed territory and the Italian Province of Ljubljana was during the Second World War.

==== Statistical regions ====

The 12 &quot;statistical regions&quot; have no administrative function and are subdivided into two macroregions for the purpose of the Regional policy of the European Union.
These two macroregions are:
*Eastern Slovenia (&quot;Vzhodna Slovenija&quot; – SI01), which groups the Mura, Drava, Carinthia, Savinja, Central Sava, Lower Sava, Southeast Slovenia, and Inner Carniola–Karst statistical regions.
*Western Slovenia (&quot;Zahodna Slovenija&quot; – SI02), which groups the Central Slovenia, Upper Carniola, Gorizia, and Coastal–Karst statistical regions.
== Economy ==

Slovenia has a developed economy and is the richest Slavic country by GDP per capita. Slovenia is also among the top global economies in terms of human capital. It is the most developed transition country with an old mining-industrial tradition, chemical industry, and developed service activities.
Slovenia was in the beginning of 2007 the first new member to introduce the euro as its currency, replacing the tolar. Since 2010, it has been member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. There is a big difference in prosperity between the various regions. The economically wealthiest regions are the Central Slovenia region, which includes the capital Ljubljana and the western Slovenian regions (the Gorizia and Coastal–Karst Statistical Regions), while the least wealthy regions are the Mura, Central Sava, and Littoral–Inner Carniola Statistical Regions.

=== Economic growth ===
In 2004–06, the economy grew on average by nearly 5% a year in Slovenia; in 2007, it expanded by almost 7%. The growth surge was fuelled by debt, particularly among firms, and especially in construction. The Great Recession and European sovereign-debt crisis had a significant impact on the domestic economy. The construction industry was severely hit in 2010 and 2011.

In 2009, Slovenian GDP per capita shrank by 8%, the biggest decline in the European Union after the Baltic countries and Finland. An increasing burden for the Slovenian economy has been its rapidly aging population.

In August 2012, the year-on-year contraction was 0.8%; however, 0.2% growth was recorded in the first quarter (in relation to the quarter before, after data was adjusted according to season and working days). Year-on-year contraction has been attributed to the fall in domestic consumption and the slowdown in export growth. The decrease in domestic consumption has been attributed to the fiscal austerity, to the freeze on budget expenditure in the final months of 2011, to the failure of the efforts to implement economic reforms, to inappropriate financing, and to the decrease in exports.

Due to the effects of the crisis, it was expected that several banks had to be bailed out by EU funds in 2013; however, needed capital was able to be covered by the country&#x27;s own funds. Fiscal actions and legislations aiming on the reduction of spendings as well as several privatisations supported an economic recovery as from 2014. The real economic growth rate was at 2.5% in 2016 and accelerated to 5% in 2017. The construction sector has seen a recent increase, and the tourism industry is expected to have continuous rising numbers.

Since 2017, Slovenia has experienced moderate economic growth, with GDP growth averaging around 2% per year between 2017 and 2019. However, like many other countries, Slovenia&#x27;s economy has been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, with a contraction of around 5% in 2020. Overall, Slovenia&#x27;s economy is relatively small but open and has shown resilience in recent years.

Slovenia&#x27;s manufacturing sector is one of the largest contributors to the country&#x27;s economy, accounting for around 25% of GDP. The country has a strong tradition in manufacturing, particularly in the areas of automotive and electrical engineering. Other important sectors include services, which account for around 65% of GDP, and agriculture, forestry, and fishing, which account for around 2% of GDP.

Slovenia is a highly export-oriented economy, with exports accounting for around 80% of GDP. The country&#x27;s main export partners are other European countries, particularly Germany, Italy, and Austria. Key exports include machinery and transport equipment, manufactured goods, and chemicals.

The government of Slovenia has implemented a range of policies aimed at promoting economic growth and development. These include efforts to attract foreign investment, reduce red tape, and increase investment in research and development. The country has also introduced reforms aimed at improving the efficiency of its labor market and increasing the flexibility of its economy. The government&#x27;s approach to consulting business associations has been noted by the European Commission as a good practice example.

=== Services and industry ===
Almost two-thirds of people are employed in services, and over one-third in industry and construction. Slovenia benefits from a well-educated workforce, well-developed infrastructure, and its location at the crossroads of major trade routes.

The level of foreign direct investment (FDI) per capita in Slovenia is one of the lowest in the EU, and the labor productivity and the competitiveness of the Slovenian economy is still significantly below the EU average. Taxes are relatively high, the labor market is seen by business interests as being inflexible, and industries are losing sales to China, India, and elsewhere.

High level of openness makes Slovenia extremely sensitive to economic conditions in its main trading partners and changes in its international price competitiveness. The main industries are motor vehicles, electric and electronic equipment, machinery, pharmaceuticals, and fuels. Examples of major Slovenian companies operating in Slovenia include the home appliance manufacturer Gorenje, the pharmaceutical companies Krka and Lek (Novartis&#x27; subsidiary), the oil distributing company Petrol Group, energy distribution companys GEN, GEN-I, HSE and Revoz, a manufacturing subsidiary of Renault.

=== Energy ===

In 2018, the net energy production was 12,262 GWh and consumption was 14,501 GWh. Hydroelectric plants produced 4,421 GWh, thermal plants produced 4,049 GWh, and the Krško Nuclear Power Plant produced 2,742 GWh (50% share that goes to Slovenia; other 50% goes to Croatia due to joint ownership). 
Domestic electricity consumption was covered 84.6% by domestic production; the percentage is decreasing from year to year meaning Slovenia is more and more dependent on electricity imports.

A new 600 MW block of Šoštanj thermal power plant finished construction and went online in the autumn of 2014. The new 39.5 MW HE Krško hydro power plant was finished in 2013. The 41.5 MW HE Brežice and 30.5 MW HE Mokrice hydro power plants were built on the Sava River in 2018 and the construction of ten more hydropower plants with a cumulative capacity of 338 MW is planned to be finished by 2030. A large pumped-storage hydro power plant Kozjak on the Drava River is in the planning stage.

At the end of 2018, at least 295 MWp of photovoltaic modules and 31,4 MW of biogas powerplants were installed. Compared to 2017, renewable energy sources contributed 5.6 percentage points more into whole energy consumption. There is interest to add more production in the area of solar and wind energy sources (subsidising schemes are increasing economic feasibility), but microlocation settlement procedures take enormous toll on the efficiency of this intitiatve (nature preservation vs. energy production facilities dilemma).

=== Tourism ===
Slovenia offers tourists a wide variety of natural and cultural amenities. Different forms of tourism have developed. The tourist gravitational area is considerably large, however the tourist market is small. There has been no large-scale tourism and no acute environmental pressures; in 2017, National Geographic Traveller&#x27;s Magazine declared Slovenia as the country with the world&#x27;s most sustainable tourism. The nation&#x27;s capital, Ljubljana, has many important Baroque and Vienna Secession buildings, with several important works of the native born architect Jože Plečnik.

At the northwestern corner of the country lie the Julian Alps with Lake Bled and the Soča Valley, as well as the nation&#x27;s highest peak, Mount Triglav in the middle of Triglav National Park. Other mountain ranges include Kamnik–Savinja Alps, the Karawanks, and Pohorje, popular with skiers and hikers.

The Karst Plateau in the Slovene Littoral gave its name to karst, a landscape shaped by water dissolving the carbonate bedrock, forming caves. The best-known caves are Postojna Cave and the UNESCO-listed Škocjan Caves. The region of Slovenian Istria meets the Adriatic Sea, where the most important historical monument is the Venetian Gothic Mediterranean town of Piran while the settlement of Portorož attracts crowds in summer.

The hills around Slovenia&#x27;s second-largest city, Maribor, are renowned for their wine-making. The northeastern part of the country is rich with spas, with Rogaška Slatina, Radenci, Čatež ob Savi, Dobrna, and Moravske Toplice growing in importance in the last two decades.

Other popular tourist destinations include the historic cities of Ptuj and Škofja Loka, and several castles, such as Predjama Castle.

Important parts of tourism in Slovenia include congress and gambling tourism. Slovenia is the country with the highest percentage of casinos per 1,000 inhabitants in the European Union. Perla in Nova Gorica is the largest casino in the region.

Most of foreign tourists to Slovenia come from the key European markets: Italy, Austria, Germany, Croatia, Belgium, Netherlands, Serbia, Russia and Ukraine, followed by United Kingdom and Ireland. European tourists create more than 90% of Slovenia&#x27;s tourist income. In 2016, Slovenia was declared the world&#x27;s first green country by the Netherlands-based organization Green Destinations. On being declared the most sustainable country in 2016, Slovenia had a big part to play at the ITB Berlin to promote sustainable tourism.

=== Transport ===

Geography has dictated transport routes in Slovenia. Significant mountain ranges, major rivers and proximity to the Danube played roles in the development of the area&#x27;s transportation corridors. One recent particular advantage are the Pan-European transport corridors V (the fastest link between the North Adriatic, and Central and Eastern Europe) and X (linking Central Europe with the Balkans). This gives it a special position in the European social, economic and cultural integration and restructuring.

==== Roads ====
The road freight and passenger transport constitutes the largest part of transport in Slovenia at 80%. Personal cars are much more popular than public road passenger transport, which has significantly declined. Slovenia has a very high highway and motorway density compared to the European Union average. The highway system, the construction of which was accelerated after 1994, has slowly but steadily transformed Slovenia into a large conurbation. Other state roads have been rapidly deteriorating because of neglect and the overall increase in traffic.

==== Railways ====
The existing Slovenian railways are out-of-date and have difficulty competing with the motorway network; partially also as a result of dispersed population settlement. Due to this fact and the projected increase in traffic through the port of Koper, which is primarily by train, a second rail on the Koper-Divača route is in early stages of starting construction. With a lack of financial assets, maintenance and modernisation of the Slovenian railway network have been neglected. Due to the out-of-date infrastructure, the share of the railway freight transport has been in decline in Slovenia. The railway passenger transport has been recovering after a large drop in the 1990s. The Pan-European railway corridors V and X, and several other major European rail lines intersect in Slovenia.

==== Ports ====
The major Slovenian port is the Port of Koper. It is the largest Northern Adriatic port in terms of container transport, with almost 590,000 TEUs annually and lines to all major world ports. It is much closer to destinations east of the Suez than the ports of Northern Europe. In addition, the maritime passenger traffic mostly takes place in Koper. Two smaller ports used for the international passenger transport as well as cargo transport are located in Izola and Piran. Passenger transport mainly takes place with Italy and Croatia. Splošna plovba, the only Slovenian shipping company, transports freight and is active only in foreign ports.

==== Air ====
Air transport in Slovenia is very low, but has significantly grown since 1991. Of the three international airports in Slovenia, Ljubljana Jože Pučnik Airport in central Slovenia is the busiest, with connections to many major European destinations. The Maribor Edvard Rusjan Airport is located in the eastern part of the country and the Portorož Airport in the west. The state-owned Adria Airways was the largest Slovenian airline; however in 2019 it declared bankruptcy and ceased operations. Since 2003, several new carriers have entered the market, mainly low-cost airlines. The only Slovenian military airport is the Cerklje ob Krki Air Base in the southwest. There are also 12 public airports in Slovenia.

== Demographics ==


The population of Slovenia as of June 2024 is 2,118,937. With 103 inhabitants per square kilometer (262/sq mi), Slovenia ranks low among the European countries in population density (compared to for the Netherlands or for Italy). The Inner Carniola–Karst Statistical Region has the lowest population density while the Central Slovenia Statistical Region has the highest.

Slovenia is among the European countries with the most pronounced ageing of its population, ascribable to a low birth rate and increasing life expectancy. Almost all Slovenian inhabitants older than 64 are retired, with no significant difference between the genders. The working-age group is diminishing in spite of immigration. The proposal to raise the retirement age from the current 57 for women and 58 for men was rejected in a referendum in 2011. In addition, the difference among the genders regarding life expectancy is still significant. The total fertility rate (TFR) in 2014 was estimated at 1.33 children born/woman, which is lower than the replacement rate of 2.1. The majority of children are born to unmarried women (in 2016, 58.6% of all births were outside of marriage).
In 2018, life expectancy at birth was 81.1 years (78.2 years male, and 84 years female).

In 2009, the suicide rate in Slovenia was 22 per 100,000 persons per year, which places Slovenia among the highest ranked European countries. Nonetheless, from 2000 until 2010, the rate has decreased by about 30%. The differences between regions and the genders are pronounced.

=== Ethnic structure ===
The largest ethnic groups in Slovenia are Slovenes (83.1%), Serbs (2.0%), Croats
(1.8%), Bosniaks (1.6%), Muslims (0.5%), Bosnians (0.4%), Hungarians (0.3%), Albanians (0.3%) and Roma (0.2%). Other ethnic groups in Slovenia include Macedonians, Italians, Montenegrins and Germans.

=== Urbanisation ===

Depending on definition, between 65% and 79% of people live in wider urban areas. According to OECD definition of rural areas none of the Slovene statistical regions is mostly urbanised, meaning that 15% or less of the population lives in rural communities. According to this definition statistical regions are classified:
* mostly rural regions: Mura, Drava, Carinthia, Savinja, Lower Sava, Littoral–Inner Carniola, Gorizia, Southeast Slovenia
* moderately rural regions: Central Sava, Upper Carniola, Coastal–Karst, Central Slovenia.

The only large town is the capital, Ljubljana. Other (medium-sized) towns include Maribor, Celje, and Kranj. Overall, there are eleven urban municipalities in Slovenia.

=== Languages ===

The official language in Slovenia is Slovene, which is a member of the South Slavic language group. In 2002, Slovene was the native language of around 88% of Slovenia&#x27;s population according to the census, with more than 92% of the Slovenian population speaking it in their home environment. This statistic ranks Slovenia among the most homogeneous countries in the EU in terms of the share of speakers of the predominant mother tongue.

Slovene is a highly diverse Slavic language in terms of dialects, with different degrees of mutual intelligibility. Accounts of the number of dialects range from as few as seven dialects, often considered dialect groups or dialect bases that are further subdivided into as many as 50 dialects. Other sources characterize the number of dialects as nine or as eight.

Hungarian and Italian, spoken by the respective minorities, enjoy the status of official languages in the ethnically mixed regions along the Hungarian and Italian borders, to the extent that even the passports issued in those areas are bilingual. In 2002 around 0.2% of the Slovenian population spoke Italian and around 0.4% spoke Hungarian as their native language. Hungarian is co-official with Slovene in 30 settlements in 5 municipalities (whereof 3 are officially bilingual). Italian is co-official with Slovene in 25 settlements in 4 municipalities (all of them officially bilingual).

Romani, spoken in 2002 as the native language by 0.2% of people, is a legally protected language in Slovenia. Romani speakers mainly belong to the geographically dispersed and marginalized Roma community.

German, which used to be the largest minority language in Slovenia prior to World War II (around 4% of the population in 1921), is now the native language of only around 0.08% of the population, the majority of whom are more than 60 years old. Gottscheerish or &quot;Granish&quot;, the traditional German dialect of Gottschee County, faces extinction.

A significant number of people in Slovenia speak a variant of Serbo-Croatian (Serbian, Croatian, Bosnian, or Montenegrin) as their native language. These are mostly families who moved to Slovenia from other former Yugoslav republics. Altogether, Serbo-Croatian in its different forms is the second natively spoken language in Slovenia with 5.9% of population. In 2002, 0.4% of the Slovenian population declared themselves to be native speakers of Albanian and 0.2% native speakers of Macedonian. Czech, the fourth-largest minority language in Slovenia prior to World War II (after German, Hungarian, and Serbo-Croatian), is now the native language of a few hundred residents of Slovenia.

Slovenia ranks among the top European countries in knowledge of foreign languages. The most taught foreign languages are English, German, Italian, French and Spanish. , 92% of the population between the age of 25 and 64 spoke at least one foreign language and around 71.8% of them spoke at least two foreign languages, which was the highest percentage in the European Union. According to the Eurobarometer survey, the majority of Slovenes could speak Croatian (61%) and English (56%). A reported 42% of Slovenes could speak German, which was one of the highest percentages outside German-speaking countries. Italian is widely spoken on the Slovenian Coast and in some other areas of the Slovene Littoral. Around 15% of Slovenians can speak Italian, which is (according to the Eurobarometer pool) the third-highest percentage in the European Union, after Italy and Malta.

=== Immigration ===
In 2015, about 12% (237,616 people) of the population in Slovenia was born abroad. About 86% of the foreign-born population originated from other countries of former Yugoslavia as (in descending order) Bosnia-Herzegovina, followed by immigrants from Croatia, Serbia, North Macedonia, and Kosovo.

By the beginning of 2017, there were about 114,438 people with foreign citizenship residing in the country making up 5.5% of the total population. Of these foreigners, 76% had citizenships of the other countries from former Yugoslavia (excluding Croatia). Additionally 16.4% had EU-citizenships and 7.6% had citizenships of other countries.

According to the 2002 census, Slovenia&#x27;s main ethnic group are Slovenes (83%); however, their share in the total population is continuously decreasing, due to their relatively low fertility rate. At least 13% (2002) of the population were immigrants from other parts of Former Yugoslavia and their descendants. They have settled mainly in cities and suburbanised areas. Relatively small but protected by the Constitution of Slovenia are the Hungarian and the Italian ethnic minority. A special position is held by the autochthonous and geographically dispersed Roma ethnic community.

The number of people immigrating into Slovenia rose steadily from 1995 and has been increasing even more rapidly in recent years. After Slovenia joined the EU in 2004, the annual number of immigrants doubled by 2006 and increased by half yet again by 2009. In 2007, Slovenia had one of the fastest growing net migration rates in the European Union.

===Religion===


Before World War II, 97% of the Slovenian population identified as members of the Catholic Church in the country, around 2.5% as Lutheran, and around 0.5% of residents identified themselves as members of other denominations. After 1945, the country underwent a process of gradual but steady secularization. After a decade of persecution of religions, the Communist regime adopted a policy of relative tolerance towards churches. After 1990, the Catholic Church regained some of its former influence, but Slovenia remains a largely secularized society.

The 2018 Eurobarometer data shows 73.4% of population identifying as Catholic that fell to 72.1% in the 2019 Eurobarometer survey. According to the Catholic Church data, the Catholic population fell from 78.04% in 2009 to 72.11% in 2019 The vast majority of Slovenian Catholics belong to the Latin Church. A small number of Eastern Catholics live in the White Carniola region.

Despite a relatively small number of Protestants (less than 1% in 2002), the Protestant legacy is historically significant given that the Slovene standard language and Slovene literature were established by the Protestant Reformation. Primoz Trubar, a theologian in the Lutheran tradition, was one of the most influential Protestant Reformers in Slovenia. Protestantism was extinguished in the Counter-Reformation implemented by the Habsburg dynasty, which controlled the region. It only survived in the easternmost regions due to protection of Hungarian nobles, who often happened to be Calvinist themselves. Today, a significant Lutheran minority lives in the easternmost region of Prekmurje, where they represent around a fifth of the population and are headed by a bishop with the seat in Murska Sobota.

The third largest denomination, with around 2.2% of the population, is the Eastern Orthodox Church, with most adherents belonging to the Serbian Orthodox Church while a minority belongs to the Macedonian and other Eastern Orthodox churches.

According to the 2002 census, Islam is the second largest religious denomination in the country, with around 2.4% of the population. Most Slovenian Muslims came from Bosnia.

Slovenia has long been home to a Jewish community. Despite the losses suffered during the Holocaust, Judaism still numbers a few hundred adherents, mostly living in Ljubljana, site of the sole remaining active synagogue in the country.

In the 2002, around 10% of Slovenes declared themselves atheists, another 10% professed no specific denomination, and around 16% declined to answer. According to the Eurobarometer Poll 2010, 32% of Slovenian citizens &quot;believe there is a god&quot;, whereas 36% &quot;believe there is some sort of spirit or life force&quot; and 26% &quot;do not believe there is any sort of spirit, god, or life force&quot;.

=== Education ===

Slovenia&#x27;s education ranks as the 12th best in the world and 4th best in the European Union, being significantly higher than the OECD average, according to the Programme for International Student Assessment. Among people age 25 to 64, 12% have attended higher education, while on average Slovenes have 9.6 years of formal education. According to an OECD report, 83% of adults ages 25–64 have earned the equivalent of a high school degree, well above the OECD average of 74%; among 25- to 34-year-olds, the rate is 93%. According to the 1991 census there is 99.6% literacy in Slovenia. Lifelong learning is also increasing.

Responsibility for education oversight at primary and secondary level in Slovenia lies with the Ministry of Education and Sports. After non-compulsory pre-school education, children enter the nine-year primary school at the age of six. Primary school is divided into three periods, each of three years. In the academic year 2006–2007 there were 166,000 pupils enrolled in elementary education and more than 13,225 teachers, giving a ratio of one teacher per 12 pupils and 20 pupils per class.

After completing elementary school, nearly all children (more than 98%) go on to secondary education, either vocational, technical, or general secondary programmes (&quot;gimnazija&quot;). The last concludes with the &quot;matura&quot;, a comprehensive exam that allows the graduates to enter a university. 84% of secondary school graduates go on to tertiary education.

Among several universities in Slovenia, the best ranked is the University of Ljubljana, ranking among the first 500 or the first 3% of the world&#x27;s best universities according to the ARWU. Two other public universities include the University of Maribor in Styria region and the University of Primorska in Slovene Littoral. In addition, there is a private University of Nova Gorica and an international EMUNI University.

== Culture ==


=== Heritage ===
Slovenia&#x27;s architectural heritage includes 2,500 churches, 1,000 castles, ruins, and manor houses, farmhouses, and special structures for drying hay, called hayracks ().

Four natural and cultural sites in Slovenia are on the UNESCO World Heritage Site list. Škocjan Caves and its karst landscape are a protected site as the old forests in the area of Goteniški Snežnik and Kočevski Rog in the SE Slovenia. The Idrija Mercury mining site is of world importance, as are the prehistoric pile dwellings in the Ljubljana Marsh.

The most picturesque church for photographers is the medieval and Baroque building on Bled Island. Near Postojna there is a fortress called Predjama Castle, half hidden in a cave. Museums in Ljubljana and elsewhere feature unique items such as the controversial Divje Babe flute, and the oldest wheel in the world. Ljubljana has medieval, Baroque, Art Nouveau, and modern architecture. The architect Plečnik&#x27;s architecture and his innovative paths and bridges along the Ljubljanica are notable and on UNESCO tentative list.

=== Cuisine ===

Slovenian cuisine is a mixture of Central European cuisine (especially Austrian and Hungarian), Mediterranean cuisine and Balkan cuisine. Historically, Slovenian cuisine was divided into town, farmhouse, cottage, castle, parsonage and monastic cuisines. Due to the variety of Slovenian cultural and natural landscapes, there are more than 40 distinct regional cuisines.

Ethnologically, the most characteristic Slovene dishes were one-pot dishes, such as &quot;ričet&quot;, Istrian stew (), minestrone (), and &quot;žganci &quot;buckwheat spoonbread; in the Prekmurje region there is also &quot;bujta repa&quot;, and &quot;prekmurska gibanica&quot; pastry. Prosciutto () is a delicacy of the Slovene Littoral. The (a type of nut roll) has become a symbol of Slovenia, especially among the Slovene diaspora in the United States. Soups were added to the traditional one-pot meals and various kinds of porridge and stew only in relatively recent history.

Each year since 2000, the Roasted Potato Festival has been organized by the &quot;Society for the Recognition of Roasted Potatoes as a Distinct Dish&quot;. Roasted potatoes, which have been traditionally served in most Slovenian families only on Sundays, have been depicted on a special edition of post marks by the Post of Slovenia in 2012. The best known sausage is &quot;kranjska klobasa&quot;. Slovenia is also the home of the world&#x27;s oldest vine, which is 400 years old.

Slovenia has been awarded the European Region of Gastronomy title for the year 2021.

=== Dance ===
Historically the most notable Slovenian ballet dancers and choreographers were Pino Mlakar, who in 1927 graduated from the Rudolf Laban Choreographic Institute, and there met his future wife, balerina Maria Luiza Pia Beatrice Scholz. Together they worked as a leading dancer and a choreographer in Dessau, Zürich, and State opera in München. Their plan to build a Slovenian dance centre at Rožnik Hill after the World War II was supported by the minister of culture, Ferdo Kozak, but was cancelled by his successor. Pino Mlakar was also a full professor at the Academy for Theatre, Radio, Film and Television (AGRFT) of the University of Ljubljana. A Mary Wigman modern dance school was founded in the 1930s by her student, Meta Vidmar, in Ljubljana.

=== Festivals, book fairs, and other events ===
A number of music, theatre, film, book, and children&#x27;s festivals take place in Slovenia each year, including the music festivals Ljubljana Summer Festival and Lent Festival, the stand-up comedy Punch Festival, the children&#x27;s Pippi Longstocking Festival, and the book festivals Slovene book fair and Frankfurt after the Frankfurt.

The most notable music festival of Slovene music was historically the Slovenska popevka festival. Between 1981 and 2000 the Novi Rock festival was notable for bringing rock music across Iron curtain from the West to the Slovenian and then Yugoslav audience. The long tradition of jazz festivals in Titoist Yugoslavia began with the Ljubljana Jazz Festival which has been held annually in Slovenia since 1960.

=== Film ===
Slovene film actors and actresses historically include Ida Kravanja, who played her roles as &quot;Ita Rina&quot; in the early European films, and Metka Bučar. After WW II, one of the most notable film actors was Polde Bibič, who played a number of roles in many films that were well received in Slovenia, and also performed in television and radio drama.

Feature film and short film production in Slovenia historically includes Karol Grossmann, František Čap, France Štiglic, Igor Pretnar, Jože Pogačnik, Peter Zobec, Matjaž Klopčič, Boštjan Hladnik, Dušan Jovanović, Vitan Mal, Franci Slak, and Karpo Godina as its most established filmmakers. Contemporary film directors Filip Robar - Dorin, Jan Cvitkovič, Damjan Kozole, Janez Lapajne, Mitja Okorn, and Marko Naberšnik are among the representatives of the so-called &quot;Renaissance of Slovenian cinema&quot;. Slovene screenwriters, who are not film directors, include Saša Vuga and Miha Mazzini. Women film directors include Polona Sepe, Hanna A. W. Slak, and Maja Weiss.

=== Literature ===


History of Slovene literature began in the 16th century with Primož Trubar and other Protestant Reformers. Poetry in Slovene achieved its highest level with the Romantic poet France Prešeren. In the 20th century, Slovene literary fiction went through several periods: the beginning of the century was marked by the authors of the Slovene Modernism, with the most influential Slovene writer and playwright, Ivan Cankar; it was then followed by expressionism (Srečko Kosovel), avantgardism (Anton Podbevšek, Ferdo Delak) and social realism (Ciril Kosmač, Prežihov Voranc) before World War II, the poetry of resistance and revolution (Karel Destovnik Kajuh, Matej Bor) during the war, and intimism (Poems of the Four, 1953), post-war modernism (Edvard Kocbek), and existentialism (Dane Zajc) after the war.

Postmodernist authors include Boris A. Novak, Marko Kravos, Drago Jančar, Evald Flisar, Tomaž Šalamun, and Brina Svit. Among the post-1990 authors best known are Aleš Debeljak, Miha Mazzini, and Alojz Ihan. There are several literary magazines that publish Slovene prose, poetry, essays, and local literary criticism. Today, notable authors include Slavoj Žižek, Mladen Dolar, Alenka Zupančič as well as Boris Pahor.

===Media===
=== Music ===

Music of Slovenia historically includes numerous musicians and composers, such as the Renaissance composer Jacobus Gallus, who greatly influenced Central European classical music, the Baroque composer Joannes Baptista Dolar, and the violin virtuoso Giuseppe Tartini. The first Slovenian hymnal, &quot;Eni Psalmi&quot;, was published in 1567. This period saw the rise of musicians like Jacobus Gallus and George Slatkonia. In 1701, Johann Berthold von Höffer founded the Academia Philharmonicorum Labacensis, as one of the oldest such institutions in Europe, based on Italian models. Composers of Slovenian Lieder and art songs include Emil Adamič, Fran Gerbič, Alojz Geržinič, Benjamin Ipavec, Davorin Jenko, Anton Lajovic, Kamilo Mašek, Josip Pavčič, Zorko Prelovec, and Lucijan Marija Škerjanc.

In the early 20th century, impressionism was spreading across Slovenia, which soon produced composers Marij Kogoj and Slavko Osterc. Avant-garde classical music arose in Slovenia in the 1960s, largely due to the work of Uroš Krek, Dane Škerl, Primož Ramovš and Ivo Petrić, who also conducted the Slavko Osterc Ensemble. Jakob Jež, Darijan Božič, Lojze Lebič and Vinko Globokar have since composed enduring works, especially Globokar&#x27;s &quot;L&#x27;Armonia&quot;, an opera. Modern composers include Uroš Rojko, Tomaž Svete, Brina Jež-Brezavšček, Božidar Kantušer and Aldo Kumar.

The Slovene National Opera and Ballet Theatre serves as the national opera and ballet house. The Slovenian Philharmonics, established in 1701 as part of Academia operosorum Labacensis, is among the oldest such institutions in Europe.

Harmony singing is a deep rooted tradition in Slovenia, and is at least three-part singing (four voices), while in some regions even up to eight-part singing (nine voices). Slovenian folk songs, thus, usually resounds soft and harmonious, and are very seldom in minor. Traditional Slovenian folk music is performed on Styrian harmonica (the oldest type of accordion), fiddle, clarinet, zithers, flute, and by brass bands of alpine type. In eastern Slovenia, fiddle and cimbalon bands are called velike goslarije. From 1952 on, the Slavko Avsenik&#x27;s band began to appear in broadcasts, movies, and concerts all over the West Germany, inventing the original &quot;Oberkrainer&quot; country sound. The band produced nearly 1000 original compositions, an integral part of the Slovenian-style polka legacy. Many musicians followed Avsenik&#x27;s steps, including Lojze Slak.
Among pop, rock, industrial, and indie musicians the most popular in Slovenia include industrial music group Laibach, as well as Siddharta, a rock band formed in 1995. Perpetuum Jazzile is the group from Slovenia that is internationally most listened online, with more than 23 million views for the official a cappella &quot;Africa&quot; video since its publishing on YouTube in May 2009 (through January 2023). Other Slovenian bands include a historically progressive rock ones that were also popular in Titoist Yugoslavia, such as Buldožer and Lačni Franz, which inspired later comedy rock bands including Zmelkoow, Slon in Sadež and Mi2. With exception of Terrafolk that made appearances worldwide, other bands, such as Avtomobili, Zaklonišče Prepeva, Šank Rock, Big Foot Mama, Dan D, and Zablujena generacija, are mostly unknown outside the country. Slovenian metal bands include Noctiferia (death metal), Negligence (thrash metal), Naio Ssaion (gothic metal), and Within Destruction (deathcore).
Slovenian post-WWII singer-songwriters include Frane Milčinski, Tomaž Pengov whose 1973 album &quot;Odpotovanja&quot; is considered to be the first singer-songwriter album in former Yugoslavia, Tomaž Domicelj, Marko Brecelj, Andrej Šifrer, Eva Sršen, Neca Falk, and Jani Kovačič. After 1990, Adi Smolar, Iztok Mlakar, Vita Mavrič, Vlado Kreslin, Zoran Predin, Peter Lovšin, and Magnifico have been popular in Slovenia, as well. In the 21st century, there have been many successful artists from Slovenia. They include country musician Manu, zalagasper, Nika Zorjan, Omar Naber, Raiven, and Joker Out.

=== Theatre ===
Theater has a rich tradition in Slovenia, starting with the 1867 first ever Slovene-language drama performance. In addition to the main houses, which include Slovene National Theatre, Ljubljana and Maribor National Drama Theatre, a number of small producers are active in Slovenia, including physical theatre (e.g. Betontanc), street theatre (e.g. Ana Monró Theatre), theatresports championship Impro League, and improvisational theatre (e.g. IGLU Theatre). A popular form is puppetry, mainly performed in the Ljubljana Puppet Theatre.

=== Visual arts, architecture and design ===

Slovenia&#x27;s visual arts, architecture, and design are shaped by a number of architects, designers, painters, sculptors, photographers, graphics artists, as well as comics, illustration and conceptual artists. Two significant prestigious institutions exhibiting works of Slovene visual artists are the National Gallery of Slovenia and the Museum of Modern Art.

Modern architecture in Slovenia was introduced by Max Fabiani, and in the mid-war period, Jože Plečnik and Ivan Vurnik. In the second half of the 20th century, the national and universal style were merged by the architects Edvard Ravnikar and first generation of his students: Milan Mihelič, Stanko Kristl, Savin Sever. The next generation is mainly still active, including Marko Mušič, Vojteh Ravnikar, and Jurij Kobe. Selected works of Jože Plečnik which shaped Ljubljana during the inter-war period were inscribed on UNESCO&#x27;s list of World Heritage Sites in 2021.

A number of conceptual visual art groups formed, including OHO, Group 69, and IRWIN. Nowadays, the Slovene visual arts are diverse, based on tradition, reflect the influence of neighboring nations and are intertwined with modern European movements.

Internationally most notable Slovenian design items include the 1952 Rex chair, a Scandinavian design-inspired wooden chair, by interior designer Niko Kralj that was given in 2012 a permanent place in Designmuseum, Denmark, the largest museum of design in Scandinavia, and is included in the collection of the Museum of Modern Art MOMA in New York City, as well. An industrial design item that has changed the international ski industry is Elan SCX by Elan company.
The renewal of Slovene sculpture begun with Alojz Gangl who created sculptures for the public monuments of the Carniolan polymath Johann Weikhard von Valvasor and Valentin Vodnik, the first Slovene poet and journalist, as well as &quot;The Genius of the Theatre&quot; and other statues for the Slovenian National Opera and Ballet Theatre building. The development of sculpture after World War II was led by a number of artists, including brothers Boris and Zdenko Kalin, Jakob Savinšek stayed with figural art. Younger sculptors, for example Janez Boljka, Drago Tršar and particularly Slavko Tihec, moved towards abstract forms. Jakov Brdar and Mirsad Begić returned to human figures.

During World War II, numerous graphics were created by Božidar Jakac, who helped establish the post-war Academy of Visual Arts in Ljubljana.

In 1917 Hinko Smrekar illustrated Fran Levstik&#x27;s book about the well-known Slovene folk hero Martin Krpan. The children&#x27;s books illustrators include a number of women illustrators, such as Marlenka Stupica, Marija Lucija Stupica, Ančka Gošnik Godec, Marjanca Jemec Božič, and Jelka Reichman.

Historically, painting and sculpture in Slovenia was in the late 18th and the 19th century marked by Neoclassicism (Matevž Langus), Biedermeier (Giuseppe Tominz) and Romanticism (Michael Stroy). The first art exhibition in Slovenia was organized in the late 19th century by Ivana Kobilca. Impressionist artists include Matej Sternen, Matija Jama, Rihard Jakopič, Ivan Grohar whose &quot;The Sower&quot; (Slovene: Sejalec) was depicted on the €0.05 Slovenian euro coins, and Franc Berneker, who introduced impressionism to Slovenia. Espressionist painters include Veno Pilon and Tone Kralj whose picture book, reprinted thirteen times, is now the most recognisable image of Martin Krpan. Some of the best known painters in the second half of the 20th century were Zoran Mušič, Gabrijel Stupica and Marij Pregelj.

In 1841, Janez Puhar invented a process for photography on glass, recognized on 17 June 1852 in Paris by the Académie Nationale Agricole, Manufacturière et Commerciale. Gojmir Anton Kos was a notable realist painter and photographer between First World War and WW II.

=== Sports ===
Slovenia is a natural sports venue, with many Slovenians actively practicing sports. A variety of sports are played in Slovenia on a professional level, with international successes in handball, basketball, volleyball, football, ice hockey, rowing, swimming, tennis, boxing, climbing, road cycling and athletics. Prior to World War II, gymnastics and fencing used to be the most popular sports in Slovenia, with athletes like Leon Štukelj and Miroslav Cerar gaining gold Olympic medals. Football gained popularity in the interwar period. After 1945, basketball, handball and volleyball have become popular among Slovenians, and from the mid-1970s, winter sports as well. Since 1992, Slovenian sportspeople have won 55 Olympic medals, including 14 gold medals, and 26 Paralympic medals with five golds.

Individual sports are also very popular in Slovenia, including tennis and mountaineering, which are two of the most widespread sporting activities in Slovenia. Several Slovenian extreme and endurance sportsmen have gained an international reputation, including the mountaineer Tomaž Humar, the mountain skier Davo Karničar, the ultramarathon swimmer Martin Strel and the ultracyclist Jure Robič. Past and current winter sports athletes include alpine skiers, such as Mateja Svet, Bojan Križaj, Ilka Štuhec and double Olympic gold medalist Tina Maze, cross-country skier Petra Majdič, and ski jumpers, such as Primož Peterka and Peter Prevc. Boxing has gained popularity since Jan Zaveck won the IBF Welterweight World Champion title in 2009. In 2021, rock climber Janja Garnbret became the first female Olympic gold medalist in sport climbing.
In cycling, Primož Roglič became the first Slovenian to win a Grand Tour when he won the 2019 Vuelta a España. Tadej Pogačar won the Tour de France, the world&#x27;s most competitive cycling race, in 2020, 2021 and 2024. Prominent team sports in Slovenia include football, basketball, handball, volleyball, and ice hockey. The men&#x27;s national football team has qualified for two European Championships (2000 and 2024) and two World Cups (2002 and 2010). Of Slovenian clubs, NK Maribor played three times in the group stages of the UEFA Champions League. The men&#x27;s national basketball team has participated at 14 EuroBaskets, winning the gold medal in the 2017 edition, and at four FIBA World Championships. Slovenia also hosted the EuroBasket 2013. The men&#x27;s national handball team has qualified for four Olympics, eleven IHF World Championships, including their third-place finish in 2017, and fourteen European Championships. Slovenia was the hosts of the 2004 European Championship, where the national team won the silver medal. Slovenia&#x27;s most prominent handball team, RK Celje, won the EHF Champions League in the 2003–04 season. In women&#x27;s handball, RK Krim won the Champions League in 2001 and 2003. The men&#x27;s national volleyball team has won three silver medals at the European Volleyball Championship, and finished fourth at the 2022 World Championship. The national ice hockey team has participated in 30 Ice Hockey World Championships (with 10 appearances in the top division).

== See also ==

* Outline of Slovenia

==Notes==
== References ==
== Further reading ==

* Perko, Drago, Ciglic, Rok, Zorn, Matija (eds.), &quot;The Geography of Slovenia: Small But Diverse&quot; (Cham, Springer, 2020).
* Stanić, Stane, &quot;Slovenia&quot; (London, Flint River Press, 1994).
* Oto Luthar (ed.), &quot;The Land Between: A History of Slovenia. With contributions by Oto Luthar, Igor Grdina, Marjeta Šašel Kos, Petra Svoljšak, Peter Kos, Dušan Kos, Peter Štih, Alja Brglez and Martin Pogačar&quot; (Frankfurt am Main etc., Peter Lang, 2008).
== External links ==

*Slovenia from &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot;
*&quot;Facts About Slovenia&quot;, publication from the Slovenian Government Communication Office. pdf. In English, Spanish, French, German and Russian.
*Slovenia – Landmarks. Virtual reality panoramas of various spots in the country.
*&quot;Slovenia: a geographical overview&quot;. Association of the Geographical Societies of Slovenia.

Government
*Slovenia.si The main national access point to information about Slovenia.
*The Republic of Slovenia. Official institutions.
*Statistical Office of the Republic of Slovenia 
*National Meteorological Service of Slovenia

Travel
*The Slovenian Tourist portal. Slovenian Tourist Board.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="0" end="8" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="25" end="45" title="Slovenia" label="Republic of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="63" end="77" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="90" end="95" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="109" end="116" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="131" end="138" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="157" end="164" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="226" end="238" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="278" end="295" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="402" end="409" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="475" end="494" title="continental climate" label="continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q125323" start="522" end="538" title="Slovene Littoral" label="Slovene Littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q119206" start="547" end="558" title="Julian Alps" label="Julian Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="560" end="569" title="Ljubljana" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q497161" start="587" end="599" title="List of cities and towns in Slovenia" label="largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010" start="703" end="710" title="Maribor" label="Maribor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021" start="712" end="717" title="Kranj" label="Kranj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012" start="719" end="724" title="Celje" label="Celje"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015" start="729" end="734" title="Koper" label="Koper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="807" end="819" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="825" end="841" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="847" end="865" title="Carolingian Empire" label="Carolingian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="871" end="888" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="894" end="912" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="918" end="936" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q699923" start="942" end="960" title="Illyrian Provinces" label="Illyrian Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="980" end="999" title="First French Empire" label="First French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="1008" end="1023" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q718374" start="1070" end="1106" title="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs" label="State of Slovenes, Croats, and Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q386496" start="1147" end="1168" title="Kingdom of Montenegro" label="Kingdom of Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="1177" end="1194" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Kingdom of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="1204" end="1225" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1234" end="1246" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1248" end="1255" title="Nazi Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="1257" end="1262" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q600018" start="1268" end="1275" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1920–1946)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="1343" end="1371" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1390" end="1394" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q208164" start="1395" end="1407" title="puppet state" label="puppet state"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="1442" end="1452" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="1495" end="1507" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196099" start="1523" end="1540" title="Tito–Stalin split" label="Tito–Stalin split"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="1577" end="1588" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="1639" end="1659" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="1684" end="1705" title="Independence of Slovenia" label="declared independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="1748" end="1763" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="1780" end="1797" title="developed country" label="developed country"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994367" start="1806" end="1825" title="World Bank high-income economy" label="high-income economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="2153" end="2170" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="2176" end="2190" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2196" end="2210" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="2212" end="2216" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="2222" end="2274" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="2408" end="2413" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q217438" start="2505" end="2512" title="demonym" label="demonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="2636" end="2647" title="prehistoric" label="prehistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q486972" start="2676" end="2692" title="human settlement" label="human habitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777287" start="2726" end="2748" title="Divje Babe flute" label="pierced cave bear bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q503142" start="2774" end="2776" title="before present" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q143742" start="2816" end="2822" title="Cerkno" label="Cerkno"/>
<link wikidata="Q179234" start="2974" end="2984" title="Cro-Magnon" label="Cro-Magnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585772" start="3063" end="3076" title="Srečko Brodar" label="Srečko Brodar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863757" start="3080" end="3090" title="Potok Cave" label="Potok Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580" start="3102" end="3127" title="Prehistoric pile dwellings around the Alps" label="remains of pile dwellings"/>
<link wikidata="Q619970" start="3172" end="3187" title="Ljubljana Marsh" label="Ljubljana Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="3208" end="3234" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q6660938" start="3251" end="3281" title="Ljubljana Marshes Wooden Wheel" label="Ljubljana Marshes Wooden Wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="3444" end="3454" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="3462" end="3470" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q223998" start="3476" end="3484" title="Urnfield" label="Urnfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q202165" start="3544" end="3560" title="Hallstatt period" label="Hallstatt period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650313" start="3640" end="3646" title="situla (vessel)" label="situla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266" start="3651" end="3661" title="Novo Mesto" label="Novo Mesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650313" start="3673" end="3688" title="Situla" label="Town of Situlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="3762" end="3767" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q913582" start="3833" end="3845" title="Italia (Roman Empire)" label="Roman Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="3871" end="3879" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="3899" end="3907" title="Pannonia" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131434" start="3912" end="3919" title="Noricum" label="Noricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q148327" start="3953" end="3958" title="Emona" label="Emona"/>
<link wikidata="Q15906" start="3972" end="3980" title="Poetovio" label="Poetovio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012" start="3993" end="3999" title="Celeia" label="Celeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="4089" end="4094" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="4179" end="4183" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="4188" end="4196" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098970" start="4335" end="4359" title="Claustra Alpium Iuliarum" label="Claustra Alpium Iuliarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q836944" start="4369" end="4383" title="Battle of the Frigidus" label="crucial battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="4392" end="4404" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q313058" start="4409" end="4417" title="Eugenius" label="Eugenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625492" start="4436" end="4449" title="Vipava Valley" label="Vipava Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="4491" end="4497" title="Slavic peoples" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="4569" end="4577" title="Lombards" label="Lombards"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="4637" end="4642" title="Pannonian Avars" label="Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4423052" start="4658" end="4695" title="Slavic settlement of the Eastern Alps" label="Slavic settlement in the Eastern Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q295168" start="4738" end="4747" title="Samo" label="King Samo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15863" start="4972" end="4980" title="Slovenes" label="Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q37985" start="5004" end="5013" title="Carinthia (state)" label="Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q501754" start="5037" end="5056" title="Carantania" label="duchy of Carantania"/>
<link wikidata="Q193474" start="5062" end="5070" title="Carniola" label="Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="5163" end="5174" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495257" start="5233" end="5245" title="Carantanians" label="Carantanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q279764" start="5316" end="5335" title="Carinthian Slovenes" label="Carinthian Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593111" start="5369" end="5388" title="Christianization of the Slavs" label="accept Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q706600" start="5455" end="5463" title="Modestus (Apostle of Carantania)" label="Modestus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13048507" start="5571" end="5580" title="Bavarians" label="Bavarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q269753" start="5633" end="5670" title="Conversio Bagoariorum et Carantanorum" label="Conversio Bagoariorum et Carantanorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q53216" start="5823" end="5831" title="Aquileia" label="Aquileia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223266" start="5878" end="5884" title="vassal" label="vassal"/>
<link wikidata="Q154547" start="5885" end="5890" title="duchy" label="duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="5913" end="5920" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q59532" start="5934" end="5956" title="christianization" label="spreading Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495257" start="5983" end="5995" title="Carantanians" label="Carantanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="6053" end="6071" title="Carolingian Empire" label="Carolingian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193474" start="6096" end="6104" title="Carniola" label="Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q53216" start="6161" end="6169" title="Aquileia" label="Aquileia"/>
<link wikidata="Q725901" start="6212" end="6220" title="Liudewit" label="Liudewit"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="6262" end="6268" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="6373" end="6386" title="feudal system" label="feudal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q43915" start="6448" end="6454" title="Otto I" label="Otto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="6464" end="6471" title="Magyars" label="Magyars"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="6549" end="6566" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q702224" start="6601" end="6619" title="Duchy of Carinthia" label="Duchy of Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42497" start="6683" end="6696" title="Lower Austria" label="Lower Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q840454" start="6766" end="6779" title="western Slavs" label="western Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495257" start="6816" end="6835" title="Carantanians" label="Slavs of Carantania"/>
<link wikidata="Q193474" start="6843" end="6851" title="Carniola" label="Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q212685" start="6924" end="6940" title="High Middle Ages" label="High Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q580447" start="6978" end="6984" title="Styria (duchy)" label="Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q702224" start="6986" end="6995" title="Carinthia (duchy)" label="Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991244" start="6997" end="7004" title="County of Gorizia" label="Gorizia"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="7006" end="7013" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="7019" end="7025" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="7100" end="7117" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q558946" start="7309" end="7326" title="Bernhard von Spanheim" label="Dukes of Spanheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q698981" start="7332" end="7349" title="Meinhardiner" label="Counts of Gorizia"/>
<link wikidata="Q700556" start="7355" end="7370" title="Counts of Celje" label="Counts of Celje"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="7390" end="7407" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962798" start="7547" end="7571" title="Slovene Lands" label="Slovene ethnic territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q275408" start="7615" end="7631" title="Henry of Bohemia" label="Henry of Gorizia"/>
<link wikidata="Q236290" start="7732" end="7740" title="Margaret, Countess of Tyrol" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q16543832" start="7762" end="7777" title="County of Tyrol" label="County of Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q57161" start="7809" end="7817" title="Louis IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Louis IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q158434" start="7876" end="7896" title="Albert II, Duke of Austria" label="Albert II of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q241653" start="7912" end="7934" title="Elisabeth of Carinthia, Queen of the Romans" label="Elisabeth of Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q275408" start="7964" end="7980" title="Henry of Bohemia" label="Henry of Gorizia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="8071" end="8088" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="8131" end="8148" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q700556" start="8265" end="8280" title="counts of Celje" label="counts of Celje"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="8367" end="8376" title="Habsburgs" label="Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q23731257" start="8697" end="8714" title="Patria del Friuli" label="Patria del Friuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="8752" end="8760" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962798" start="8814" end="8827" title="Slovene Lands" label="Slovene Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q786171" start="8895" end="8908" title="Ottoman–Habsburg wars" label="Turkish raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q321452" start="8921" end="8935" title="Slovene peasant revolt of 1515" label="peasant revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055358" start="9007" end="9040" title="Croatian-Slovenian peasant revolt" label="Croatian-Slovenian peasant revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649504" start="9215" end="9260" title="Fall of the Republic of Venice" label="dissolution of the Republic of Venice in 1797"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962798" start="9323" end="9336" title="Slovene Lands" label="Slovene Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q699923" start="9374" end="9392" title="Illyrian Provinces" label="Illyrian Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="9422" end="9437" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="9442" end="9457" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q193474" start="9486" end="9494" title="Carniola" label="Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q702224" start="9532" end="9541" title="Duchy of Carinthia" label="Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q580447" start="9546" end="9552" title="Duchy of Styria" label="Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q306696" start="9592" end="9609" title="Austrian Littoral" label="Austrian Littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q215695" start="9622" end="9631" title="Prekmurje" label="Prekmurje"/>
<link wikidata="Q696970" start="9639" end="9657" title="Lands of the Crown of Saint Stephen" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541693" start="9939" end="9948" title="Slovene Americans" label="to the US"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090446" start="9959" end="9975" title="Slovene communities in South America" label="to South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="9994" end="10003" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="10015" end="10020" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="10074" end="10080" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q13298" start="10085" end="10089" title="Graz" label="Graz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="10263" end="10270" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q263985" start="10289" end="10309" title="Romantic nationalism" label="Romantic nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585354" start="10367" end="10382" title="United Slovenia" label="United Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="10410" end="10429" title="revolutions of 1848" label="revolutions of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639580" start="10552" end="10563" title="Yugoslavism" label="Yugoslavism"/>
<link wikidata="Q273824" start="10604" end="10624" title="South Slavs" label="South Slavic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q155812" start="10650" end="10672" title="Pan-Germanism" label="Pan-German nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299884" start="10677" end="10696" title="Italian irredentism" label="Italian irredentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="10719" end="10730" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q681517" start="10793" end="10814" title="Battles of the Isonzo" label="Battles of the Isonzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q682645" start="10962" end="10983" title="Austro-Hungarian Army" label="Austro-Hungarian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q692946" start="11054" end="11093" title="Princely County of Gorizia and Gradisca" label="Princely County of Gorizia and Gradisca"/>
<link wikidata="Q622499" start="11112" end="11124" title="refugee camp" label="refugee camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q125323" start="11372" end="11388" title="Slovene Littoral" label="Slovene Littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q871407" start="11410" end="11427" title="Treaty of Rapallo (1920)" label="Treaty of Rapallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q468823" start="11535" end="11554" title="March on Rome" label="fascists took power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675071" start="11616" end="11630" title="Italianization" label="Italianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="11736" end="11743" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="11747" end="11757" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="11894" end="11915" title="Anti-fascism" label="militant anti-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q278630" start="11929" end="11933" title="TIGR" label="TIGR"/>
<link wikidata="Q958521" start="12022" end="12034" title="Julian March" label="Julian March"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276547" start="12122" end="12149" title="Slovene People&amp;#x27;s Party (historical)" label="Slovene People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q273824" start="12239" end="12251" title="South Slavic peoples" label="South Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="12264" end="12272" title="Habsburg dynasty" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12394" end="12414" title="May Declaration (1917)" label="Declaration Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="12570" end="12585" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687281" start="12591" end="12637" title="National Council of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs" label="National Council of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="12652" end="12658" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q718374" start="12828" end="12864" title="State of Slovenes, Croats, and Serbs" label="State of Slovenes, Croats, and Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="12939" end="12945" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="12972" end="13010" title="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes" label="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="13039" end="13060" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="13368" end="13383" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="13556" end="13576" title="1929 economic crisis" label="1929 economic crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="13581" end="13597" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q692136" start="13612" end="13622" title="Carinthian Plebiscite" label="plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q37985" start="13670" end="13679" title="Carinthia (state)" label="Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="13693" end="13700" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q181902" start="13711" end="13728" title="Treaty of Trianon" label="Treaty of Trianon"/>
<link wikidata="Q215695" start="13797" end="13806" title="Prekmurje" label="Prekmurje"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="13977" end="13989" title="Cultural assimilation" label="assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="14037" end="14049" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q600018" start="14054" end="14061" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1920–1946)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="14143" end="14148" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q871407" start="14263" end="14280" title="Treaty of Rapallo (1920)" label="Treaty of Rapallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="14324" end="14352" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="14524" end="14536" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="14549" end="14554" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q215695" start="14593" end="14602" title="Prekmurje" label="Prekmurje"/>
<link wikidata="Q218276" start="14671" end="14688" title="Lower Sava Valley" label="Lower Sava Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="14740" end="14768" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="14788" end="14806" title="Invasion of Yugoslavia" label="invaded Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="14891" end="14900" title="Ljubljana" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q154278" start="15021" end="15037" title="ethnic cleansing" label="ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589262" start="15147" end="15166" title="Nedić&amp;#x27;s Serbia" label="Nedić&amp;#x27;s Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="15179" end="15182" title="NDH" label="NDH"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588090" start="15388" end="15397" title="Gottschee" label="Gottschee"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="15575" end="15586" title="Wehrmacht" label="German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q239755" start="15762" end="15783" title="Province of Ljubljana" label="Province of Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q172071" start="15789" end="15824" title="Liberation Front of the Slovene Nation" label="Slovenian National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q174777" start="15896" end="15912" title="Slovene Partisans" label="Slovene Partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="15934" end="15952" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="Yugoslav Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="15981" end="15996" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q3652001" start="16167" end="16186" title="Italian concentration camps" label="concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q701901" start="16279" end="16282" title="Rab concentration camp" label="Rab"/>
<link wikidata="Q684986" start="16287" end="16293" title="Gonars concentration camp" label="Gonars"/>
<link wikidata="Q196502" start="16524" end="16541" title="Italian armistice" label="Italian armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q246373" start="16688" end="16729" title="Operation Zone of Adriatic Coastal Region" label="Operation Zone of Adriatic Coastal Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q137886" start="16798" end="16816" title="Slovene Home Guard" label="Slovene Home Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="17056" end="17066" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="17160" end="17204" title="People&amp;#x27;s Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="People&amp;#x27;s Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17206" end="17234" title="#Etymology" label="The first Slovenian republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q211092" start="17242" end="17258" title="Socialist Republic of Slovenia" label="Federal Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="17415" end="17427" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q215695" start="17471" end="17480" title="Prekmurje" label="Prekmurje"/>
<link wikidata="Q926080" start="17513" end="17540" title="Holocaust in Hungary" label="holocaust of Hungarian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089050" start="17707" end="17723" title="Istrian Italians" label="Istrian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294142" start="17864" end="17879" title="Foibe killings" label="foibe massacres"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574141" start="17929" end="17945" title="Slovenian Istria" label="Slovenian Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q211092" start="18130" end="18172" title="Socialist Republic of Slovenia" label="first Slovenian republic, Federal Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="18208" end="18226" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Federal Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q842112" start="18237" end="18252" title="socialist state" label="socialist state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196099" start="18273" end="18290" title="Tito–Stalin split" label="Tito–Stalin split"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="18361" end="18373" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q125323" start="18398" end="18414" title="Slovene Littoral" label="Slovene Littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q867469" start="18439" end="18453" title="Inner Carniola" label="Inner Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314084" start="18556" end="18579" title="Collective farming" label="forced collectivisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15981562" start="18672" end="18695" title="Workers&amp;#x27; self-management" label="workers self-management"/>
<link wikidata="Q268003" start="18802" end="18816" title="Edvard Kardelj" label="Edvard Kardelj"/>
<link wikidata="Q663333" start="18844" end="18851" title="Titoism" label="Titoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q541157" start="18998" end="19007" title="Goli otok" label="Goli otok"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="19210" end="19225" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="19268" end="19288" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="19460" end="19476" title="Gross domestic product" label="domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q223191" start="19869" end="19882" title="Adria Airways" label="Adria Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q211092" start="19948" end="19956" title="Socialist Republic of Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402529" start="20867" end="20879" title="Contributions for the Slovenian National Program" label="57th edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064370" start="20902" end="20913" title="Nova revija (magazine)" label="Nova revija"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152970" start="21046" end="21087" title="Committee for the Defence of Human Rights" label="Committee for the Defence of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q53463" start="21180" end="21204" title="constitutional amendment" label="constitutional amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="21231" end="21254" title="parliamentary democracy" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186208" start="21492" end="21497" title="Democratic Opposition of Slovenia" label="DEMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q360127" start="21505" end="21516" title="Jože Pučnik" label="Jože Pučnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="21597" end="21616" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="Revolutions of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q272110" start="21892" end="21919" title="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q163883" start="22027" end="22038" title="Ten-Day War" label="Ten-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q917606" start="22055" end="22072" title="Brijuni Agreement" label="Brijuni Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294338" start="22285" end="22297" title="Constitution of Slovenia" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="22343" end="22378" title="privatization" label="denationalisation and privatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="22399" end="22413" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="22562" end="22576" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="22629" end="22648" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="22705" end="22724" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="22784" end="22788" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q744775" start="22837" end="22856" title="Maastricht criteria" label="Maastricht criteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="22872" end="22880" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q308905" start="22992" end="23039" title="Presidency of the Council of the European Union" label="Presidency of the Council of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4362345" start="23235" end="23263" title="2012–2013 Slovenian protests" label="2012–2013 Slovenian protests"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23301" end="23325" title="15 October 2011 global protests#Slovenia" label="15 October 2011 protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152671" start="23417" end="23488" title="Commission for the Prevention of Corruption of the Republic of Slovenia" label="Commission for the Prevention of Corruption of the Republic of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q629962" start="23576" end="23589" title="arbitrariness" label="arbitrariness"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449" start="23623" end="23638" title="Southern Europe" label="Southern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="23657" end="23661" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="23680" end="23697" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="23732" end="23751" title="Mediterranean basin" label="Mediterranean basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256191" start="23779" end="23782" title="45th parallel north" label="45°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256610" start="23787" end="23792" title="47th parallel north" label="47° N"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704721" start="23809" end="23812" title="13th meridian east" label="13°"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705870" start="23817" end="23822" title="17th meridian east" label="17° E"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700643" start="23828" end="23846" title="15th meridian east" label="15th meridian east"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442633" start="23932" end="23976" title="Geometric Centre of the Republic of Slovenia" label="Geometric Centre of the Republic of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="23991" end="24002" title="Geographic coordinate system" label="coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074540" start="24067" end="24073" title="Slivna" label="Slivna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115226" start="24097" end="24103" title="Litija" label="Litija"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024" start="24137" end="24144" title="Triglav" label="Triglav"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="24183" end="24198" title="Above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q189915" start="24276" end="24285" title="Dinaric Alps" label="Dinarides"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="24291" end="24306" title="Pannonian Plain" label="Pannonian Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="24364" end="24376" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="24432" end="24441" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="24442" end="24456" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q119206" start="24481" end="24492" title="Julian Alps" label="Julian Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q210436" start="24498" end="24517" title="Kamnik-Savinja Alps" label="Kamnik-Savinja Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q198007" start="24526" end="24534" title="Karawanks" label="Karawank"/>
<link wikidata="Q218853" start="24557" end="24564" title="Pohorje" label="Pohorje"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="24626" end="24633" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="24733" end="24749" title="Karst topography" label="Karst topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q625139" start="24803" end="24816" title="Karst Plateau" label="Karst Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="24820" end="24829" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="24931" end="24946" title="Pannonian plain" label="Pannonian plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="25147" end="25162" title="Above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25245" end="25275" title="European countries by forest area" label="by percentage of area forested"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="25283" end="25290" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="25295" end="25301" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q25403" start="25335" end="25340" title="beech" label="beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350" start="25342" end="25345" title="fir" label="fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="25362" end="25365" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="25434" end="25450" title="old growth" label="primeval forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q12958961" start="25493" end="25500" title="Kočevje" label="Kočevje"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249040" start="25640" end="25652" title="seismic zone" label="seismic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q376417" start="25690" end="25704" title="Adriatic Plate" label="Adriatic Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q188521" start="25736" end="25750" title="Eurasian Plate" label="Eurasian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q203548" start="25772" end="25785" title="African Plate" label="African Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q193343" start="25885" end="25896" title="Tectonics" label="geotectonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q777913" start="26181" end="26190" title="Carbonate rock" label="carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q570309" start="26191" end="26198" title="bedrock" label="bedrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q35509" start="26213" end="26224" title="cave system" label="cave system"/>
<link wikidata="Q737297" start="26331" end="26342" title="Anton Melik" label="Anton Melik"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26359" end="26374" title="Svetozar Ilešič" label="Svetozar Ilešič"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26412" end="26421" title="Ivan Gams" label="Ivan Gams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="26476" end="26480" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q218060" start="26506" end="26526" title="Slovene Prealps" label="subalpine landscapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q125323" start="26563" end="26579" title="Slovene Littoral" label="Slovene Littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="26583" end="26599" title="Submediterranean" label="Submediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q189915" start="26679" end="26686" title="Dinaric Alps" label="Dinaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="26687" end="26695" title="plateaus" label="plateaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="26776" end="26797" title="Pannonian Plain" label="Subpannonian Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434769" start="26921" end="26932" title="macroregion" label="macroregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="26997" end="27005" title="Pannonia" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163005" start="27355" end="27376" title="Triglav National Park" label="Triglav National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q503021" start="27392" end="27403" title="Natura 2000" label="Natura 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="27562" end="27577" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261772" start="27585" end="27616" title="Environmental Performance Index" label="Environmental Performance Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="27852" end="27856" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="27865" end="27877" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="27901" end="27920" title="continental climate" label="continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="28042" end="28063" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q202760" start="28135" end="28139" title="Soča" label="Soča"/>
<link wikidata="Q859654" start="28163" end="28177" title="Alpine climate" label="Alpine climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="28315" end="28328" title="Precipitation (meteorology)" label="Precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065271" start="28352" end="28365" title="Gulf of Genoa" label="Gulf of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q215695" start="28460" end="28469" title="Prekmurje" label="Prekmurje"/>
<link wikidata="Q190825" start="28907" end="28911" title="bora (wind)" label="bora"/>
<link wikidata="Q180372" start="28917" end="28921" title="jugo" label="jugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12314" start="28931" end="28936" title="foehn wind" label="foehn"/>
<link wikidata="Q21332443" start="29218" end="29228" title="north wind" label="north wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="29308" end="29317" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="29372" end="29384" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q204040" start="29478" end="29482" title="Mur (river)" label="Mura"/>
<link wikidata="Q171009" start="29500" end="29505" title="Drava" label="Drava"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="29523" end="29527" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q211046" start="29545" end="29550" title="Kupa" label="Kolpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="29627" end="29646" title="developed countries" label="developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148482" start="29955" end="29972" title="intensive farming" label="intensive farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q152805" start="30021" end="30055" title="Convention on Biological Diversity" label="Convention on Biological Diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914772" start="30152" end="30198" title="Biodiversity action plan" label="National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845967" start="30475" end="30506" title="Dinaric Mountains mixed forests" label="Dinaric Mountains mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q771194" start="30508" end="30531" title="Pannonian mixed forests" label="Pannonian mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q27067672" start="30533" end="30563" title="Alps conifer and mixed forests" label="Alps conifer and mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269041" start="30569" end="30595" title="Illyrian deciduous forests" label="Illyrian deciduous forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q503021" start="30658" end="30669" title="Natura 2000" label="Natura 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520600" start="30807" end="30839" title="Forest Landscape Integrity Index" label="Forest Landscape Integrity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="30932" end="30952" title="biodiversity" label="biological diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q131567" start="31099" end="31105" title="marmot" label="marmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q168327" start="31108" end="31119" title="Alpine ibex" label="Alpine ibex"/>
<link wikidata="Q131340" start="31125" end="31132" title="chamois" label="chamois"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="31153" end="31157" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q122069" start="31159" end="31167" title="roe deer" label="roe deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="31169" end="31173" title="boar" label="boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q46076" start="31179" end="31183" title="hare" label="hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q15102590" start="31190" end="31205" title="edible dormouse" label="edible dormouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q43375" start="31385" end="31398" title="Eurasian lynx" label="Eurasian lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q43576" start="31400" end="31417" title="European wild cat" label="European wild cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="31442" end="31449" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413529" start="31456" end="31471" title="European jackal" label="European jackal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120" start="31483" end="31491" title="hedgehog" label="hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q26533" start="31494" end="31500" title="marten" label="marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q651012" start="31522" end="31528" title="Viperinae" label="vipers"/>
<link wikidata="Q170713" start="31533" end="31544" title="grass snake" label="grass snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="31600" end="31606" title="Gray wolf" label="wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q36341" start="31621" end="31631" title="brown bear" label="brown bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="31723" end="31738" title="Endemism" label="endemic species"/>
<link wikidata="Q15856" start="31794" end="31797" title="olm" label="olm"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="31881" end="31888" title="cetacea" label="cetacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q149069" start="31933" end="31951" title="bottlenose dolphin" label="bottlenose dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25756" start="32034" end="32043" title="tawny owl" label="tawny owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q25384" start="32049" end="32063" title="long-eared owl" label="long-eared owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q214293" start="32069" end="32078" title="eagle owl" label="eagle owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q846664" start="32080" end="32084" title="hawk" label="hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q170251" start="32091" end="32107" title="short-toed eagle" label="short-toed eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q388450" start="32189" end="32193" title="crow" label="crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495957" start="32199" end="32205" title="magpie" label="magpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q143284" start="32283" end="32288" title="Black woodpecker" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q166171" start="32293" end="32298" title="European green woodpecker" label="green"/>
<link wikidata="Q25439" start="32299" end="32309" title="woodpecker" label="woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352" start="32319" end="32330" title="white stork" label="white stork"/>
<link wikidata="Q215695" start="32354" end="32363" title="Prekmurje" label="Prekmurje"/>
<link wikidata="Q37954" start="32512" end="32526" title="Karst Shepherd" label="Karst Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507340" start="32532" end="32550" title="Carniolan honeybee" label="Carniolan honeybee"/>
<link wikidata="Q217671" start="32560" end="32568" title="Lipizzan" label="Lipizzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q22231158" start="32580" end="32592" title="marble trout" label="marble trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258881" start="32812" end="32817" title="trout" label="trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q159323" start="32848" end="32860" title="wels catfish" label="wels catfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="33370" end="33373" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q25403" start="33378" end="33383" title="beech" label="beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="33403" end="33409" title="spruce" label="spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350" start="33411" end="33414" title="fir" label="fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="33420" end="33424" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q625139" start="33465" end="33478" title="Karst Plateau" label="Karst Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q127849" start="33549" end="33560" title="tilia" label="lime/linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q207762" start="33622" end="33631" title="tree line" label="tree line"/>
<link wikidata="Q676451" start="33676" end="33692" title="Daphne blagayana" label="Daphne blagayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q144682" start="33700" end="33707" title="gentian" label="gentian"/>
<link wikidata="Q159969" start="33716" end="33731" title="Gentiana clusii" label="Gentiana clusii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729031" start="33745" end="33764" title="Gentiana froelichii" label="Gentiana froelichii"/>
<link wikidata="Q164186" start="33779" end="33795" title="Primula auricula" label="Primula auricula"/>
<link wikidata="Q178265" start="33803" end="33812" title="Leontopodium alpinum" label="edelweiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q156124" start="33859" end="33880" title="Cypripedium calceolus" label="Cypripedium calceolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q157339" start="33894" end="33915" title="Fritillaria meleagris" label="Fritillaria meleagris"/>
<link wikidata="Q145399" start="33964" end="33982" title="Pulsatilla grandis" label="Pulsatilla grandis"/>
<link wikidata="Q841408" start="34033" end="34049" title="Ethnobotany" label="ethnobotanically"/>
<link wikidata="Q159218" start="34142" end="34159" title="Aconitum napellus" label="Aconitum napellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26726" start="34173" end="34188" title="Cannabis sativa" label="Cannabis sativa"/>
<link wikidata="Q179729" start="34205" end="34218" title="Taxus baccata" label="Taxus baccata"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="34352" end="34375" title="Parliamentary system" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="34392" end="34410" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="34416" end="34429" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q495877" start="34437" end="34446" title="President of Slovenia" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q921208" start="34677" end="34699" title="Military of Slovenia" label="Slovenian armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754526" start="34720" end="34734" title="Administration (government)" label="administrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264458" start="34772" end="34794" title="Government of Slovenia" label="Government of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45758" start="34819" end="34833" title="Prime Minister of Slovenia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568676" start="34898" end="34915" title="National Assembly (Slovenia)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="34961" end="34970" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288169" start="34971" end="34993" title="Parliament of Slovenia" label="Parliament of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="35189" end="35216" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13876576" start="35275" end="35288" title="indigenism" label="autochthonous"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="35311" end="35321" title="Ethnic Minorities" label="minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q953810" start="35366" end="35382" title="National Council (Slovenia)" label="National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258672" start="35596" end="35625" title="Liberal Democracy of Slovenia" label="Liberal Democracy of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q663333" start="35681" end="35688" title="Titoism" label="Titoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q171228" start="35857" end="35871" title="Janez Drnovšek" label="Janez Drnovšek"/>
<link wikidata="Q194443" start="36013" end="36024" title="Milan Kučan" label="Milan Kučan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57627" start="36167" end="36178" title="Janez Janša" label="Janez Janša"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663446" start="36267" end="36285" title="loan-deposit ratio" label="loan-deposit ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q911554" start="36409" end="36425" title="business magnate" label="business magnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="36451" end="36466" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q217197" start="36471" end="36501" title="European sovereign-debt crisis" label="European sovereign-debt crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q57627" start="36792" end="36803" title="Janez Janša" label="Janez Janša"/>
<link wikidata="Q526294" start="36811" end="36814" title="Slovenska demokratska stranka" label="SDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118212" start="37069" end="37088" title="Modern Centre Party" label="Modern Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258564" start="37096" end="37108" title="New Slovenia" label="New Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="37237" end="37249" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q57641" start="37280" end="37292" title="Viktor Orbán" label="Viktor Orban"/>
<link wikidata="Q106704283" start="37344" end="37360" title="Freedom Movement (Slovenia)" label="Freedom Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q65119188" start="37384" end="37392" title="2022 Slovenian parliamentary election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q526294" start="37475" end="37501" title="Slovenian Democratic Party" label="Slovenian Democratic party"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645045" start="37595" end="37607" title="Robert Golob" label="Robert Golob"/>
<link wikidata="Q45758" start="37620" end="37646" title="Prime Minister of Slovenia" label="Prime Minister of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q653368" start="37928" end="37944" title="State&amp;#x27;s Attorney" label="State Prosecutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585377" start="38082" end="38102" title="Constitutional Court of Slovenia" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q921208" start="38373" end="38395" title="Slovenian Armed Forces" label="Slovenian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365383" start="38585" end="38598" title="standing army" label="standing army"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="38604" end="38622" title="Commander-in-Chief" label="Commander-in-Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q495877" start="38630" end="38667" title="President of Slovenia" label="President of the Republic of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12797349" start="38719" end="38745" title="Chief of the General Staff (Slovenia)" label="Chief of the General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="38868" end="38872" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="39125" end="39147" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="39149" end="39155" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="39161" end="39172" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q327901" start="39196" end="39214" title="Global Peace Index" label="Global Peace Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="39793" end="39820" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211577" start="39864" end="39887" title="plurality voting system" label="plurality voting system"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="40657" end="40665" title="House of Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473816" start="40666" end="40676" title="crown land" label="crown land"/>
<link wikidata="Q193474" start="40694" end="40702" title="Carniola" label="Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q702224" start="40704" end="40713" title="Duchy of Carinthia" label="Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q580447" start="40715" end="40721" title="Styria (duchy)" label="Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q125323" start="40731" end="40739" title="Slovene Littoral" label="Littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q125323" start="40890" end="40906" title="Slovene Littoral" label="Slovene Littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q215695" start="40908" end="40917" title="Prekmurje" label="Prekmurje"/>
<link wikidata="Q867469" start="41127" end="41141" title="Inner Carniola" label="Inner Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q909928" start="41189" end="41203" title="Upper Carniola" label="Upper Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q239755" start="41279" end="41300" title="Province of Ljubljana" label="Province of Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="41316" end="41332" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13217620" start="41501" end="41538" title="Regional policy of the European Union" label="Regional policy of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330475" start="41569" end="41585" title="Eastern Slovenia" label="Eastern Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988304" start="41769" end="41785" title="Western Slovenia" label="Western Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="41955" end="41972" title="developed country" label="developed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q165687" start="42086" end="42099" title="human capital" label="human capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="42157" end="42163" title="Coal mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q917614" start="42164" end="42174" title="Industrial society" label="industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q207652" start="42186" end="42203" title="chemical industry" label="chemical industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q112730899" start="42219" end="42226" title="Service economy" label="service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="42315" end="42319" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q208133" start="42351" end="42356" title="Slovenian tolar" label="tolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="42396" end="42450" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q205926" start="42565" end="42581" title="Central Slovenia Statistical Region" label="Central Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="42617" end="42626" title="Ljubljana" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q125323" start="42635" end="42660" title="Slovene Littoral" label="western Slovenian regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q858792" start="42666" end="42673" title="Gorizia Statistical Region" label="Gorizia"/>
<link wikidata="Q833534" start="42678" end="42691" title="Coastal–Karst Statistical Region" label="Coastal–Karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q846162" start="42754" end="42758" title="Mura Statistical Region" label="Mura"/>
<link wikidata="Q148188" start="42760" end="42772" title="Central Sava Statistical Region" label="Central Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q375299" start="42778" end="42801" title="Littoral–Inner Carniola Statistical Region" label="Littoral–Inner Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="43056" end="43071" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q217197" start="43076" end="43106" title="European sovereign-debt crisis" label="European sovereign-debt crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="43238" end="43252" title="GDP per capita" label="GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="43319" end="43335" title="Baltic countries" label="Baltic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814650" start="43832" end="43841" title="austerity" label="austerity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839494" start="43951" end="43967" title="microeconomic reform" label="economic reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178147" start="46090" end="46111" title="Trade association" label="business associations"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="46469" end="46494" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q28161" start="46708" end="46720" title="labor market" label="labor market"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="47089" end="47103" title="pharmaceutical" label="pharmaceutical"/>
<link wikidata="Q848521" start="47217" end="47224" title="Gorenje" label="Gorenje"/>
<link wikidata="Q143017" start="47255" end="47259" title="Krka (company)" label="Krka"/>
<link wikidata="Q507154" start="47269" end="47277" title="Novartis" label="Novartis"/>
<link wikidata="Q174824" start="47326" end="47338" title="Petrol Group" label="Petrol Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q15090956" start="47389" end="47394" title="Revoz" label="Revoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="47426" end="47433" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q474478" start="47618" end="47643" title="Krško Nuclear Power Plant" label="Krško Nuclear Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47962" end="47989" title="Šoštanj#Power plant" label="Šoštanj thermal power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="48199" end="48203" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q339353" start="48349" end="48381" title="Pumped-storage hydroelectricity" label="pumped-storage hydro power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q171009" start="48396" end="48401" title="Drava" label="Drava"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="48475" end="48495" title="Photovoltaics" label="photovoltaic modules"/>
<link wikidata="Q555853" start="48511" end="48529" title="Biogas power plant" label="biogas powerplants"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="49275" end="49294" title="National Geographic" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344240" start="49381" end="49400" title="sustainable tourism" label="sustainable tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="49429" end="49438" title="Ljubljana" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="49459" end="49466" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q208208" start="49471" end="49487" title="Vienna Secession" label="Vienna Secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q314886" start="49557" end="49569" title="Jože Plečnik" label="Jože Plečnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q119206" start="49622" end="49633" title="Julian Alps" label="Julian Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q648902" start="49639" end="49648" title="Lake Bled" label="Lake Bled"/>
<link wikidata="Q202760" start="49657" end="49661" title="Soča" label="Soča"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024" start="49713" end="49726" title="Mount Triglav" label="Mount Triglav"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163005" start="49744" end="49765" title="Triglav National Park" label="Triglav National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q210436" start="49797" end="49816" title="Kamnik–Savinja Alps" label="Kamnik–Savinja Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q198007" start="49822" end="49831" title="Karawanks" label="Karawanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q218853" start="49837" end="49844" title="Pohorje" label="Pohorje"/>
<link wikidata="Q625139" start="49883" end="49896" title="Karst Plateau" label="Karst Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q125323" start="49904" end="49920" title="Slovene Littoral" label="Slovene Littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="49938" end="49943" title="karst" label="karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q15903" start="50047" end="50060" title="Postojna Cave" label="Postojna Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="50069" end="50075" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q500376" start="50083" end="50096" title="Škocjan Caves" label="Škocjan Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574141" start="50112" end="50128" title="Slovenian Istria" label="Slovenian Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="50139" end="50151" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919731" start="50205" end="50220" title="Venetian Gothic architecture" label="Venetian Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382" start="50243" end="50248" title="Piran" label="Piran"/>
<link wikidata="Q564988" start="50273" end="50281" title="Portorož" label="Portorož"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010" start="50364" end="50371" title="Maribor" label="Maribor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502521" start="50470" end="50485" title="Rogaška Slatina" label="Rogaška Slatina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434276" start="50487" end="50494" title="Radenci" label="Radenci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579401" start="50496" end="50509" title="Čatež ob Savi" label="Čatež ob Savi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845117" start="50511" end="50517" title="Dobrna" label="Dobrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q678429" start="50523" end="50539" title="Moravske Toplice" label="Moravske Toplice"/>
<link wikidata="Q15906" start="50654" end="50658" title="Ptuj" label="Ptuj"/>
<link wikidata="Q15922" start="50663" end="50674" title="Škofja Loka" label="Škofja Loka"/>
<link wikidata="Q79217" start="50705" end="50720" title="Predjama Castle" label="Predjama Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="50783" end="50799" title="gambling tourism" label="gambling tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q133215" start="50856" end="50862" title="casino" label="casino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50909" end="50914" title="Perla hotel and casino" label="Perla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018" start="50918" end="50929" title="Nova Gorica" label="Nova Gorica"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="51041" end="51046" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="51048" end="51055" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="51057" end="51064" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="51066" end="51073" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="51075" end="51082" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="51084" end="51095" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="51097" end="51103" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="51105" end="51111" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="51116" end="51123" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="51137" end="51151" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="51156" end="51163" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q387339" start="51460" end="51470" title="ITB Berlin" label="ITB Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q671469" start="51763" end="51794" title="Pan-European transport corridor" label="Pan-European transport corridor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51796" end="51797" title="Pan-European transport corridor V" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q659418" start="51880" end="51881" title="Pan-European Corridor X" label="X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077837" start="52288" end="52316" title="highways in Slovenia" label="highway and motorway density"/>
<link wikidata="Q245260" start="52489" end="52500" title="conurbation" label="conurbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015" start="52871" end="52876" title="Koper" label="Koper"/>
<link wikidata="Q478048" start="53469" end="53482" title="Port of Koper" label="Port of Koper"/>
<link wikidata="Q488021" start="53578" end="53582" title="twenty-foot equivalent unit" label="TEUs"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="53674" end="53678" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q15877" start="53894" end="53899" title="Izola" label="Izola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382" start="53904" end="53909" title="Piran" label="Piran"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53974" end="53988" title="Splošna plovba" label="Splošna plovba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109558" start="54226" end="54255" title="Ljubljana Jože Pučnik Airport" label="Ljubljana Jože Pučnik Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030725" start="54350" end="54379" title="Maribor Edvard Rusjan Airport" label="Maribor Edvard Rusjan Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432473" start="54434" end="54450" title="Portorož Airport" label="Portorož Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q223191" start="54480" end="54493" title="Adria Airways" label="Adria Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q695850" start="54694" end="54710" title="military airbase" label="military airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7583980" start="54718" end="54742" title="Cerklje ob Krki Air Base" label="Cerklje ob Krki Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="54779" end="54793" title="public airport" label="public airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="55033" end="55044" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q375299" start="55064" end="55103" title="Inner Carniola–Karst Statistical Region" label="Inner Carniola–Karst Statistical Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q205926" start="55148" end="55183" title="Central Slovenia Statistical Region" label="Central Slovenia Statistical Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541874" start="55635" end="55653" title="June 2011 Slovenian referendum" label="referendum in 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="55753" end="55773" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q210297" start="56093" end="56105" title="List of countries by suicide rate" label="suicide rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15863" start="56426" end="56434" title="Slovenes" label="Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564956" start="56444" end="56449" title="Serbs in Slovenia" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187243" start="56458" end="56464" title="Croats of Slovenia" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947382" start="56473" end="56481" title="Bosniaks of Slovenia" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137457" start="56490" end="56497" title="Muslims (ethnic group)" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q165235" start="56506" end="56514" title="Bosnians" label="Bosnians"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="56523" end="56533" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090450" start="56542" end="56551" title="Albanians in Slovenia" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q113461620" start="56563" end="56567" title="Romani people in Slovenia" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="56783" end="56787" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474320" start="56826" end="56853" title="Statistical regions of Slovenia" label="Slovene statistical regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q846162" start="57035" end="57039" title="Mura Statistical Region" label="Mura"/>
<link wikidata="Q856328" start="57041" end="57046" title="Drava Statistical Region" label="Drava"/>
<link wikidata="Q673562" start="57048" end="57057" title="Carinthia Statistical Region" label="Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q549369" start="57059" end="57066" title="Savinja Statistical Region" label="Savinja"/>
<link wikidata="Q913773" start="57068" end="57078" title="Lower Sava Statistical Region" label="Lower Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q375299" start="57080" end="57103" title="Littoral–Inner Carniola Statistical Region" label="Littoral–Inner Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q858792" start="57105" end="57112" title="Gorizia Statistical Region" label="Gorizia"/>
<link wikidata="Q856299" start="57114" end="57132" title="Southeast Slovenia Statistical Region" label="Southeast Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148188" start="57161" end="57173" title="Central Sava Statistical Region" label="Central Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q659845" start="57175" end="57189" title="Upper Carniola Statistical Region" label="Upper Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q833534" start="57191" end="57204" title="Coastal–Karst Statistical Region" label="Coastal–Karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q205926" start="57206" end="57222" title="Central Slovenia Statistical Region" label="Central Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="57451" end="57458" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q146665" start="57485" end="57512" title="South Slavic languages" label="South Slavic language group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503153" start="57912" end="57920" title="Slovene dialects" label="dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="58222" end="58231" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093327" start="58236" end="58243" title="Italian language in Slovenia" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13201" start="58814" end="58820" title="Romani language" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q533109" start="59264" end="59277" title="Gottscheerish" label="Gottscheerish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588090" start="59336" end="59345" title="Gottschee" label="Gottschee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="59435" end="59449" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="59451" end="59458" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="59460" end="59468" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303" start="59470" end="59477" title="Bosnian language" label="Bosnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8821" start="59482" end="59493" title="Montenegrin language" label="Montenegrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="59580" end="59595" title="former Yugoslav" label="former Yugoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="59820" end="59828" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="59857" end="59867" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="59869" end="59874" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q748216" start="60454" end="60467" title="Eurobarometer" label="Eurobarometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="60513" end="60521" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574141" start="60702" end="60717" title="Slovenian Istria" label="Slovenian Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q125323" start="60749" end="60765" title="Slovene Littoral" label="Slovene Littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="60926" end="60931" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="61156" end="61174" title="Bosnia-Herzegovina" label="Bosnia-Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="61204" end="61211" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="61213" end="61219" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="61221" end="61236" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="61242" end="61248" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15863" start="61661" end="61669" title="Slovenes" label="Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="61778" end="61792" title="fertility rate" label="fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="61868" end="61885" title="Former Yugoslavia" label="Former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294338" start="62006" end="62030" title="Constitution of Slovenia" label="Constitution of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215695" start="62039" end="62048" title="Hungarians in Slovenia" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089050" start="62057" end="62080" title="Italians in Slovenia" label="Italian ethnic minority"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62159" end="62180" title="Roma in Slovenia" label="Roma ethnic community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932516" start="62489" end="62507" title="net migration rate" label="net migration rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361259" start="62632" end="62662" title="Catholic Church in Slovenia" label="Catholic Church in the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q85502" start="62841" end="62855" title="secularization" label="secularization"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="63395" end="63407" title="Latin Church" label="Latin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q49376" start="63427" end="63444" title="Eastern Catholic Churches" label="Eastern Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q425767" start="63457" end="63471" title="White Carniola" label="White Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="63518" end="63529" title="Protestants" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="63692" end="63714" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q156902" start="63716" end="63729" title="Primoz Trubar" label="Primoz Trubar"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="63751" end="63759" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q763779" start="63803" end="63823" title="Protestant Reformers" label="Protestant Reformers"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="63875" end="63894" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="63914" end="63930" title="Habsburg dynasty" label="Habsburg dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="64069" end="64078" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="64112" end="64120" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q215695" start="64165" end="64174" title="Prekmurje" label="Prekmurje"/>
<link wikidata="Q15899" start="64274" end="64287" title="Murska Sobota" label="Murska Sobota"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="64365" end="64388" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="64427" end="64450" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Serbian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q906685" start="64483" end="64493" title="Macedonian Orthodox Church" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="64562" end="64567" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="64698" end="64704" title="Bosnia" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134900" start="64740" end="64756" title="History of the Jews in Slovenia" label="Jewish community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="64797" end="64806" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="65000" end="65008" title="atheists" label="atheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q748216" start="65110" end="65123" title="Eurobarometer" label="Eurobarometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="65458" end="65472" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="65510" end="65514" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q323481" start="65541" end="65587" title="Programme for International Student Assessment" label="Programme for International Student Assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="65944" end="65952" title="literacy" label="literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q368475" start="65966" end="65983" title="Lifelong learning" label="Lifelong learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="66664" end="66685" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="&amp;quot;gimnazija&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66716" end="66734" title="Matura#Slovenia" label="&amp;quot;matura&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377" start="66933" end="66956" title="University of Ljubljana" label="University of Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q478743" start="67057" end="67061" title="Academic Ranking of World Universities" label="ARWU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378" start="67105" end="67126" title="University of Maribor" label="University of Maribor"/>
<link wikidata="Q215659" start="67130" end="67136" title="Styria (Slovenia)" label="Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378123" start="67152" end="67175" title="University of Primorska" label="University of Primorska"/>
<link wikidata="Q125323" start="67179" end="67195" title="Slovene Littoral" label="Slovene Littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q656086" start="67229" end="67254" title="University of Nova Gorica" label="University of Nova Gorica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411497" start="67276" end="67292" title="EMUNI University" label="EMUNI University"/>
<link wikidata="Q254036" start="67490" end="67497" title="hayrack" label="hayrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="67559" end="67585" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q500376" start="67592" end="67605" title="Škocjan Caves" label="Škocjan Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="67614" end="67619" title="karst" label="karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370031" start="67744" end="67770" title="Heritage of Mercury. Almadén and Idrija" label="Idrija Mercury mining site"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580" start="67806" end="67832" title="Prehistoric pile dwellings around the Alps" label="prehistoric pile dwellings"/>
<link wikidata="Q619970" start="67840" end="67855" title="Ljubljana Marsh" label="Ljubljana Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67944" end="67955" title="Lake Bled#Bled Island" label="Bled Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q15901" start="67962" end="67970" title="Postojna" label="Postojna"/>
<link wikidata="Q79217" start="67998" end="68013" title="Predjama Castle" label="Predjama Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777287" start="68120" end="68136" title="Divje Babe flute" label="Divje Babe flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6660938" start="68146" end="68171" title="Ljubljana Marshes Wheel" label="oldest wheel in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q314886" start="68258" end="68265" title="Plečnik" label="Plečnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q42029" start="68476" end="68484" title="Austrian cuisine" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q264327" start="68489" end="68498" title="Hungarian cuisine" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q934309" start="68501" end="68522" title="Mediterranean cuisine" label="Mediterranean cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q805060" start="68527" end="68541" title="Balkan cuisine" label="Balkan cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q43455" start="68776" end="68790" title="Ethnology" label="Ethnologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q321356" start="68866" end="68871" title="ričet" label="ričet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136304" start="68879" end="68891" title="Istrian stew" label="Istrian stew"/>
<link wikidata="Q581462" start="68896" end="68906" title="minestrone" label="minestrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q264558" start="68921" end="68927" title="žganci" label="žganci"/>
<link wikidata="Q215695" start="68963" end="68972" title="Prekmurje" label="Prekmurje"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986776" start="69000" end="69010" title="bujta repa" label="bujta repa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524291" start="69028" end="69047" title="prekmurska gibanica" label="prekmurska gibanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065033" start="69062" end="69072" title="Prosciutto" label="Prosciutto"/>
<link wikidata="Q125323" start="69097" end="69113" title="Slovene Littoral" label="Slovene Littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449298" start="69130" end="69138" title="nut roll" label="nut roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541693" start="69194" end="69231" title="American Slovenes" label="Slovene diaspora in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q41415" start="69233" end="69237" title="Soup" label="Soup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69384" end="69407" title="Roasted Potato Festival" label="Roasted Potato Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098680" start="69656" end="69665" title="post mark" label="post mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6522631" start="69674" end="69690" title="Post of Slovenia" label="Post of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q700415" start="69732" end="69748" title="kranjska klobasa" label="kranjska klobasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q290102" start="69802" end="69813" title="old vine" label="oldest vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q96377460" start="69870" end="69899" title="European Region of Gastronomy" label="European Region of Gastronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196383" start="70019" end="70030" title="Pino Mlakar" label="Pino Mlakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q213712" start="70063" end="70075" title="Rudolf von Laban" label="Rudolf Laban"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196383" start="70141" end="70172" title="Pia Mlakar" label="Maria Luiza Pia Beatrice Scholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q487070" start="70238" end="70244" title="Dessau" label="Dessau"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="70246" end="70252" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="70273" end="70280" title="München" label="München"/>
<link wikidata="Q10977425" start="70330" end="70341" title="Rožnik Hill" label="Rožnik Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q414344" start="70501" end="70548" title="Academy for Theatre, Radio, Film and Television" label="Academy for Theatre, Radio, Film and Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377" start="70564" end="70587" title="University of Ljubljana" label="University of Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q77127" start="70591" end="70602" title="Mary Wigman" label="Mary Wigman"/>
<link wikidata="Q850130" start="70603" end="70615" title="modern dance" label="modern dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822309" start="70664" end="70675" title="Meta Vidmar" label="Meta Vidmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6660941" start="70874" end="70899" title="Ljubljana Summer Festival" label="Ljubljana Summer Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523298" start="70904" end="70917" title="Lent Festival" label="Lent Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259934" start="70939" end="70953" title="Punch Festival" label="Punch Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70975" end="71002" title="Pippi Longstocking Festival" label="Pippi Longstocking Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541714" start="71027" end="71044" title="Slovene book fair" label="Slovene book fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490861" start="71049" end="71078" title="Frankfurt after the Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt after the Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q14025305" start="71151" end="71168" title="Slovenska popevka" label="Slovenska popevka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064857" start="71205" end="71214" title="Novi Rock" label="Novi Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q124425" start="71267" end="71279" title="Iron curtain" label="Iron curtain"/>
<link wikidata="Q663333" start="71379" end="71386" title="Titoism" label="Titoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q451945" start="71559" end="71571" title="Ida Kravanja" label="Ida Kravanja"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71651" end="71662" title="Metka Bučar" label="Metka Bučar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209226" start="71717" end="71728" title="Polde Bibič" label="Polde Bibič"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373036" start="71934" end="71949" title="Karol Grossmann" label="Karol Grossmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q576589" start="71951" end="71964" title="František Čap" label="František Čap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080757" start="71966" end="71980" title="France Štiglic" label="France Štiglic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5993630" start="71982" end="71994" title="Igor Pretnar" label="Igor Pretnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12792880" start="71996" end="72009" title="Jože Pogačnik" label="Jože Pogačnik"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72011" end="72022" title="Peter Zobec" label="Peter Zobec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851901" start="72024" end="72038" title="Matjaž Klopčič" label="Matjaž Klopčič"/>
<link wikidata="Q343329" start="72040" end="72055" title="Boštjan Hladnik" label="Boštjan Hladnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041797" start="72057" end="72072" title="Dušan Jovanović (theatre director)" label="Dušan Jovanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936988" start="72074" end="72083" title="Vitan Mal" label="Vitan Mal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479793" start="72085" end="72096" title="Franci Slak" label="Franci Slak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373315" start="72102" end="72114" title="Karpo Godina" label="Karpo Godina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448513" start="72179" end="72198" title="Filip Robar - Dorin" label="Filip Robar - Dorin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046611" start="72200" end="72213" title="Jan Cvitkovič" label="Jan Cvitkovič"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212653" start="72215" end="72228" title="Damjan Kozole" label="Damjan Kozole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376233" start="72230" end="72243" title="Janez Lapajne" label="Janez Lapajne"/>
<link wikidata="Q66361596" start="72245" end="72256" title="Mitja Okorn" label="Mitja Okorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18644524" start="72262" end="72277" title="Marko Naberšnik" label="Marko Naberšnik"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72429" end="72438" title="Saša Vuga" label="Saša Vuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q256657" start="72443" end="72455" title="Miha Mazzini" label="Miha Mazzini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72486" end="72497" title="Polona Sepe" label="Polona Sepe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72499" end="72515" title="Hanna A. W. Slak" label="Hanna A. W. Slak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72521" end="72531" title="Maja Weiss" label="Maja Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933509" start="72566" end="72584" title="Slovene literature" label="Slovene literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q156902" start="72616" end="72629" title="Primož Trubar" label="Primož Trubar"/>
<link wikidata="Q324945" start="72634" end="72660" title="Protestant Reformation in the Slovene Lands" label="other Protestant Reformers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="72672" end="72679" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735649" start="72716" end="72724" title="Romantic poetry" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031" start="72730" end="72745" title="France Prešeren" label="France Prešeren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72885" end="72902" title="Slovene Modernism" label="Slovene Modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15809" start="72961" end="72972" title="Ivan Cankar" label="Ivan Cankar"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="72998" end="73011" title="expressionism" label="expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q368139" start="73013" end="73027" title="Srečko Kosovel" label="Srečko Kosovel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775959" start="73044" end="73059" title="Anton Podbevšek" label="Anton Podbevšek"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630957" start="73061" end="73072" title="Ferdo Delak" label="Ferdo Delak"/>
<link wikidata="Q837024" start="73078" end="73092" title="social realism" label="social realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q924983" start="73094" end="73106" title="Ciril Kosmač" label="Ciril Kosmač"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083392" start="73108" end="73123" title="Prežihov Voranc" label="Prežihov Voranc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73150" end="73185" title="poetry of resistance and revolution" label="poetry of resistance and revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q752072" start="73187" end="73208" title="Karel Destovnik Kajuh" label="Karel Destovnik Kajuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q535355" start="73210" end="73219" title="Matej Bor" label="Matej Bor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057681" start="73241" end="73249" title="intimism (Slovene poetry)" label="intimism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73251" end="73268" title="Poems of the Four" label="Poems of the Four"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73277" end="73295" title="Slovenian post-war modernism" label="post-war modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q367383" start="73297" end="73310" title="Edvard Kocbek" label="Edvard Kocbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q38066" start="73317" end="73331" title="existentialism" label="existentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159458" start="73333" end="73342" title="Dane Zajc" label="Dane Zajc"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="73360" end="73373" title="Postmodernism" label="Postmodernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4309430" start="73390" end="73404" title="Boris A. Novak" label="Boris A. Novak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849635" start="73406" end="73418" title="Marko Kravos" label="Marko Kravos"/>
<link wikidata="Q384991" start="73420" end="73432" title="Drago Jančar" label="Drago Jančar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078852" start="73434" end="73446" title="Evald Flisar" label="Evald Flisar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15794" start="73448" end="73461" title="Tomaž Šalamun" label="Tomaž Šalamun"/>
<link wikidata="Q468211" start="73467" end="73477" title="Brina Svit" label="Brina Svit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969431" start="73522" end="73535" title="Aleš Debeljak" label="Aleš Debeljak"/>
<link wikidata="Q256657" start="73537" end="73549" title="Miha Mazzini" label="Miha Mazzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734280" start="73555" end="73565" title="Alojz Ihan" label="Alojz Ihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368848" start="73585" end="73603" title="literary magazines" label="literary magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q184750" start="73709" end="73721" title="Slavoj Žižek" label="Slavoj Žižek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164381" start="73723" end="73735" title="Mladen Dolar" label="Mladen Dolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642178" start="73737" end="73752" title="Alenka Zupančič" label="Alenka Zupančič"/>
<link wikidata="Q378747" start="73764" end="73775" title="Boris Pahor" label="Boris Pahor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328766" start="73805" end="73822" title="Music of Slovenia" label="Music of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="73891" end="73902" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q439813" start="73912" end="73926" title="Jacobus Gallus" label="Jacobus Gallus"/>
<link wikidata="Q438790" start="74006" end="74028" title="Joannes Baptista Dolar" label="Joannes Baptista Dolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q108555" start="74054" end="74070" title="Giuseppe Tartini" label="Giuseppe Tartini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74106" end="74116" title="Eni Psalmi" label="Eni Psalmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q439813" start="74190" end="74204" title="Jacobus Gallus" label="Jacobus Gallus"/>
<link wikidata="Q322661" start="74209" end="74225" title="George Slatkonia" label="George Slatkonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6215653" start="74236" end="74262" title="Johann Berthold von Höffer" label="Johann Berthold von Höffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q836874" start="74275" end="74311" title="Slovenian Philharmonics" label="Academia Philharmonicorum Labacensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q216860" start="74411" end="74417" title="Lieder" label="Lieder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797274" start="74422" end="74430" title="art song" label="art song"/>
<link wikidata="Q14962" start="74440" end="74451" title="Emil Adamič" label="Emil Adamič"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478142" start="74453" end="74464" title="Fran Gerbič" label="Fran Gerbič"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734275" start="74466" end="74480" title="Alojz Geržinič" label="Alojz Geržinič"/>
<link wikidata="Q251428" start="74482" end="74497" title="Benjamin Ipavec" label="Benjamin Ipavec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178302" start="74499" end="74512" title="Davorin Jenko" label="Davorin Jenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138787" start="74514" end="74527" title="Anton Lajovic" label="Anton Lajovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q959302" start="74529" end="74541" title="Kamilo Mašek" label="Kamilo Mašek"/>
<link wikidata="Q10985421" start="74543" end="74555" title="Josip Pavčič" label="Josip Pavčič"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074481" start="74557" end="74571" title="Zorko Prelovec" label="Zorko Prelovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q379328" start="74577" end="74600" title="Lucijan Marija Škerjanc" label="Lucijan Marija Škerjanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="74630" end="74643" title="impressionism" label="impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080044" start="74705" end="74716" title="Marij Kogoj" label="Marij Kogoj"/>
<link wikidata="Q714370" start="74721" end="74734" title="Slavko Osterc" label="Slavko Osterc"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="74748" end="74763" title="european classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q12805108" start="74823" end="74832" title="Uroš Krek" label="Uroš Krek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74834" end="74844" title="Dane Skerl" label="Dane Škerl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353084" start="74846" end="74859" title="Primoz Ramovs" label="Primož Ramovš"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099147" start="74864" end="74874" title="Ivo Petric" label="Ivo Petrić"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539448" start="74899" end="74921" title="Slavko Osterc Ensemble" label="Slavko Osterc Ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74923" end="74932" title="Jakob Jez" label="Jakob Jež"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74934" end="74947" title="Darijan Božič" label="Darijan Božič"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74949" end="74960" title="Lojze Lebic" label="Lojze Lebič"/>
<link wikidata="Q683339" start="74965" end="74979" title="Vinko Globokar" label="Vinko Globokar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75049" end="75063" title="L&amp;#x27;Armonia (opera)" label="L&amp;#x27;Armonia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75106" end="75116" title="Uros Rojko" label="Uroš Rojko"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75118" end="75129" title="Tomaz Svete" label="Tomaž Svete"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75131" end="75151" title="Brina Jez-Brezavscek" label="Brina Jež-Brezavšček"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923166" start="75153" end="75169" title="Božidar Kantušer" label="Božidar Kantušer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75174" end="75184" title="Aldo Kumar" label="Aldo Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541707" start="75191" end="75232" title="Slovene National Opera and Ballet Theatre" label="Slovene National Opera and Ballet Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q836874" start="75284" end="75307" title="Slovenian Philharmonics" label="Slovenian Philharmonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998537" start="75340" end="75370" title="Academia operosorum Labacensis" label="Academia operosorum Labacensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="75422" end="75429" title="Harmony" label="Harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q76239" start="75808" end="75814" title="zither" label="zither"/>
<link wikidata="Q215695" start="75862" end="75878" title="Prekmurje" label="eastern Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75917" end="75933" title="velike goslarije" label="velike goslarije"/>
<link wikidata="Q683397" start="75953" end="75967" title="Slavko Avsenik" label="Slavko Avsenik"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="76045" end="76057" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q909928" start="76088" end="76099" title="Gorenjska" label="Oberkrainer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541786" start="76198" end="76219" title="Slovenian-style polka" label="Slovenian-style polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668481" start="76284" end="76294" title="Lojze Slak" label="Lojze Slak"/>
<link wikidata="Q487965" start="76382" end="76398" title="industrial music" label="industrial music"/>
<link wikidata="Q325359" start="76405" end="76412" title="Laibach (band)" label="Laibach"/>
<link wikidata="Q735411" start="76425" end="76434" title="Siddharta (band)" label="Siddharta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397002" start="76464" end="76481" title="Perpetuum Jazzile" label="Perpetuum Jazzile"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="76604" end="76614" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q383842" start="76621" end="76627" title="Africa (Toto song)" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="76753" end="76769" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q663333" start="76801" end="76808" title="Titoism" label="Titoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q851799" start="76829" end="76837" title="Buldožer" label="Buldožer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348830" start="76842" end="76853" title="Lačni Franz" label="Lačni Franz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391336" start="76876" end="76887" title="comedy rock" label="comedy rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073092" start="76904" end="76912" title="Zmelkoow" label="Zmelkoow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541315" start="76914" end="76927" title="Slon in Sadež" label="Slon in Sadež"/>
<link wikidata="Q11076163" start="76932" end="76935" title="Mi2 (rock band)" label="Mi2"/>
<link wikidata="Q14476337" start="76955" end="76964" title="Terrafolk" label="Terrafolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q12785320" start="77019" end="77029" title="Avtomobili" label="Avtomobili"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065129" start="77031" end="77049" title="Zaklonišče Prepeva" label="Zaklonišče Prepeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q8082713" start="77051" end="77060" title="Šank Rock" label="Šank Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289894" start="77062" end="77075" title="Big Foot Mama" label="Big Foot Mama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495088" start="77077" end="77082" title="Dan D" label="Dan D"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063525" start="77088" end="77108" title="Zablujena generacija" label="Zablujena generacija"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77180" end="77190" title="Noctiferia" label="Noctiferia"/>
<link wikidata="Q483251" start="77192" end="77203" title="death metal" label="death metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849860" start="77206" end="77216" title="Negligence (band)" label="Negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q483352" start="77218" end="77230" title="thrash metal" label="thrash metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435241" start="77233" end="77244" title="Naio Ssaion" label="Naio Ssaion"/>
<link wikidata="Q178145" start="77246" end="77258" title="gothic metal" label="gothic metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q475221" start="77285" end="77294" title="deathcore" label="deathcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484752" start="77344" end="77359" title="Frane Milčinski" label="Frane Milčinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q12804252" start="77361" end="77373" title="Tomaž Pengov" label="Tomaž Pengov"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="77472" end="77489" title="former Yugoslavia" label="former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77491" end="77505" title="Tomaž Domicelj" label="Tomaž Domicelj"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77507" end="77520" title="Marko Brecelj" label="Marko Brecelj"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77522" end="77535" title="Andrej Šifrer" label="Andrej Šifrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q451593" start="77537" end="77546" title="Eva Sršen" label="Eva Sršen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6985367" start="77548" end="77557" title="Neca Falk" label="Neca Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q22269423" start="77563" end="77575" title="Jani Kovačič" label="Jani Kovačič"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682622" start="77589" end="77599" title="Adi Smolar" label="Adi Smolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4171162" start="77601" end="77613" title="Iztok Mlakar" label="Iztok Mlakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q14623441" start="77615" end="77626" title="Vita Mavrič" label="Vita Mavrič"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024048" start="77628" end="77641" title="Vlado Kreslin" label="Vlado Kreslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q220554" start="77643" end="77655" title="Zoran Predin" label="Zoran Predin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487630" start="77657" end="77669" title="Peter Lovšin" label="Peter Lovšin"/>
<link wikidata="Q963905" start="77675" end="77684" title="Magnifico (musician)" label="Magnifico"/>
<link wikidata="Q22964793" start="77831" end="77835" title="ManuElla" label="Manu"/>
<link wikidata="Q52595331" start="77837" end="77847" title="zalagasper" label="zalagasper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4194038" start="77849" end="77860" title="Nika Zorjan" label="Nika Zorjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q742763" start="77862" end="77872" title="Omar Naber" label="Omar Naber"/>
<link wikidata="Q22231012" start="77874" end="77880" title="Raiven" label="Raiven"/>
<link wikidata="Q96879786" start="77886" end="77895" title="Joker Out" label="Joker Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q21034517" start="78072" end="78107" title="Slovene National Theatre, Ljubljana" label="Slovene National Theatre, Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q557499" start="78112" end="78142" title="Maribor National Drama Theatre" label="Maribor National Drama Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179173" start="78206" end="78222" title="physical theatre" label="physical theatre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78229" end="78238" title="Betontanc" label="Betontanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140453" start="78241" end="78255" title="street theatre" label="street theatre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78262" end="78279" title="Ana Monró Theatre" label="Ana Monró Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568285" start="78282" end="78295" title="theatresports" label="theatresports"/>
<link wikidata="Q12791338" start="78309" end="78321" title="Impro League" label="Impro League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140700" start="78327" end="78350" title="improvisational theatre" label="improvisational theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029097" start="78357" end="78369" title="IGLU Theatre" label="IGLU Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q588750" start="78390" end="78398" title="puppetry" label="puppetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q19816628" start="78424" end="78448" title="Ljubljana Puppet Theatre" label="Ljubljana Puppet Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953536" start="78802" end="78830" title="National Gallery of Slovenia" label="National Gallery of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11234584" start="78839" end="78859" title="Museum of Modern Art, Ljubljana" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="78862" end="78881" title="Modern architecture" label="Modern architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q597895" start="78912" end="78923" title="Max Fabiani" label="Max Fabiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q314886" start="78952" end="78964" title="Jože Plečnik" label="Jože Plečnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097772" start="78969" end="78980" title="Ivan Vurnik" label="Ivan Vurnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605703" start="79085" end="79100" title="Edvard Ravnikar" label="Edvard Ravnikar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10326618" start="79236" end="79247" title="Marko Mušič" label="Marko Mušič"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016064" start="79249" end="79264" title="Vojteh Ravnikar" label="Vojteh Ravnikar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79270" end="79280" title="Jurij Kobe" label="Jurij Kobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="79382" end="79388" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="79404" end="79423" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q203209" start="79447" end="79468" title="conceptual art" label="conceptual visual art"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79494" end="79497" title="OHO (art group)" label="OHO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79499" end="79507" title="Group 69" label="Group 69"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425631" start="79513" end="79518" title="IRWIN" label="IRWIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319117" start="79754" end="79757" title="Rex (chair)" label="Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1793969" start="79767" end="79786" title="Scandinavian design" label="Scandinavian design"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79831" end="79841" title="Niko Kralj" label="Niko Kralj"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79886" end="79898" title="Designmuseum" label="Designmuseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="79900" end="79907" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="79995" end="80015" title="Museum of Modern Art, New York" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="80016" end="80020" title="MOMA" label="MOMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q243606" start="80051" end="80068" title="industrial design" label="industrial design"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353388" start="80125" end="80133" title="Elan SCX" label="Elan SCX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634723" start="80137" end="80141" title="Elan (company)" label="Elan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80195" end="80206" title="Alojz Gangl" label="Alojz Gangl"/>
<link wikidata="Q193474" start="80262" end="80270" title="Carniola" label="Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q551267" start="80281" end="80309" title="Johann Weikhard von Valvasor" label="Johann Weikhard von Valvasor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083404" start="80314" end="80329" title="Valentin Vodnik" label="Valentin Vodnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541707" start="80445" end="80488" title="Slovenian National Opera and Ballet Theatre" label="Slovenian National Opera and Ballet Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q893695" start="80598" end="80603" title="Boris Kalin" label="Boris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80608" end="80620" title="Zdenko Kalin" label="Zdenko Kalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679332" start="80622" end="80636" title="Jakob Savinšek" label="Jakob Savinšek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80693" end="80705" title="Janez Boljka" label="Janez Boljka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80707" end="80718" title="Drago Tršar" label="Drago Tršar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80736" end="80748" title="Slavko Tihec" label="Slavko Tihec"/>
<link wikidata="Q5839475" start="80764" end="80772" title="abstract sculpture" label="abstract"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438411" start="80780" end="80791" title="Jakov Brdar" label="Jakov Brdar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80796" end="80808" title="Mirsad Begić" label="Mirsad Begić"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953063" start="80892" end="80905" title="Božidar Jakac" label="Božidar Jakac"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671463" start="80941" end="80963" title="Academy of Visual Arts and Design, Ljubljana" label="Academy of Visual Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590666" start="80987" end="81000" title="Hinko Smrekar" label="Hinko Smrekar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15800" start="81013" end="81025" title="Fran Levstik" label="Fran Levstik"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555081" start="81077" end="81089" title="Martin Krpan" label="Martin Krpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559570" start="81178" end="81194" title="Marlenka Stupica" label="Marlenka Stupica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763318" start="81196" end="81217" title="Marija Lucija Stupica" label="Marija Lucija Stupica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778533" start="81219" end="81237" title="Ančka Gošnik Godec" label="Ančka Gošnik Godec"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766185" start="81239" end="81259" title="Marjanca Jemec Božič" label="Marjanca Jemec Božič"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176814" start="81265" end="81279" title="Jelka Reichman" label="Jelka Reichman"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="81383" end="81396" title="Neoclassicism" label="Neoclassicism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81398" end="81411" title="Matevž Langus" label="Matevž Langus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81414" end="81425" title="Biedermeier#Visual arts" label="Biedermeier"/>
<link wikidata="Q532760" start="81427" end="81442" title="Giuseppe Tominz" label="Giuseppe Tominz"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="81448" end="81459" title="Romantic visual arts" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3601119" start="81461" end="81474" title="Michael Stroy" label="Michael Stroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q236878" start="81556" end="81569" title="Ivana Kobilca" label="Ivana Kobilca"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="81571" end="81584" title="impressionism (arts)" label="Impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4442392" start="81601" end="81614" title="Matej Sternen" label="Matej Sternen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787462" start="81616" end="81627" title="Matija Jama" label="Matija Jama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497776" start="81629" end="81643" title="Rihard Jakopič" label="Rihard Jakopič"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339347" start="81645" end="81656" title="Ivan Grohar" label="Ivan Grohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q234162" start="81730" end="81750" title="Slovenian euro coins" label="Slovenian euro coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q13392423" start="81756" end="81770" title="Franc Berneker" label="Franc Berneker"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="81814" end="81827" title="Expressionism" label="Espressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268845" start="81845" end="81855" title="Veno Pilon" label="Veno Pilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921853" start="81860" end="81870" title="Tone Kralj" label="Tone Kralj"/>
<link wikidata="Q220545" start="82045" end="82056" title="Zoran Mušič" label="Zoran Mušič"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="82058" end="82074" title="Gabrijel Stupica" label="Gabrijel Stupica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763312" start="82079" end="82092" title="Marij Pregelj" label="Marij Pregelj"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499408" start="82104" end="82115" title="Janez Puhar" label="Janez Puhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772850" start="82264" end="82280" title="Gojmir Anton Kos" label="Gojmir Anton Kos"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="82295" end="82302" title="Realism (arts)" label="realist"/>
<link wikidata="Q354234" start="82805" end="82817" title="Leon Štukelj" label="Leon Štukelj"/>
<link wikidata="Q722550" start="82822" end="82836" title="Miroslav Cerar" label="Miroslav Cerar"/>
<link wikidata="Q576643" start="83094" end="83111" title="Slovenia at the Olympics" label="55 Olympic medals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332404" start="83143" end="83163" title="Slovenia at the Paralympics" label="26 Paralympic medals"/>
<link wikidata="Q403662" start="83459" end="83470" title="Tomaž Humar" label="Tomaž Humar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679318" start="83491" end="83504" title="Davo Karničar" label="Davo Karničar"/>
<link wikidata="Q723632" start="83532" end="83544" title="Martin Strel" label="Martin Strel"/>
<link wikidata="Q929468" start="83566" end="83576" title="Jure Robič" label="Jure Robič"/>
<link wikidata="Q258443" start="83649" end="83660" title="Mateja Svet" label="Mateja Svet"/>
<link wikidata="Q506526" start="83662" end="83674" title="Bojan Križaj" label="Bojan Križaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q451604" start="83676" end="83687" title="Ilka Štuhec" label="Ilka Štuhec"/>
<link wikidata="Q10085" start="83721" end="83730" title="Tina Maze" label="Tina Maze"/>
<link wikidata="Q231305" start="83752" end="83764" title="Petra Majdič" label="Petra Majdič"/>
<link wikidata="Q453622" start="83791" end="83805" title="Primož Peterka" label="Primož Peterka"/>
<link wikidata="Q456136" start="83810" end="83821" title="Peter Prevc" label="Peter Prevc"/>
<link wikidata="Q963256" start="83858" end="83868" title="Jan Zaveck" label="Jan Zaveck"/>
<link wikidata="Q742944" start="83877" end="83880" title="International Boxing Federation" label="IBF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562372" start="83881" end="83908" title="List of welterweight boxing champions" label="Welterweight World Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q26209646" start="83946" end="83960" title="Janja Garnbret" label="Janja Garnbret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541373" start="84010" end="84024" title="sport climbing" label="sport climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110167" start="84038" end="84051" title="Primož Roglič" label="Primož Roglič"/>
<link wikidata="Q866427" start="84088" end="84098" title="Grand Tour (cycling)" label="Grand Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q56284054" start="84115" end="84135" title="2019 Vuelta a España" label="2019 Vuelta a España"/>
<link wikidata="Q26904312" start="84137" end="84150" title="Tadej Pogačar" label="Tadej Pogačar"/>
<link wikidata="Q33881" start="84159" end="84173" title="Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q172221" start="84353" end="84386" title="Slovenia national football team" label="men&amp;#x27;s national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="84409" end="84431" title="UEFA European Football Championship" label="European Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="84456" end="84466" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q210530" start="84504" end="84514" title="NK Maribor" label="NK Maribor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="84561" end="84582" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q499324" start="84588" end="84623" title="Slovenian national basketball team" label="men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q193141" start="84647" end="84657" title="EuroBasket" label="EuroBasket"/>
<link wikidata="Q26001" start="84716" end="84739" title="FIBA World Championship" label="FIBA World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q618148" start="84767" end="84782" title="EuroBasket 2013" label="EuroBasket 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q833101" start="84788" end="84821" title="Slovenia men&amp;#x27;s national handball team" label="men&amp;#x27;s national handball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q205570" start="84866" end="84885" title="IHF World Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118005" start="84944" end="84966" title="European Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="European Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q386821" start="84998" end="85024" title="2004 European Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="2004 European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q286001" start="85118" end="85126" title="RK Celje" label="RK Celje"/>
<link wikidata="Q330395" start="85136" end="85156" title="EHF Champions League" label="EHF Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117302" start="85206" end="85213" title="RK Krim" label="RK Krim"/>
<link wikidata="Q652498" start="85222" end="85238" title="Women&amp;#x27;s EHF Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q672207" start="85261" end="85296" title="Slovenia men&amp;#x27;s national volleyball team" label="men&amp;#x27;s national volleyball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834" start="85332" end="85364" title="Men&amp;#x27;s European Volleyball Championship" label="European Volleyball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q60970197" start="85393" end="85416" title="2022 FIVB Volleyball Men&amp;#x27;s World Championship" label="2022 World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q728135" start="85422" end="85446" title="Slovenia men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="national ice hockey team"/>
<link wikidata="Q190163" start="85470" end="85500" title="Ice Hockey World Championships" label="Ice Hockey World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112452" start="85563" end="85582" title="Outline of Slovenia" label="Outline of Slovenia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27339" wikidata="Q324945" url="?curid=27339" title="History of Slovenia">
<text>The history of Slovenia chronicles the period of the Slovenian territory from the 5th century BC to the present. In the Early Bronze Age, Proto-Illyrian tribes settled an area stretching from present-day Albania to the city of Trieste. The Slovenian territory was part of the Roman Empire, and it was devastated by the Migration Period&#x27;s incursions during late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages. The main route from the Pannonian plain to Italy ran through present-day Slovenia. Alpine Slavs, ancestors of modern-day Slovenians, settled the area in the late 6th Century AD. The Holy Roman Empire controlled the land for nearly 1,000 years. Between the mid-14th century through 1918 most of Slovenia was under Habsburg rule. In 1918, most Slovene territory became part of the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes, and in 1929 the Drava Banovina was created within the Kingdom of Yugoslavia with its capital in Ljubljana, corresponding to Slovenian-majority territories within the state. The Socialist Republic of Slovenia was created in 1945 as part of federal Yugoslavia. Slovenia gained its independence from Yugoslavia in June 1991, and today it is a member of the European Union and NATO.

== Prehistory to Slavic settlement ==

===Prehistory===

During the last glacial period, present-day Slovenia was inhabited by Neanderthals. The best-known Neanderthal archaeological site in Slovenia is a cave close to the village of Šebrelje near Cerkno, known as Divje Babe. Here the Divje Babe flute was found in 1995, a perforated bone controversially believed to be a flute, which would make it the oldest known musical instrument in the world.

The world&#x27;s oldest securely dated wooden wheel and axle was found near the Ljubljana Marsh in 2002.

In the transition period between the Bronze Age to the Iron Age, the Urnfield culture flourished. Numerous archeological remains dating from the Hallstatt period have been found in Slovenia, with important settlements in Most na Soči, Vače, and Šentvid pri Stični.

Novo Mesto in Lower Carniola, one of the most important archaeological sites of the Hallstatt culture, has been nicknamed the &quot;City of Situlas&quot; after numerous situlas found in the area.

===Ancient Celts and Romans===

In the Iron Age, present-day Slovenia was inhabited by Illyrian and Celtic tribes until the 1st century BC, when the Romans conquered the region establishing the provinces of Pannonia and Noricum. What is now western Slovenia was included directly under Roman Italia as part of the X region &quot;Venetia et Histria&quot;. Important Roman towns located in present-day Slovenia included Emona, Celeia and Poetovio. Other important settlements were Nauportus, Neviodunum, Haliaetum, Atrans, and Stridon.

During the Migration Period, the region suffered invasions of many barbarian armies, due to its strategic position as the main passage from the Pannonian Plain to the Italian Peninsula. Rome finally abandoned the region at the end of the 4th century. Most cities were destroyed, while the remaining local population moved to the highland areas, establishing fortified towns. In the 5th century, the region was part of the Ostrogothic Kingdom, and was later contested between the Ostrogoths, the Byzantine Empire and the Lombards.
===Slavic settlement===
The Slavic ancestors of present-day Slovenes settled in the East Alpine area at the end of the 6th century. Coming from two directions, North (via today&#x27;s East Austria and Czech Republic), settling in the area of today&#x27;s Carinthia and west Styria, and South (via today&#x27;s Slavonia), settling in the area of today&#x27;s central Slovenia.

====King Samo====
This Slavic tribe, also known as the Alpine Slavs, was submitted to Avar rule before joining the Slavic King Samo&#x27;s tribal union in 623 AD. After Samo&#x27;s death, the Slavs of Carniola (in present-day Slovenia) again fell to Avar rule, while the Slavs north of the Karavanke range (in present-day Austrian regions of Carinthia, Styria and East Tyrol) established the independent principality of Carantania.

== Middle Ages ==

===Carantania to Carinthia===

In 745, Carantania and the rest of Slavic-populated territories of present-day Slovenia, being pressured by newly consolidated Avar power, submitted to Bavarian overrule and were, together with the Duchy of Bavaria, incorporated into the Carolingian Empire, while Carantanians and other Slavs living in present Slovenia converted to Christianity. The eastern part of Carantania was ruled again by Avars between 745 and 795.

Carantania retained its internal independence until 818 when the local princes, following the anti-Frankish rebellion of Ljudevit Posavski, were deposed and gradually replaced by a Germanic (primarily Bavarian) ascendancy. Under Emperor Arnulf of Carinthia, Carantania, now ruled by a mixed Bavarian-Slav nobility, briefly emerged as a regional power, but was destroyed by the Hungarian invasions in the late 9th century.

Carantania-Carinthia was established again as an autonomous administrative unit in 976, when Emperor Otto I, &quot;the Great&quot;, after deposing the Duke of Bavaria, Henry II, &quot;the Quarreller&quot;, split the lands held by him and made Carinthia the sixth duchy of the Holy Roman Empire, but old Carantania never developed into a unified realm.

In the late 10th and beginning of the 11th century, primarily because of the Hungarian threat, the south-eastern border region of the German Empire was organized into so called &quot;marks&quot;, that became the core of the development of the historical Slovenian lands, the Carniola, the Styria and the western Goriška/Gorizia. The consolidation and formation of the historical Slovenian lands took place in a long period between 11th and 14th century being led by a number of important feudal families such as the Dukes of Spanheim, the Counts of Gorizia, the Counts of Celje and finally the House of Habsburg.

===Slovenes as a distinct ethnic group===

The first mentions of a common Slovene ethnic identity, transcending regional boundaries, date from the 16th century.

During the 14th century, most of the Slovene Lands passed under the Habsburg rule. In the 15th century, the Habsburg domination was challenged by the Counts of Celje, but by the end of the century the great majority of Slovene-inhabited territories were incorporated into the Habsburg monarchy. Most Slovenes lived in the administrative region known as Inner Austria, forming the majority of the population of the Duchy of Carniola and the County of Gorizia and Gradisca, as well as of Lower Styria and southern Carinthia.

Slovenes also inhabited most of the territory of the Imperial Free City of Trieste, although representing the minority of its population.

== Early modern period ==

In the 16th century, the Protestant Reformation spread throughout the Slovene Lands. During this period, the first books in Slovene were written by the Protestant preacher Primož Trubar and his followers, establishing the base for the development of standard Slovene. In the second half of the 16th century, numerous books were printed in Slovene, including an integral translation of the Bible by Jurij Dalmatin. During the Counter-Reformation in the late 16th and 17th centuries, led by the bishop of Ljubljana Thomas Chrön and Seckau Martin Brenner, almost all Protestants were expelled from the Slovene Lands (with the exception of Prekmurje). Nevertheless, they left a strong legacy in the tradition of Slovene culture, which was partially incorporated in the Catholic Counter-Reformation in the 17th century. The old Slovene orthography, also known as Bohorič&#x27;s alphabet, which was developed by the Protestants in the 16th century and remained in use until the mid-19th century, testified to the unbroken tradition of Slovene culture as established in the years of the Protestant Reformation.

Between the 15th and the 17th centuries, the Slovene Lands suffered many calamities. Many areas, especially in southern Slovenia, were devastated by the Ottoman–Habsburg wars. Many flourishing towns, like Vipavski Križ and Kostanjevica na Krki, were completely destroyed by incursions of the Ottoman Army, and never recovered. The nobility of the Slovene-inhabited provinces had an important role in the fight against the Ottoman Empire. The Carniolan noblemen&#x27;s army thus defeated the Ottomans in the Battle of Sisak of 1593, marking the end of the immediate Ottoman threat to the Slovene Lands, although sporadic Ottoman incursions continued well into the 17th century.
In the 16th and 17th centuries, the western Slovene regions became the battlefield of the wars between the Habsburg monarchy and the Venetian Republic, most notably the War of Gradisca, which was largely fought in the Slovene Goriška region. Between the late 15th and early 18th centuries, the Slovene lands also witnessed many peasant wars, the best-known being the Carinthian Peasant Revolt of 1478, the Slovene Peasant Revolt of 1515, the Croatian–Slovene Peasant Revolt of 1573, the Second Slovene Peasant Revolt of 1635, and the Tolmin Peasant Revolt of 1713.

The late 17th century was also marked by a vivid intellectual and artistic activity. Many Italian Baroque artists, mostly architects and musicians, settled in the Slovene Lands, and contributed greatly to the development of the local culture. Artists like Francesco Robba, Andrea Pozzo, Vittore Carpaccio and Giulio Quaglio worked in the Slovenian territory, while scientists such as Johann Weikhard von Valvasor and Johannes Gregorius Thalnitscher contributed to the development of the scholarly activities. By the early 18th century, however, the region entered another period of stagnation, which was slowly overcome only by the mid-18th century.

==Age of Enlightenment to the national movement==

Between the early 18th century and early 19th century, the Slovene lands experienced a period of peace, with a moderate economic recovery starting from mid-18th century onward. The Adriatic city of Trieste was declared a free port in 1718, boosting the economic activity throughout the western parts of the Slovene Lands. The political, administrative and economic reforms of the Habsburg rulers Maria Theresa of Austria and Joseph II improved the economic situation of the peasantry, and were well received by the emerging bourgeoisie, which was however still weak.

In the late 18th century, a process of standardarization of Slovene began, promoted by Carniolan clergymen like Marko Pohlin and Jurij Japelj. During the same period, peasant-writers began using and promoting the Slovene vernacular in the countryside. This popular movement, known as &quot;bukovniki&quot;, started among Carinthian Slovenes as part a wider revival of Slovene literature. The Slovene cultural tradition was strongly reinforced in the Enlightenment period in the 18th century by the endeavours of the Zois Circle. After two centuries of stagnation, Slovene literature emerged again, most notably in the works of the playwright Anton Tomaž Linhart and the poet Valentin Vodnik. However, German remained the main language of culture, administration and education well into the 19th century.

Between 1805 and 1813, the Slovene-settled territory was part of the Illyrian Provinces, an autonomous province of the Napoleonic French Empire, the capital of which was established at Ljubljana. Although the French rule in the Illyrian Provinces was short-lived it significantly contributed to greater national self-confidence and awareness of freedoms. The French did not entirely abolish the feudal system, their rule familiarised in more detail the inhabitants of the Illyrian Provinces with the achievements of the French Revolution and with contemporary bourgeois society. They introduced equality before the law, compulsory military service for men and a uniform tax system, and also abolished certain tax privileges, introduced modern administration, separated powers between the state and the Church, and nationalised the judiciary.

In August 1813, Austria declared war on France. Austrian troops led by General Franz Tomassich invaded the Illyrian Provinces. After this short French interim all Slovene Lands were, once again, included in the Austrian Empire. Slowly, a distinct Slovene national consciousness developed, and the quest for a political unification of all Slovenes became widespread. In the 1820s and 1840s, the interest in Slovene language and folklore grew enormously, with numerous philologists collecting folk songs and advancing the first steps towards a standardization of the language. A small number of Slovene activist, mostly from Styria and Carinthia, embraced the Illyrian movement that started in neighboring Croatia and aimed at uniting all South Slavic peoples. Pan-Slavic and Austro-Slavic ideas also gained importance. However, the intellectual circle around the philologist Matija Čop and the Romantic poet France Prešeren was influential in affirming the idea of Slovene linguistic and cultural individuality, refusing the idea of merging the Slovenes into a wider Slavic nation.

In 1848, a mass political and popular movement for the United Slovenia (&quot;&quot;) emerged as part of the Spring of Nations movement within the Austrian Empire. Slovene activists demanded a unification of all Slovene-speaking territories in a unified and autonomous Slovene kingdom within the Austrian Empire. Although the project failed, it served as an almost undisputed platform of Slovene political activity in the following decades.

== Clashing nationalisms in the late 19th century ==


Between 1848 and 1918, numerous institutions (including theatres and publishing houses, as well as political, financial and cultural organisations) were founded in the so-called Slovene National Awakening. Despite their political and institutional fragmentation and lack of proper political representation, the Slovenes were able to establish a functioning national infrastructure.

With the introduction of a constitution granting civil and political liberties in the Austrian Empire in 1860, the Slovene national movement gained force. Despite its internal differentiation among the conservative Old Slovenes and the progressive Young Slovenes, the Slovene nationals defended similar programs, calling for a cultural and political autonomy of the Slovene people. In the late 1860s and early 1870s, a series of mass rallies called &quot;tabori&quot;, modeled on the Irish monster meetings, were organized in support of the United Slovenia program. These rallies, attended by thousands of people, proved the allegiance of wider strata of the Slovene population to the ideas of national emancipation.

By the end of the 19th century, Slovenes had established a standardized language, and a thriving civil society. Literacy levels were among the highest in the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and numerous national associations were present at grassroots level. The idea of a common political entity of all South Slavs, known as Yugoslavia, emerged.

Since the 1880s, a fierce culture war between Catholic traditionalists and integralists on one side, and liberals, progressivists and anticlericals dominated Slovene political and public life, especially in Carniola. During the same period, the growth of industrialization intensified social tensions. Both Socialist and Christian socialist movements mobilized the masses. In 1905, the first Socialist mayor in the Austro-Hungarian Empire was elected in the Slovene mining town of Idrija on the list of the Yugoslav Social Democratic Party. In the same years, the Christian socialist activist Janez Evangelist Krek organized hundreds of workers and agricultural cooperatives throughout the Slovene countryside.

At the turn of the 20th century, national struggles in ethnically mixed areas (especially in Carinthia, Trieste and in Lower Styrian towns) dominated the political and social lives of the citizenry. By the 1910s, the national struggles between Slovene and Italian speakers in the Austrian Littoral, and Slovene and German speakers, overshadowed other political conflicts and brought about a nationalist radicalization on both sides.

In the last two decades before World War One, Slovene arts and literature experienced one of its most flourishing periods, with numerous talented modernist authors, painters and architects. The most important authors of this period were Ivan Cankar, Oton Župančič and Dragotin Kette, while Ivan Grohar and Rihard Jakopič were among the most talented Slovene visual artists of the time.

 After the Ljubljana earthquake of 1895, the city experienced a rapid modernization under the charismatic Liberal nationalist mayors Ivan Hribar and Ivan Tavčar. Architects like Max Fabiani and Ciril Metod Koch introduced their own version of the Vienna Secession architecture to Ljubljana. In the same period, the Adriatic port of Trieste became an increasingly important center of Slovene economy, culture and politics. By 1910, around a third of the city population was Slovene, and the number of Slovenes in Trieste was higher than in Ljubljana.

At the turn of the 20th century, hundreds of thousands of Slovenes emigrated to other countries, mostly to the United States, but also to South America, Germany, Egypt and to larger cities in the Austro-Hungarian Empire, especially Zagreb and Vienna. It has been calculated that around 300,000 Slovenes emigrated between 1880 and 1910, which means that one in six Slovenes left their homeland.

== Emigration ==
The period between the 1880s and World War I saw a mass emigration from the present-day Slovenia to America. The largest group of Slovenes eventually settled in Cleveland, Ohio, and the surrounding area. The second-largest group settled in Chicago, principally on the Lower West Side. Many Slovene immigrants went to southwestern Pennsylvania, southeastern Ohio and the state of West Virginia to work in the coal mines and lumber industry. Some also went to the Pittsburgh or Youngstown, Ohio areas, to work in the steel mills, as well as Minnesota&#x27;s Iron Range, to work in the iron mines.

During the First World War, which severely affected Slovenia in particular with the bloody soviet front and the politics of the great powers that threatened to dismantle the Slovene territory between several countries (Treaty of London, 1915), Slovenes have already tried to regulate their national position in the common state unit Croats and Serbs in the Habsburg Monarchy. The demand, known as the May Declaration, was given by the Slovene, Croatian and Serbian parliamentarians in the Vienna Parliament in the spring of 1917. The ruling circles of the Habsburg monarchy initially rejected the request, and subsequent government initiatives for the federalisation of the monarchy (for example, the October manifesto of Emperor Charles) was rejected by most Slovenian politicians, which has already leaned towards independence. The preservation of the reformed state was longest defended by the former head of the Slovenian People&#x27;s Party and the last Provincial Commander-in-Chief of Carniola, Ivan Šusteršič, who had few supporters and influence.

== Merging into the Yugoslav state and struggle for the border areas ==

The Slovene People&#x27;s Party launched a movement for self-determination, demanding the creation of a semi-independent South Slavic state under Habsburg rule. The proposal was picked up by most Slovene parties, and a mass mobilization of Slovene civil society, known as the Declaration Movement, followed. By early 1918, more than 200,000 signatures were collected in favor of the Slovene People Party&#x27;s proposal.

During the War, some 500 Slovenes served as volunteers in the Serbian army, while a smaller group led by Captain Ljudevit Pivko, served as volunteers in the Italian Army. In the final year of the war, many predominantly Slovene regiments in the Austro-Hungarian Army staged a mutiny against their military leadership; the best-known mutiny of Slovene soldiers was the Judenburg Rebellion in May 1918.

Following the dissolution of Austro-Hungarian Empire in the aftermath of the World War I, a National Council of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs took power in Zagreb on 6 October 1918. On 29 October independence was declared by a national gathering in Ljubljana, and by the Croatian parliament, declaring the establishment of the new State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs. On 1 December 1918 the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs merged with Serbia, becoming part of the new Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, itself being renamed in 1929 to Kingdom of Yugoslavia.

Slovenes whose territory fell under the rule of neighboring states Italy, Austria and Hungary, were subjected to policies of assimilation.

===Border with Austria===
After the dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire in late 1918, an armed dispute started between the Slovenes and German Austria for the regions of Lower Styria and southern Carinthia. In November 1918, Rudolf Maister seized the city of Maribor and surrounding areas of Lower Styria in the name of the newly formed Yugoslav state. The Austrian government of Styria refrained from military intervention and also opposed a referendum, knowing that the vast majority of Lower Styria was ethnically Slovenian, while Maribor, Ptuj, and Celje had a German-speaking majority, partly as a result of assimilation of Slovenes. Maribor and Lower Styria were eventually awarded to Yugoslavia in the Treaty of Saint-Germain.

Around the same time, a group of volunteers led by Franjo Malgaj attempted to take control of southern Carinthia. Fighting in Carinthia lasted between December 1918 and June 1919, when the Slovene volunteers and the regular Serbian Army managed to occupy the city of Klagenfurt. In compliance with the Treaty of Saint-Germain, the Yugoslav forces had to withdraw from Klagenfurt, while a referendum was to be held in other areas of southern Carinthia. In October 1920, the majority of the population of southern Carinthia voted to remain in Austria, and only a small portion of the province (around Dravograd and Guštanj) was awarded to the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes. With the Treaty of Trianon, on the other hand, Kingdom of Yugoslavia was awarded the Slovene-inhabited Prekmurje region, which had belonged to Hungary since the 10th century. 

===Border with Italy===
In exchange for joining the Allied Powers in the First World War, the Kingdom of Italy, under the secret Treaty of London (1915) and later Treaty of Rapallo (1920), was granted rule over much of the Slovene territories. These included a quarter of the Slovene ethnic territory, including areas that were exclusively ethnic Slovene. The population of the affected areas was approximately 327,000 of the total population of 1.3 million Slovenes.

== Kingdom of Yugoslavia ==
In 1921, against the vote of the great majority (70%) of Slovene MPs, a centralist constitution was passed in the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes. Despite it, Slovenes managed to maintain a high level of cultural autonomy, and both economy and the arts prospered. Slovene politicians participated in almost all Yugoslav governments, and the Slovene conservative leader Anton Korošec briefly served as the only non-Serbian Prime Minister of Yugoslavia in the period between the two world wars.

In 1929, the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes was renamed to Kingdom of Yugoslavia. The constitution was abolished, civil liberties suspended, while the centralist pressure intensified. Slovenia was renamed to Drava Banovina. During the whole interwar period, Slovene voters strongly supported the conservative Slovene People&#x27;s Party, which unsuccessfully fought for the autonomy of Slovenia within a federalized Yugoslavia. In 1935, however, the Slovene People&#x27;s Party joined the pro-regime Yugoslav Radical Community, opening the space for the development of a left wing autonomist movement. In the 1930s, the economic crisis created a fertile ground for the rising of both leftist and rightist radicalisms. In 1937, the Communist Party of Slovenia was founded as an autonomous party within the Communist Party of Yugoslavia. Between 1938 and 1941, left liberal, Christian left and agrarian forces established close relations with members of the illegal Communist party, aiming at establishing a broad anti-Fascist coalition.

The main territory of Slovenia, being the most industrialized and westernized among others less developed parts of Yugoslavia became the main center of industrial production: in comparison to Serbia, for example, in Slovenia the industrial production was four times greater and even twenty-two times greater than in Vardar Banovina.

The interwar period brought a further industrialization in Slovenia, with a rapid economic growth in the 1920s followed by a relatively successful economic adjustment to the 1929 economic crisis. This development however affected only certain areas, especially the Ljubljana Basin, the Central Sava Valley, parts of Slovenian Carinthia, and the urban areas around Celje and Maribor. Tourism experienced a period of great expansion, with resort areas like Bled and Rogaška Slatina gaining an international reputation. Elsewhere, agriculture and forestry remained the predominant economic activities. Nevertheless, Slovenia emerged as one of the most prosperous and economically dynamic areas in Yugoslavia, profiting from a large Balkan market. Arts and literature also prospered, as did architecture. The two largest Slovenian cities, Ljubljana and Maribor, underwent an extensive program of urban renewal and modernization. Architects like Jože Plečnik, Ivan Vurnik and Vladimir Šubic introduced modernist architecture to Slovenia.

===Fascist Italianization of Littoral Slovenes and resistance===

With a secret Treaty of London in 1915, the Kingdom of Italy was promised large portions of Austrian-Hungarian territory by the Triple Entente, in exchange for joining the Entente against the Central Powers in World War I. After the Central Powers were defeated in 1918, Italy went on to annex some of the promised territories, after signing the treaty of Rapallo with the new Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes in 1920. However, these areas also included a quarter of Slovene ethnic territory and approximately 327.000 out of total population of 1.3 million Slovenes, were annexed by the Kingdom of Italy The treaty left half a million Slavs (besides Slovenes also Croatians) inside Italy, while only a few hundred Italians in the fledgling Yugoslav state&quot;.

Trieste was at the end of 19th century de facto the largest Slovene city, having had more Slovene inhabitants than Ljubljana. After being ceded from the multi-ethnic Austria, Italian lower middle class—who felt most threatened by the city&#x27;s Slovene middle class—sought to make Trieste &quot;città italianissima&quot;, committing series of attacks, led by Black Shirts, on Slovene shops, libraries, lawyer offices, and the central place of the rival community in &quot;Narodni dom&quot;. Forced Italianization followed and by the mid-1930s, several thousand Slovenes, especially intellectuals from Trieste region, emigrated to the Kingdom of Yugoslavia and to South America.

The present-day Slovenian municipalities of Idrija, Ajdovščina, Vipava, Kanal, Postojna, Pivka, and Ilirska Bistrica, were subjected to forced Italianization. The Slovene minority in Italy (1920-1947) lacked any minority protection under international or domestic law. Clashes between the Italian authorities and Fascist squads on one side, and the local Slovene population on the other, started as early as 1920, culminating with the burning of the Narodni dom, the Slovenian National Hall of Trieste. After all Slovene minority organizations in Italy had been suppressed, the militant anti-fascist organization TIGR was formed in 1927 in order to fight Fascist violence. The anti-Fascist guerrilla movement continued throughout the late 1920s and 1930s.

When Hungary, Bulgaria and Romania joined the Tripartite pact in 1940, pressure greatly increased on Yugoslavia to join in as Hitler was trying to protect its southern flank before launching the attack on the Soviet Union. The signing of the Treaty of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia with Germany on March 25, 1941, was followed two days later by a coup led by aviation general Dušan Simović. Regent prince Pavel was thrown out and authority was granted to young Peter. General Simović took over the provisional administration of the government. Thus, Yugoslavia did not seem to be reliable anymore to Hitler, and so on April 6, 1941, according to the operation Marita and without a formal declaration of war, Axis forces invaded the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. The attack began with the bombing of Belgrade, killing 20,000 people. The resistance of the Yugoslav royal army was only symbolic, as only half of the recruits were able to collect due to slow mobilization, and the military equipment and doctrine of Serbia from the Balkan wars and the First World War were obsolete. Thus, on April 10, German troops have already reached Zagreb and on April 12 Belgrade. The Italian army launched its attack only on April 11, when Hungary joined. At that time, the German army was already in Karlovac. The Italian army split into two parts: it penetrated the part towards both Ljubljana and beyond via Kočevje, and the second part penetrated via Dalmatia. The German army also broke out of Bulgaria and with the mobilized units easily prevented the withdrawal of the Yugoslav army into the Thessaloniki front.

Shortly after the attack, the National People&#x27;s Council was formed under the leadership of Marko Natlačen, who called for a peaceful handover of weapons and expelled the occupier. After the capitulation of the Yugoslav army, Hungary took over most of Prekmurje. In 1941, five Slovene settlements were established under the authority of NDH: Bregansko selo (now called Slovenska vas), Nova vas near Bregana (now Nova vas near Mokrice), Jesenice in Dolenjska, Obrežje and Čedem. The territory was about 20 square kilometers, with about 800 inhabitants at that time.
The Italians in the beginning held a moderate policy in their occupied territory. In this way, bilingualism coincided, Italian was introduced into schools only as a teaching subject, all non-political, cultural and sports associations allowed it. In the occupied territory, composed of Ljubljana, Notranjska and Dolenjska with approximately 320,000 inhabitants, Italy established the Province of Ljubljana (Italian Provincia di Lubiana). After the first successful rebel actions of the occupants in the occupied territory, the Italian authorities changed the policy and began the program of ethnic cleansing [15]. The execution of this plot led to the expulsion of approximately 35,000 civilians, of whom in the Italian concentration camps, in 1942 and 1943, about 3500 men, women and children died of hunger and disease [16] That this was an attempt to ethnic cleansing, results not only from the very large number of people killed and displaced, but also from the statements and orders of the high Italian officers, and in particular from the content of the notorious 3C circular, signed by General Mario Roatta on March 1, 1942. ]
The German form of occupation was the tiniest of all three, since they banned all Slovenian newspapers, German was introduced into schools as a language, the adults were violently enrolled in the Styrian Homeland Association and the Carinthian People&#x27;s Union or their armed sections. The official language has also become German. They violently took away 600 children who seemed to satisfy the criteria of the Aryan race and assigned them to the Lebensborn organization, they introduced Nazi laws, and later began to mobilize the military, which was contrary to international law, ...

On April 26, 1941, the Anti-Imperialist Front was set up in Ljubljana (renamed the Liberation Front) in the German invasion of the Soviet Union, which began an armed struggle against the occupiers. The founding groups of the Anti-Imperialist Front were: the Communist Party of Slovenia, part of the Christian Socialists, the democratic part of the Liberal Gymnastical Society Sokol and a part of the cultural workers who were unconnected. In memory of this event was determined April 27 as the day of the resistance against the occupier.

In Volkmerjev prehod in Maribor, on April 29, 1941, two anti-German-style young men under the leadership of Bojan Ilich burned two personal cars of the German Civil Administration. This was the first rebuffing anti-occupation campaign in occupied Slovenia, which was born out of a revolt at the trance, which was visited by Hitler during the three days before that of most of the German Germans. Nazi police arrested about 60 young men, but they soon released them because they could not prove their participation in the fire. On June 22, 1941, the main command of the Partisan forces was established and on the same day, the Secrets of the Liberation Movement OF were published. Subsequently, on November 1, 1941, the Basic Points of the OF, whose points 8 and 9 were written under the influence of the Atlantic Charter, were also published. By the signing of the Dolomite Declaration on March 1, 1943, the leading role in the Liberation Front was taken over by the Communist Party of Slovenia, which in the victorious national liberation struggle itself assumed all power.

In 1943, a liberated territory was formed in Kočevje, where the OF organized the Kočevski Choir, in which it elected the highest organ of the Slovenian state, adopted a decision on joining the Primorska Slovenia and elected a delegation for the II. sitting AVNOJ.

At the end of the war, the Slovene Partisan army, together with the Yugoslav Army and the Soviet Red Army, freed the entire Slovenian ethnic territory. The VOS departments under the command of the Communist Party and the Soviet model, after the end of the war, mostly performed post-war extrajudicial killings against civilian and military personnel. Up to 600 graves have been evacuated so far throughout Slovenia.

==Slovenia in Titoist Yugoslavia==

Following the re-establishment of Yugoslavia at the end of World War II, Slovenia became part of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, declared on 29 November 1943. A socialist state was established, but because of the Tito–Stalin split, economic and personal freedoms were broader than in the Eastern Bloc. In 1947, Italy ceded most of the Julian March to Yugoslavia, and Slovenia thus regained the Slovenian Littoral. The towns of Koper, Izola, and Piran, Italian-populated urban enclaves saw mass ethnic Italian and anti-Communist emigration (part of the Istrian Exodus) due to the ongoing Foibe massacres and other revenge against them for Italian war crimes and due to their fear of Communism, which by 1947 had nationalised all private property.

The dispute over the port of Trieste however remained open until 1954, until the short-lived Free Territory of Trieste was divided among Italy and Yugoslavia, thus giving Slovenia access to the sea. This division was ratified only in 1975 with the Treaty of Osimo, which gave a final legal sanction to Slovenia&#x27;s long disputed western border. From the 1950s, the Socialist Republic of Slovenia enjoyed a relatively wide autonomy.

===Stalinist period===
Between 1945 and 1948, a wave of political repressions took place in Slovenia and in Yugoslavia. Thousands of people were imprisoned for their political beliefs. Several tens of thousands of Slovenes left Slovenia immediately after the war in fear of Communist persecution. Many of them settled in Argentina, which became the core of Slovenian anti-Communist emigration. More than 50,000 more followed in the next decade, frequently for economic reasons, as well as political ones. These later waves of Slovene immigrants mostly settled in Canada and in Australia, but also in other western countries.

===The 1948 Tito–Stalin split and aftermath===

In 1948, the Tito–Stalin split took place. In the first years following the split, the political repression worsened, as it extended to Communists accused of Stalinism. Hundreds of Slovenes were imprisoned in the concentration camp of Goli Otok, together with thousands of people of other nationalities. Among the show trials that took place in Slovenia between 1945 and 1950, the most important were the Nagode Trial against democratic intellectuals and left liberal activists (1946) and the Dachau trials (1947–1949), where former inmates of Nazi concentration camps were accused of collaboration with the Nazis. Many members of the Roman Catholic clergy also suffered persecution. The case of bishop of Ljubljana Anton Vovk, who was doused with gasoline and set on fire by Communist activists during a pastoral visit to Novo Mesto in January 1952, echoed in the western press.

===1950s: heavy industrialization===
In the late 1950s, Slovenia was the first of the Yugoslav republics to begin a process of relative pluralization. A decade of industrialisation was accompanied also by a fervent cultural and literary production with many tensions between the regime and the dissident intellectuals. From the late 1950s onward, dissident circles started to be formed, mostly around short-lived independent journals, such as &quot;Revija 57&quot; (1957–1958), which was the first independent intellectual journal in Yugoslavia and one of the first of this kind in the Communist bloc, and &quot;Perspektive&quot; (1960–1964). Among the most important critical public intellectuals in this period were the sociologist Jože Pučnik, the poet Edvard Kocbek, and the literary historian Dušan Pirjevec.

===1960s: &quot;Self-management&quot;===
By the late 1960s, the reformist faction gained control of the Slovenian Communist Party, launching a series of reforms, aiming at the modernization of Slovenian society and economy. A new economic policy, known as workers self-management started to be implemented under the advice and supervision of the main theorist of the Yugoslav Communist Party, the Slovene Edvard Kardelj.

===1970s-1980s: &quot;Years of Lead&quot;===
In 1973, this trend was stopped by the conservative faction of the Slovenian Communist Party, backed by the Yugoslav Federal government. A period known as the &quot;Years of Lead&quot; (Slovene: &quot;svinčena leta&quot;) followed. During this period, censorship and repression of the press and artists increased, while freedom of speech declined. Many people were jailed because of their political beliefs.

===1980s: Towards independence===
In the 1980s, Slovenia experienced a rise of cultural pluralism. Numerous grass-roots political, artistic and intellectual movements emerged, including the Neue Slowenische Kunst, the Ljubljana school of psychoanalysis, and the &quot;Nova revija&quot; intellectual circle. By the mid-1980s, a reformist fraction, led by Milan Kučan, took control of the Slovenian Communist Party, starting a gradual reform towards controlled political pluralism.

The Yugoslav economic crisis of the 1980s increased the struggles within the Yugoslav Communist regime regarding the appropriate economic measures to be undertaken. Slovenia, which had less than 10% of overall Yugoslav population, produced around a fifth of the country&#x27;s GDP and a fourth of all Yugoslav exports. The political disputes around economic measures was echoed in the public sentiment, as many Slovenes felt they were being economically exploited, having to sustain an expensive and inefficient federal administration.

In 1987 and 1988, a series of clashes between the emerging civil society and the Communist regime culminated with the Slovene Spring. In 1987, a group of liberal intellectuals published a manifesto in the alternative &quot;Nova revija&quot; journal; in their so-called Contributions for the Slovenian National Program, they called for democratization and a greater independence for Slovenia. Some of the articles openly contemplated Slovenia&#x27;s independence from Yugoslavia and the establishment of a full-fedged parliamentary democracy. The manifesto was condemned by the Communist authorities, but the authors did not suffer any direct repression, and the journal was not suppressed (although the editorial board was forced to resign). At the end of the same year, a massive strike broke out in the Litostroj manufacturing plant in Ljubljana, which led to the establishment of the first independent trade union in Yugoslavia. The leaders of the strike established an independent political organization, called the Social Democratic Union of Slovenia. Soon afterwards, in mid May 1988, an independent Peasant Union of Slovenia was organized. Later in the same month, the Yugoslav Army arrested four Slovenian journalists of the alternative magazine &quot;Mladina&quot;, accusing them of revealing state secrets. The so-called Ljubljana trial triggered mass protests in Ljubljana and other Slovenian cities. (See:1987-1988 Slovenia protests)

A mass democratic movement, coordinated by the Committee for the Defense of Human Rights, pushed the Communists in the direction of democratic reforms. These revolutionary events in Slovenia pre-dated by almost one year the Revolutions of 1989 in Eastern Europe, but went largely unnoticed by international observers.

At the same time, the confrontation between the Slovenian and Serbian Leagues of Communists (which was dominated by the nationalist leader Slobodan Milošević), became the most important political struggle in Yugoslavia. The poor economic performance of the Federation, and rising clashes between the different republics, created a fertile soil for the rise of secessionist ideas among Slovenes, both anti-Communists and Communists. On 27 of September 1989 the Slovenian Assembly made many amendments to the 1974 constitution including the abandonment of the League of Communists of Slovenia monopoly on political power and the reassertion of Slovenia&#x27;s right to leave Yugoslavia.

In an action named &quot;Action North&quot; in 1989, Slovene police forces, members of which later organized their own veteran organization, prevented several hundred Milošević supporters from meeting in Ljubljana on 1 December at a so-called Rally of Truth, with an attempt to overthrow Slovenian leadership because of its opposition to Serb centralist policy. The action can be considered the first defense action for Slovenian independence.

On 23 January 1990, the League of Communists of Slovenia, in protest against the domination of the Serb nationalist leadership, walked out of the 14th Congress of the League of Communists of Yugoslavia which effectively ceased to exist as a national party – they were followed soon after by the League of Communists of Croatia.

In September 1989, numerous constitutional amendments were passed by the Assembly, which introduced parliamentary democracy to Slovenia. On 7 March 1990, the Slovenian Assembly passed the amendment XCI changing the official name of the state to the Republic of Slovenia dropping the word &#x27;Socialist&#x27;. The new name has been official since 8 March 1990.

==Republic of Slovenia==
===Free elections===
On 30 December 1989 Slovenia officially opened the spring 1990 elections to opposition parties thus inaugurating multi-party democracy. The &quot;Democratic Opposition of Slovenia&quot; (DEMOS) coalition of democratic political parties was created by an agreement between the Slovenian Democratic Union, the Social Democrat Alliance of Slovenia, the Slovene Christian Democrats, the Farmers&#x27; Alliance and the Greens of Slovenia. The leader of the coalition was the well-known dissident Jože Pučnik.

On 8 April 1990, the first free multiparty parliamentary elections, and the first round of the presidential elections, were held. DEMOS defeated the former Communist party in the parliamentary elections, by gathering 54% of the votes. A coalition government led by the Christian Democrat Lojze Peterle was formed, and began economic and political reforms that established a market economy and a liberal democratic political system. At the same time, the government pursued the independence of Slovenia from Yugoslavia.

Milan Kučan was elected president in the second round of the presidential elections on 22 April 1990, defeating the DEMOS candidate Jože Pučnik.

===Kučan presidency (1990–2002)===

====The DEMOS government (1990–1992): Independence====
Milan Kučan strongly opposed the preservation of Yugoslavia through violent means. After the concept of a loose confederation failed to gain support by the republics of Yugoslavia, Kučan favoured a controlled process of non-violent disassociation that would enable the collaboration of the former Yugoslav nations on a new, different basis.

On 23 December 1990, a referendum on the independence of Slovenia was held, in which the more than 88% of Slovenian residents voted for the independence of Slovenia from Yugoslavia. Slovenia became independent through the passage of the appropriate acts on 25 June 1991. In the morning of the next day, a short Ten-Day War began, in which the Slovenian forces successfully rejected Yugoslav military interference. In the evening, the independence was solemnly proclaimed in Ljubljana by the Speaker of the Parliament France Bučar. The Ten-Day War lasted till 7 July 1991, when the Brijuni Agreement was made, with the European Community as a mediator, and the Yugoslav National Army started its withdrawal from Slovenia. On 26 October 1991, the last Yugoslav soldier left Slovenia.

On 23 December 1991 the Assembly of the Republic of Slovenia passed a new Constitution, which became the first Constitution of independent Slovenia.
Kučan represented Slovenia at the peace conference on former Yugoslavia in the Hague and Brussels which concluded that the former Yugoslav nations were free to determine their future as independent states. On May 22, 1992 Kučan represented Slovenia as it became a new member of the United Nations.

The most important achievement of the Coalition, however, was the declaration of independence of Slovenia on 25 June 1991, followed by a Ten-Day War in which the Slovenians rejected Yugoslav military interference.
As a result of internal disagreements the coalition fell apart in 1992. It was officially dissolved in April 1992 in agreement with all the parties that had composed it. Following the collapse of Lojze Peterle&#x27;s government, a new coalition government, led by Janez Drnovšek was formed, which included several parties of the former DEMOS. Jože Pučnik became vice-president in Drnovšek&#x27;s cabinet, guaranteeing some continuity in the government policies.

The first country to recognise Slovenia as an independent country was Croatia on 26 June 1991. In the second half of 1991, some of the countries formed after the collapse of the Soviet Union recognized Slovenia. These were the Baltic countries Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia, and Georgia, Ukraine, and Belarus. On 19 December 1991, Iceland and Sweden recognised Slovenia, and Germany passed a resolution on the recognition of Slovenia, realised alongside the European Economic Community (EEC) on 15 January 1992. On 13, respectively 14 January 1992, the Holy See and San Marino recognised Slovenia. The first transmarine countries to recognise Slovenia were Canada and Australia on the 15, respectively 16 January 1992. The United States was at first very reserved towards the Slovenian independence and recognised Slovenia only on 7 April 1992.

The recognition by the EEC was particularly significant for Slovenia, as in December 1991 the EEC passed criteria for the international recognition of newly founded countries, which included democracy, the respect for human rights, the government of law, and the respect for the national minority rights. The recognition of Slovenia therefore indirectly also meant that Slovenia had been meeting the passed criteria.

In December 1992, after the independence and the international recognition of Slovenia, Kučan was elected as the first president of Slovenia in the 1992 presidential election, with the support of the citizens list. He won another five-year term in the 1997 election, running again as an independent and again winning the majority in the first round.

====Drnovšek premiership (1992–2002): Re-orientation of Slovenia&#x27;s trade====

Janez Drnovšek was the second Prime Minister of independent Slovenia. He was chosen as a compromise candidate and an expert in economic policy, transcending ideological and programmatic divisions between parties. Drnovšek&#x27;s governments reoriented Slovenia&#x27;s trade away from Yugoslavia towards the West and contrary to some other former Communist countries in Eastern Europe, the economic and social transformation followed a gradualist approach. After six months in opposition from May 2000 to Autumn 2000, Drnovšek returned to power again and helped to arrange the first meeting between George W. Bush and Vladimir Putin (Bush-Putin 2001).

===Drnovšek presidency (2002–2007); EU and NATO membership===

Drnovšek held the position of the president from 2002 to 2007. During the term, in March 2003, Slovenia held two referendums on joining the EU and NATO. Slovenia joined NATO on 29 March 2004. and the European Union on 1 May 2004. On 1 January 2007 Slovenia joined the Eurozone and adopted the euro as its currency.

====Janša premiership (2004–2008): Unsustainable growth====
Janez Janša was Prime Minister of Slovenia from November 2004 to November 2008 for the first time. During the term characterized by over-enthusiasm after joining EU, between 2005 and 2008 the Slovenian banks have seen loan-deposit ratio veering out of control, over-borrowing from foreign banks and then over-crediting private sector, leading to its unsustainable growth.

===Türk presidency (2007–2012)===
Danilo Türk held the position of the president from 2007 to 2012.

====Pahor premiership (2008–2012): Blocked reforms====
Borut Pahor was Prime Minister of Slovenia from November 2008 until February 2012. Faced by the global economic crisis his government proposed economic reforms, but they were rejected by the opposition leader Janez Janša and blocked by referendums in 2011. On the other hand, the voters voted in favour of an arbitration agreement with Croatia, aimed to solve the border dispute between the countries, emerging after the breakup of Yugoslavia. In 2010, Slovenia joined the OECD.

===Pahor presidency (2012-2022)===

Pahor has held the position of president since 2012. In November 2017, Slovenian President Borut Pahor was re-elected for a second term in close election.

====Janša premiership (2012–2013): Anti-corruption report====
Janša was Prime Minister of Slovenia from February 2012 until March 2013 for the second time. He was replaced by the first female PM in history of Slovenia, Alenka Bratušek, after the official anti-corruption agency&#x27;s &quot;Report on the Parliamentary Parties&#x27; Leaders&quot; was issued.
Former prime minister Janez Janša spent six months in prison in 2014 after being convicted on bribery charges related to a 2006 arms deal. Janša had denied any wrongdoing.

Miro Cerar was prime minister since September 2014 until March 2018. His government coalition included Cerar&#x27;s Party of Modern Centre, the Social Democrats and pensioners’ party DeSUS.

In June 2018, the center-right Slovenia Democratic Party (SDS) of former prime minister Janez Janša won in the election. SDS secured 25 seats in the 90-seat parliament. A center-left party, The List of Marjan Šarec (LMŠ), was in second place with 13 seats. Cerar&#x27;s Party of The Modern Centre was fourth with just 10 seats.

In August 2018, new prime minister Marjan Šarec formed a minority government made up of five center-left parties.

In January 2020, prime minister Šarec resigned because his minority government was too weak to push through important legislation.

====Janša premiership (2020-2022)====
In March 2020, Janez Janša became prime minister for third time in the new coalition government of SDS, the Modern Centre Party (SMC), New Slovenia (NSi) and Pensioners&#x27; Party (DeSUS). Janša had previously been prime minister from 2004 to 2008 and from 2012 to 2013.
Janez Janša was known as a right-wing populist and an outspoken supporter of former US President Donald Trump. Janša was also known as an ally of right-wing Prime Minister Viktor Orban of Hungary.

====Golob premiership (2022-)====
In April 2022, liberal opposition, The Freedom Movement, won the parliamentary election. The Freedom Movement won 34.5% of the vote, compared with 23.6% for Janša’s Slovenian Democratic party. On 25 May 2022, Slovenia’s parliament voted to appoint the leader of Freedom Movement, Robert Golob, as the new Prime Minister of Slovenia to succeed Janez Janša.

In November 2022, Natasa Pirc Musar, liberal candidate and lawyer, won the second round of Slovenia&#x27;s presidential election, becoming Slovenia&#x27;s first female president.

===Pirc Musar presidency (2022-)===

On 23 December 2022, Nataša Pirc Musar became Slovenia’s fifth president to succeed her predecessor Borut Pahor.

==See also==
* Breakup of Yugoslavia
* Divje Babe flute
* Habsburg monarchy
* History of the Balkans
* History of Europe
* History of Austria, History of Italy, History of Hungary, History of Croatia, History of Yugoslavia
* History of the Jews in Slovenia
* League of Communists of Yugoslavia
* List of presidents of Slovenia
* List of heads of state of Yugoslavia
* List of prime ministers of Yugoslavia
* Politics of Slovenia
* Prime Minister of Slovenia
* Ten-Day War
* Timeline of Slovenian history
* Republic of Prekmurje
* Slovene March (Kingdom of Hungary)

==References==
==Further reading==

* Oto Luthar (ed), &quot;The Land Between: A history of Slovenia. With contributions by Oto Luthar, Igor Grdina, Marjeta Šašel Kos, Petra Svoljšak, Peter Kos, Dušan Kos, Peter Štih, Alja Brglez and Martin Pogačar&quot; (Frankfurt am Main etc., Peter Lang, 2008).

==External links==

* Sistory.si – an education and research portal of Slovene historiography.
* History of Slovenia: Primary Documents</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q324945" start="4" end="23" title="History of Slovenia" label="history of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962798" start="53" end="72" title="Slovenian Lands" label="Slovenian territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="120" end="136" title="Early Bronze Age" label="Early Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="144" end="152" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="204" end="211" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="227" end="234" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="276" end="288" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="319" end="335" title="Migration Period" label="Migration Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="361" end="375" title="late Antiquity" label="late Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="384" end="401" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="427" end="442" title="Pannonian plain" label="Pannonian plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q913582" start="446" end="451" title="Italy (Roman Empire)" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4423052" start="486" end="498" title="Alpine Slavs" label="Alpine Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15863" start="524" end="534" title="Slovenians" label="Slovenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="585" end="602" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="716" end="724" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="782" end="820" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256012" start="838" end="852" title="Drava Banovina" label="Drava Banovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="876" end="897" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="918" end="927" title="Ljubljana" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q211092" start="999" end="1029" title="Socialist Republic of Slovenia" label="Socialist Republic of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="1061" end="1079" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="federal Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="1119" end="1129" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1176" end="1190" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="1195" end="1199" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="1270" end="1289" title="last glacial period" label="last glacial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="1329" end="1340" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546042" start="1436" end="1444" title="Šebrelje" label="Šebrelje"/>
<link wikidata="Q143742" start="1450" end="1456" title="Cerkno" label="Cerkno"/>
<link wikidata="Q18533909" start="1467" end="1477" title="Divje Babe" label="Divje Babe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777287" start="1488" end="1504" title="Divje Babe flute" label="Divje Babe flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q592289" start="1699" end="1713" title="wheel and axle" label="wheel and axle"/>
<link wikidata="Q619970" start="1733" end="1748" title="Ljubljana Marsh" label="Ljubljana Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394404" start="1796" end="1806" title="Bronze Age Europe" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000127" start="1814" end="1822" title="Iron Age Europe" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q223998" start="1828" end="1844" title="Urnfield culture" label="Urnfield culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q202165" start="1904" end="1920" title="Hallstatt period" label="Hallstatt period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398575" start="1980" end="1992" title="Most na Soči" label="Most na Soči"/>
<link wikidata="Q637519" start="1994" end="1998" title="Vače" label="Vače"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613333" start="2004" end="2022" title="Šentvid pri Stični" label="Šentvid pri Stični"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266" start="2025" end="2035" title="Novo Mesto" label="Novo Mesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q861573" start="2039" end="2053" title="Lower Carniola" label="Lower Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650313" start="2194" end="2200" title="situla" label="situla"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="2261" end="2269" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="2309" end="2317" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="2322" end="2328" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="2371" end="2377" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="2429" end="2437" title="Pannonia" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131434" start="2442" end="2449" title="Noricum" label="Noricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q913582" start="2508" end="2520" title="Roman Italy" label="Roman Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148327" start="2640" end="2645" title="Emona" label="Emona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012" start="2647" end="2653" title="Celeia" label="Celeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15906" start="2658" end="2666" title="Poetovio" label="Poetovio"/>
<link wikidata="Q11122991" start="2701" end="2710" title="Nauportus" label="Nauportus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036862" start="2712" end="2722" title="Neviodunum" label="Neviodunum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642036" start="2724" end="2733" title="Haliaetum" label="Haliaetum"/>
<link wikidata="Q841428" start="2735" end="2741" title="Atrans" label="Atrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q522804" start="2747" end="2754" title="Stridon" label="Stridon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="2768" end="2784" title="Migration Period" label="Migration Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="2901" end="2916" title="Pannonian Plain" label="Pannonian Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="2924" end="2941" title="Italian Peninsula" label="Italian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q583038" start="3179" end="3198" title="Ostrogothic Kingdom" label="Ostrogothic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="3236" end="3246" title="Ostrogoths" label="Ostrogoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3252" end="3268" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="3277" end="3285" title="Lombards" label="Lombards"/>
<link wikidata="Q15863" start="3347" end="3355" title="Slovenes" label="Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q63817" start="3371" end="3382" title="Eastern Alps" label="East Alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4423052" start="3719" end="3731" title="Alpine Slavs" label="Alpine Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="3750" end="3754" title="Pannonian Avars" label="Avar"/>
<link wikidata="Q295168" start="3791" end="3795" title="Samo" label="Samo"/>
<link wikidata="Q193474" start="3865" end="3873" title="Carniola" label="Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q198007" start="3954" end="3963" title="Karavanke" label="Karavanke"/>
<link wikidata="Q37985" start="4006" end="4015" title="Carinthia" label="Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41358" start="4017" end="4023" title="Styria" label="Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195398" start="4028" end="4038" title="East Tyrol" label="East Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q501754" start="4084" end="4094" title="Carantania" label="Carantania"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="4385" end="4403" title="Carolingian Empire" label="Carolingian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495257" start="4411" end="4423" title="Carantanians" label="Carantanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q59532" start="4467" end="4492" title="christianization" label="converted to Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="4671" end="4679" title="Franks" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q725901" start="4693" end="4710" title="Ljudevit Posavski" label="Ljudevit Posavski"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="4773" end="4780" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q154936" start="4809" end="4828" title="Arnulf of Carinthia" label="Arnulf of Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="4949" end="4958" title="Hungarian people" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q702224" start="5238" end="5247" title="Duchy of Carinthia" label="Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695" start="5525" end="5542" title="March (territory)" label="&amp;quot;marks&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q558946" start="5864" end="5881" title="Bernhard von Spanheim" label="Dukes of Spanheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q698981" start="5887" end="5904" title="Meinhardiner" label="Counts of Gorizia"/>
<link wikidata="Q700556" start="5910" end="5925" title="Counts of Celje" label="Counts of Celje"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="5942" end="5959" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="6192" end="6200" title="House of Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q700556" start="6274" end="6289" title="Counts of Celje" label="Counts of Celje"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="6400" end="6417" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q689885" start="6477" end="6490" title="Inner Austria" label="Inner Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360973" start="6538" end="6555" title="Duchy of Carniola" label="Duchy of Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q692946" start="6564" end="6594" title="County of Gorizia and Gradisca" label="County of Gorizia and Gradisca"/>
<link wikidata="Q215659" start="6610" end="6622" title="Lower Styria" label="Lower Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q702224" start="6636" end="6645" title="Duchy of Carinthia" label="Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57318" start="6701" end="6719" title="Imperial Free City" label="Imperial Free City"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="6723" end="6730" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="6839" end="6861" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="6966" end="6976" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q156902" start="6986" end="6999" title="Primož Trubar" label="Primož Trubar"/>
<link wikidata="Q709563" start="7212" end="7226" title="Jurij Dalmatin" label="Jurij Dalmatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="7239" end="7258" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594028" start="7327" end="7339" title="Thomas Chrön" label="Thomas Chrön"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7351" end="7365" title=":de:Martin Brenner" label="Martin Brenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q215695" start="7450" end="7459" title="Prekmurje" label="Prekmurje"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="7588" end="7607" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612697" start="7633" end="7656" title="Bohorič alphabet" label="old Slovene orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q348832" start="7672" end="7679" title="Adam Bohorič" label="Bohorič"/>
<link wikidata="Q786171" start="8072" end="8093" title="Ottoman–Habsburg wars" label="Ottoman–Habsburg wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924036" start="8124" end="8137" title="Vipavski Križ" label="Vipavski Križ"/>
<link wikidata="Q15885" start="8142" end="8162" title="Kostanjevica na Krki" label="Kostanjevica na Krki"/>
<link wikidata="Q729125" start="8211" end="8223" title="Ottoman Army" label="Ottoman Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="8341" end="8355" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193474" start="8361" end="8369" title="Carniola" label="Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q701335" start="8426" end="8441" title="Battle of Sisak" label="Battle of Sisak"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="8703" end="8720" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="8729" end="8746" title="Venetian Republic" label="Venetian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q598089" start="8765" end="8780" title="War of Gradisca" label="War of Gradisca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345610" start="8822" end="8829" title="Goriška" label="Goriška"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372327" start="8963" end="8988" title="Carinthian Peasant Revolt" label="Carinthian Peasant Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q321452" start="9002" end="9032" title="Slovene Peasant Revolt of 1515" label="Slovene Peasant Revolt of 1515"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055358" start="9038" end="9069" title="Croatian–Slovene Peasant Revolt" label="Croatian–Slovene Peasant Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9083" end="9112" title="Second Slovene Peasant Revolt" label="Second Slovene Peasant Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9130" end="9151" title="Tolmin Peasant Revolt" label="Tolmin Peasant Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581485" start="9252" end="9267" title="Italian Baroque" label="Italian Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q976087" start="9418" end="9433" title="Francesco Robba" label="Francesco Robba"/>
<link wikidata="Q380103" start="9435" end="9447" title="Andrea Pozzo" label="Andrea Pozzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581" start="9449" end="9466" title="Vittore Carpaccio" label="Vittore Carpaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5565280" start="9471" end="9485" title="Giulio Quaglio the Elder" label="Giulio Quaglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q551267" start="9546" end="9574" title="Johann Weikhard von Valvasor" label="Johann Weikhard von Valvasor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9579" end="9610" title="Johannes Gregorius Thalnitscher" label="Johannes Gregorius Thalnitscher"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="10045" end="10053" title="Adriatic" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="10062" end="10069" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929782" start="10085" end="10094" title="free port" label="free port"/>
<link wikidata="Q131706" start="10260" end="10284" title="Maria Theresa of Austria" label="Maria Theresa of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q76555" start="10289" end="10298" title="Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Joseph II"/>
<link wikidata="Q399495" start="10471" end="10488" title="Standard language" label="standardarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q193474" start="10519" end="10527" title="Carniola" label="Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q574516" start="10544" end="10556" title="Marko Pohlin" label="Marko Pohlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q826657" start="10561" end="10573" title="Jurij Japelj" label="Jurij Japelj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="10653" end="10663" title="vernacular" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996710" start="10722" end="10730" title="bukovnik" label="bukovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q279764" start="10753" end="10772" title="Carinthian Slovenes" label="Carinthian Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="10882" end="10895" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q200509" start="10948" end="10959" title="Sigmund Zois" label="Zois Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933509" start="10996" end="11014" title="Slovene literature" label="Slovene literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q594866" start="11074" end="11093" title="Anton Tomaž Linhart" label="Anton Tomaž Linhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083404" start="11107" end="11122" title="Valentin Vodnik" label="Valentin Vodnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q699923" start="11306" end="11324" title="Illyrian Provinces" label="Illyrian Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="11367" end="11380" title="First French Empire" label="French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="11422" end="11431" title="Ljubljana" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q699923" start="11465" end="11483" title="Illyrian Provinces" label="Illyrian Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="11632" end="11645" title="feudal system" label="feudal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q699923" start="11709" end="11727" title="Illyrian Provinces" label="Illyrian Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="11757" end="11774" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="11797" end="11814" title="bourgeois society" label="bourgeois society"/>
<link wikidata="Q209572" start="11868" end="11884" title="military service" label="military service"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12159" end="12174" title="Franz Tomassich" label="Franz Tomassich"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="12224" end="12238" title="First French Empire" label="French interim"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="12291" end="12306" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q215659" start="12703" end="12709" title="Lower Styria" label="Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q702224" start="12714" end="12723" title="Carinthia (duchy)" label="Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q680821" start="12738" end="12755" title="Illyrian movement" label="Illyrian movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="12784" end="12791" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182267" start="12839" end="12849" title="Pan-Slavic" label="Pan-Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183088" start="12854" end="12867" title="Austro-Slavism" label="Austro-Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441000" start="12954" end="12964" title="Matija Čop" label="Matija Čop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031" start="12987" end="13002" title="France Prešeren" label="France Prešeren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585354" start="13217" end="13232" title="United Slovenia" label="United Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="13271" end="13288" title="Revolutions of 1848" label="Spring of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13837" end="13863" title="Slovene National Awakening" label="Slovene National Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084988" start="14257" end="14269" title="Old Slovenes" label="Old Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058429" start="14290" end="14304" title="Young Slovenes" label="Young Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14497" end="14503" title="Tabori rallies" label="tabori"/>
<link wikidata="Q314917" start="14532" end="14548" title="monster meetings" label="monster meetings"/>
<link wikidata="Q273824" start="15057" end="15068" title="South Slavs" label="South Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="15079" end="15089" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480226" start="15127" end="15138" title="culture war" label="culture war"/>
<link wikidata="Q592832" start="15176" end="15188" title="integralism" label="integralists"/>
<link wikidata="Q478004" start="15235" end="15248" title="Anticlericalism" label="anticlericals"/>
<link wikidata="Q193474" start="15308" end="15316" title="Carniola" label="Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="15408" end="15417" title="Socialist" label="Socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q739609" start="15422" end="15441" title="Christian socialist" label="Christian socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15875" start="15582" end="15588" title="Idrija" label="Idrija"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560945" start="15608" end="15640" title="Yugoslav Social Democratic Party" label="Yugoslav Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487959" start="15694" end="15715" title="Janez Evangelist Krek" label="Janez Evangelist Krek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4539" start="15763" end="15774" title="cooperative" label="cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q702224" start="15906" end="15915" title="Carinthia (duchy)" label="Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="15917" end="15924" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q215659" start="15932" end="15944" title="Lower Styria" label="Lower Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q306696" start="16093" end="16110" title="Austrian Littoral" label="Austrian Littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q15809" start="16484" end="16495" title="Ivan Cankar" label="Ivan Cankar"/>
<link wikidata="Q301171" start="16497" end="16510" title="Oton Župančič" label="Oton Župančič"/>
<link wikidata="Q15806" start="16515" end="16529" title="Dragotin Kette" label="Dragotin Kette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339347" start="16537" end="16548" title="Ivan Grohar" label="Ivan Grohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497776" start="16553" end="16567" title="Rihard Jakopič" label="Rihard Jakopič"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556932" start="16645" end="16665" title="Ljubljana earthquake" label="Ljubljana earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q59599" start="16740" end="16759" title="Liberal nationalism" label="Liberal nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q981034" start="16767" end="16778" title="Ivan Hribar" label="Ivan Hribar"/>
<link wikidata="Q700898" start="16783" end="16794" title="Ivan Tavčar" label="Ivan Tavčar"/>
<link wikidata="Q597895" start="16812" end="16823" title="Max Fabiani" label="Max Fabiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121903" start="16828" end="16844" title="Ciril Metod Koch" label="Ciril Metod Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q208208" start="16881" end="16897" title="Vienna Secession" label="Vienna Secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="16966" end="16973" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="17296" end="17309" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090446" start="17323" end="17336" title="Slovene communities in South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="17338" end="17345" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="17347" end="17352" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="17417" end="17423" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="17428" end="17434" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="17630" end="17641" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="17758" end="17773" title="Cleveland, Ohio" label="Cleveland, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264397" start="17865" end="17880" title="Lower West Side, Chicago" label="Lower West Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="17976" end="17989" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="18059" end="18069" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q216820" start="18073" end="18089" title="Youngstown, Ohio" label="Youngstown, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="18136" end="18145" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154526" start="18153" end="18163" title="Iron Range" label="Iron Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q824165" start="18412" end="18428" title="Treaty of London (1915)" label="Treaty of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276547" start="19327" end="19354" title="Slovene People&amp;#x27;s Party (historical)" label="Slovene People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="19469" end="19477" title="Habsburg dynasty" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19599" end="19619" title="May Declaration (1917)" label="Declaration Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q16746717" start="19858" end="19872" title="Ljudevit Pivko" label="Ljudevit Pivko"/>
<link wikidata="Q12805066" start="20113" end="20132" title="Judenburg Rebellion" label="Judenburg Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="20224" end="20235" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687281" start="20239" end="20285" title="National Council of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs" label="National Council of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q718374" start="20475" end="20510" title="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs" label="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="20583" end="20589" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="20616" end="20653" title="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes" label="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="20687" end="20708" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="20836" end="20848" title="cultural assimilation" label="assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757474" start="20947" end="20968" title="Austrian-Slovene clashes in Carinthia" label="armed dispute started"/>
<link wikidata="Q268970" start="20994" end="21008" title="German Austria" label="German Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q215659" start="21028" end="21040" title="Lower Styria" label="Lower Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q702224" start="21054" end="21063" title="Duchy of Carinthia" label="Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q697765" start="21083" end="21097" title="Rudolf Maister" label="Rudolf Maister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757474" start="21098" end="21104" title="Austro-Slovene conflict in Carinthia" label="seized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010" start="21117" end="21124" title="Maribor" label="Maribor"/>
<link wikidata="Q192924" start="21567" end="21590" title="Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye (1919)" label="Treaty of Saint-Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484801" start="21644" end="21657" title="Franjo Malgaj" label="Franjo Malgaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q41753" start="21860" end="21870" title="Klagenfurt" label="Klagenfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q192924" start="21895" end="21918" title="Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye (1919)" label="Treaty of Saint-Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q692136" start="22115" end="22120" title="Carinthian Plebiscite" label="voted"/>
<link wikidata="Q15867" start="22192" end="22201" title="Dravograd" label="Dravograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q15911" start="22206" end="22213" title="Ravne na Koroškem" label="Guštanj"/>
<link wikidata="Q181902" start="22282" end="22299" title="Treaty of Trianon" label="Treaty of Trianon"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="22320" end="22341" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215695" start="22376" end="22385" title="Prekmurje" label="Prekmurje"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="22416" end="22423" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="22502" end="22515" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="22523" end="22538" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="22544" end="22560" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q824165" start="22579" end="22602" title="Treaty of London (1915)" label="Treaty of London (1915)"/>
<link wikidata="Q871407" start="22613" end="22637" title="Treaty of Rapallo (1920)" label="Treaty of Rapallo (1920)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15863" start="22673" end="22680" title="Slovenes" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="23061" end="23098" title="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes" label="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369260" start="23157" end="23174" title="cultural autonomy" label="cultural autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q515684" start="23322" end="23335" title="Anton Korošec" label="Anton Korošec"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="23367" end="23374" title="Serbs" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419999" start="23375" end="23403" title="Prime Minister of Yugoslavia" label="Prime Minister of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="23513" end="23534" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256012" start="23662" end="23676" title="Drava Banovina" label="Drava Banovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276547" start="23763" end="23790" title="Slovene People&amp;#x27;s Party (historical)" label="Slovene People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q116009" start="23954" end="23980" title="Yugoslav Radical Community" label="Yugoslav Radical Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268112" start="24185" end="24212" title="Communist Party of Slovenia" label="Communist Party of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q641691" start="24259" end="24288" title="Communist Party of Yugoslavia" label="Communist Party of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201712" start="24313" end="24325" title="left liberal" label="left liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080800" start="24327" end="24341" title="Christian left" label="Christian left"/>
<link wikidata="Q492050" start="24346" end="24354" title="Agrarianism" label="agrarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="24466" end="24478" title="anti-Fascist" label="anti-Fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="24683" end="24689" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q939101" start="24807" end="24822" title="Vardar Banovina" label="Vardar Banovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="24999" end="25019" title="1929 economic crisis" label="1929 economic crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800666" start="25090" end="25105" title="Ljubljana Basin" label="Ljubljana Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061788" start="25111" end="25130" title="Central Sava Valley" label="Central Sava Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q909894" start="25141" end="25160" title="Slovenian Carinthia" label="Slovenian Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012" start="25189" end="25194" title="Celje" label="Celje"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010" start="25199" end="25206" title="Maribor" label="Maribor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="25208" end="25215" title="Tourism" label="Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q202852" start="25280" end="25284" title="Bled" label="Bled"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502521" start="25289" end="25304" title="Rogaška Slatina" label="Rogaška Slatina"/>
<link wikidata="Q314886" start="25766" end="25778" title="Jože Plečnik" label="Jože Plečnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097772" start="25780" end="25791" title="Ivan Vurnik" label="Ivan Vurnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7938760" start="25796" end="25810" title="Vladimir Šubic" label="Vladimir Šubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q824165" start="25939" end="25955" title="Treaty of London (1915)" label="Treaty of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="25969" end="25985" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q177859" start="26053" end="26067" title="Triple Entente" label="Triple Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="26117" end="26131" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="26135" end="26146" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q871407" start="26271" end="26288" title="Treaty of Rapallo (1920)" label="treaty of Rapallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="26302" end="26339" title="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes" label="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17035543" start="26386" end="26421" title="Slovene minority in Italy (1920–1947)" label="quarter of Slovene ethnic territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="26517" end="26533" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="26693" end="26700" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q15863" start="26783" end="26790" title="Slovenes" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="26808" end="26817" title="Ljubljana" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q846081" start="27053" end="27065" title="Black Shirts" label="Black Shirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544639" start="27166" end="27177" title="Narodni dom" label="Narodni dom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675071" start="27192" end="27206" title="Italianization" label="Italianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="27328" end="27349" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="27357" end="27370" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q15875" start="27417" end="27423" title="Idrija" label="Idrija"/>
<link wikidata="Q15854" start="27425" end="27435" title="Ajdovščina" label="Ajdovščina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527695" start="27437" end="27443" title="Vipava, Slovenia" label="Vipava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012996" start="27445" end="27450" title="Kanal ob Soči" label="Kanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15901" start="27452" end="27460" title="Postojna" label="Postojna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501699" start="27462" end="27467" title="Pivka" label="Pivka"/>
<link wikidata="Q15876" start="27473" end="27489" title="Ilirska Bistrica" label="Ilirska Bistrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675071" start="27516" end="27530" title="Italianization" label="Italianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q17035543" start="27536" end="27573" title="Slovene minority in Italy (1920-1947)" label="Slovene minority in Italy (1920-1947)"/>
<link wikidata="Q846081" start="27686" end="27700" title="Blackshirts" label="Fascist squads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544639" start="27823" end="27834" title="Narodni dom (Trieste)" label="Narodni dom"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="27867" end="27874" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="27951" end="27972" title="militant anti-fascist" label="militant anti-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q278630" start="27986" end="27990" title="TIGR" label="TIGR"/>
<link wikidata="Q153122" start="28176" end="28191" title="Tripartite pact" label="Tripartite pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="28311" end="28351" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="launching the attack on the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="34453" end="34493" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196099" start="34579" end="34596" title="Tito–Stalin split" label="Tito–Stalin split"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="34654" end="34666" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q958521" start="34701" end="34713" title="Julian March" label="Julian March"/>
<link wikidata="Q125323" start="34760" end="34778" title="Slovenian Littoral" label="Slovenian Littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015" start="34793" end="34798" title="Koper" label="Koper"/>
<link wikidata="Q15877" start="34800" end="34805" title="Izola" label="Izola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382" start="34811" end="34816" title="Piran" label="Piran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714904" start="34918" end="34932" title="Istrian Exodus" label="Istrian Exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294142" start="34953" end="34968" title="Foibe massacres" label="Foibe massacres"/>
<link wikidata="Q474884" start="35004" end="35022" title="Italian war crimes" label="Italian war crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="35077" end="35089" title="nationalisation" label="nationalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="35142" end="35149" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q391980" start="35206" end="35231" title="Free Territory of Trieste" label="Free Territory of Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q933745" start="35361" end="35376" title="Treaty of Osimo" label="Treaty of Osimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q211092" start="35481" end="35511" title="Socialist Republic of Slovenia" label="Socialist Republic of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="35870" end="35879" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="36112" end="36118" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="36126" end="36135" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196099" start="36236" end="36253" title="Tito–Stalin split" label="Tito–Stalin split"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="36381" end="36390" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q541157" start="36458" end="36467" title="Goli Otok" label="Goli Otok"/>
<link wikidata="Q19845160" start="36628" end="36640" title="Nagode Trial" label="Nagode Trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q12787217" start="36716" end="36729" title="Dachau trials (Slovenia)" label="Dachau trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="36767" end="36791" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="Nazi concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q365246" start="36939" end="36949" title="Anton Vovk" label="Anton Vovk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266" start="37046" end="37056" title="Novo Mesto" label="Novo Mesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="37267" end="37284" title="industrialisation" label="industrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37553" end="37562" title="Revija 57" label="Revija 57"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37716" end="37727" title="Perspektive" label="Perspektive"/>
<link wikidata="Q360127" start="37838" end="37849" title="Jože Pučnik" label="Jože Pučnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q367383" start="37860" end="37873" title="Edvard Kocbek" label="Edvard Kocbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317742" start="37902" end="37916" title="Dušan Pirjevec" label="Dušan Pirjevec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268112" start="38023" end="38048" title="Slovenian Communist Party" label="Slovenian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15981562" start="38175" end="38198" title="Workers&amp;#x27; self-management" label="workers self-management"/>
<link wikidata="Q268003" start="38324" end="38338" title="Edvard Kardelj" label="Edvard Kardelj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266300" start="38985" end="39007" title="Neue Slowenische Kunst" label="Neue Slowenische Kunst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6660948" start="39013" end="39047" title="Ljubljana school of psychoanalysis" label="Ljubljana school of psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064370" start="39063" end="39074" title="Nova revija (magazine)" label="Nova revija"/>
<link wikidata="Q194443" start="39149" end="39160" title="Milan Kučan" label="Milan Kučan"/>
<link wikidata="Q333024" start="39254" end="39273" title="Pluralism (political philosophy)" label="political pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q181865" start="39872" end="39885" title="civil society" label="civil society"/>
<link wikidata="Q324945" start="39931" end="39945" title="Slovene Spring" label="Slovene Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064370" start="40036" end="40047" title="Nova revija (magazine)" label="Nova revija"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402529" start="40082" end="40130" title="Contributions for the Slovenian National Program" label="Contributions for the Slovenian National Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="40651" end="40660" title="Ljubljana" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q526294" start="40833" end="40868" title="Social Democratic Union of Slovenia" label="Social Democratic Union of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258654" start="40919" end="40944" title="Peasant Union of Slovenia" label="Peasant Union of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848414" start="41073" end="41080" title="Mladina" label="Mladina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107790" start="41144" end="41159" title="Ljubljana trial" label="Ljubljana trial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41230" end="41257" title="1987-1988 Slovenia protests" label="1987-1988 Slovenia protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152970" start="41307" end="41348" title="Committee for the Defense of Human Rights" label="Committee for the Defense of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="41484" end="41503" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="Revolutions of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268112" start="41627" end="41636" title="League of Communists of Slovenia" label="Slovenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424039" start="41641" end="41670" title="League of Communists of Serbia" label="Serbian Leagues of Communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q47139" start="41718" end="41736" title="Slobodan Milošević" label="Slobodan Milošević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268112" start="42137" end="42169" title="League of Communists of Slovenia" label="League of Communists of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q574965" start="42508" end="42522" title="Rally of Truth" label="Rally of Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268112" start="42734" end="42766" title="League of Communists of Slovenia" label="League of Communists of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q187604" start="42856" end="42911" title="14th Congress of the League of Communists of Yugoslavia" label="14th Congress of the League of Communists of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268048" start="43005" end="43036" title="League of Communists of Croatia" label="League of Communists of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q53463" start="43067" end="43091" title="constitutional amendment" label="constitutional amendment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43112" end="43120" title="Assembly of the Socialist Republic of Slovenia" label="Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="43139" end="43162" title="parliamentary democracy" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="43288" end="43308" title="Republic of Slovenia" label="Republic of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="43561" end="43582" title="multi-party democracy" label="multi-party democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396876" start="43724" end="43750" title="Slovenian Democratic Union" label="Slovenian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q526294" start="43756" end="43792" title="Slovenian Democratic Party" label="Social Democrat Alliance of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395554" start="43798" end="43825" title="Slovene Christian Democrats" label="Slovene Christian Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258654" start="43831" end="43853" title="Slovenian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Farmers&amp;#x27; Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275990" start="43862" end="43880" title="Greens of Slovenia" label="Greens of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181043" start="43929" end="43938" title="dissident" label="dissident"/>
<link wikidata="Q360127" start="43939" end="43950" title="Jože Pučnik" label="Jože Pučnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q613779" start="43970" end="44019" title="1990 Slovenian parliamentary election" label="the first free multiparty parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4153388" start="44083" end="44088" title="DEMOS" label="DEMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395554" start="44222" end="44240" title="Slovene Christian Democrats" label="Christian Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q282653" start="44241" end="44254" title="Lojze Peterle" label="Lojze Peterle"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="44327" end="44341" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q194443" start="44473" end="44484" title="Milan Kučan" label="Milan Kučan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186208" start="44589" end="44594" title="DEMOS coalition" label="DEMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q360127" start="44605" end="44616" title="Jože Pučnik" label="Jože Pučnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="44822" end="44835" title="confederation" label="confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439107" start="45075" end="45117" title="1990 Slovenian independence referendum" label="referendum on the independence of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q163883" start="45363" end="45374" title="Ten-Day War" label="Ten-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347423" start="45569" end="45581" title="France Bučar" label="France Bučar"/>
<link wikidata="Q917606" start="45633" end="45650" title="Brijuni Agreement" label="Brijuni Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="45670" end="45688" title="European Community" label="European Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q272110" start="45712" end="45734" title="Yugoslav National Army" label="Yugoslav National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294338" start="45946" end="45982" title="Constitution of Slovenia" label="Constitution of independent Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="46059" end="46068" title="the Hague" label="the Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="46073" end="46081" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="46266" end="46280" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q163883" start="46420" end="46431" title="Ten-Day War" label="Ten-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="46445" end="46453" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="46465" end="46473" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q282653" start="46693" end="46706" title="Lojze Peterle" label="Lojze Peterle"/>
<link wikidata="Q171228" start="46761" end="46775" title="Janez Drnovšek" label="Janez Drnovšek"/>
<link wikidata="Q360127" start="46840" end="46851" title="Jože Pučnik" label="Jože Pučnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="47138" end="47150" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="47419" end="47446" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="47514" end="47522" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="47998" end="48007" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="48025" end="48037" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="48057" end="48060" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369260" start="48086" end="48110" title="minority rights" label="national minority rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q495877" start="48344" end="48365" title="List of Presidents of Slovenia" label="president of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606186" start="48373" end="48399" title="1992 Slovenian presidential election" label="1992 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607581" start="48477" end="48490" title="1997 Slovenian presidential election" label="1997 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="48689" end="48703" title="Prime Minister" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="49028" end="49042" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q948814" start="49094" end="49104" title="gradualist" label="gradualist"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="49257" end="49271" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="49276" end="49290" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541734" start="49292" end="49307" title="Bush-Putin 2001" label="Bush-Putin 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q495877" start="49408" end="49417" title="President of Slovenia" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737053" start="49483" end="49525" title="2003 Slovenian European Union and NATO membership referendum" label="two referendums on joining the EU and NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="49642" end="49650" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="49667" end="49671" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q57627" start="49750" end="49761" title="Janez Janša" label="Janez Janša"/>
<link wikidata="Q45758" start="49766" end="49792" title="Prime Minister of Slovenia" label="Prime Minister of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663446" start="49968" end="49986" title="loan-deposit ratio" label="loan-deposit ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q57329" start="50157" end="50168" title="Danilo Türk" label="Danilo Türk"/>
<link wikidata="Q495877" start="50194" end="50203" title="President of Slovenia" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q206471" start="50279" end="50290" title="Borut Pahor" label="Borut Pahor"/>
<link wikidata="Q45758" start="50295" end="50321" title="Prime Minister of Slovenia" label="Prime Minister of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="50375" end="50397" title="Late-2000s recession" label="global economic crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541874" start="50515" end="50534" title="Slovenian referendums of 2011" label="referendums in 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296841" start="50566" end="50581" title="2010 Slovenian border dispute agreement referendum" label="voted in favour"/>
<link wikidata="Q476210" start="50643" end="50657" title="Croatia–Slovenia border disputes" label="border dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="50752" end="50756" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q495877" start="50826" end="50835" title="President of Slovenia" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q28128720" start="50940" end="50948" title="2017 Slovenian presidential election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q45758" start="51023" end="51049" title="Prime Minister of Slovenia" label="Prime Minister of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739767" start="51170" end="51185" title="Alenka Bratušek" label="Alenka Bratušek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152671" start="51206" end="51228" title="Commission for the Prevention of Corruption of the Republic of Slovenia" label="anti-corruption agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q17117413" start="51483" end="51493" title="Miro Cerar" label="Miro Cerar"/>
<link wikidata="Q27976460" start="51785" end="51793" title="2018 Slovenian parliamentary election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q12795878" start="51876" end="51888" title="Marjan Šarec" label="Marjan Šarec"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="52657" end="52669" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q57641" start="52732" end="52744" title="Viktor Orbán" label="Viktor Orban"/>
<link wikidata="Q106704283" start="52831" end="52847" title="Freedom Movement (Slovenia)" label="Freedom Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q65119188" start="52871" end="52879" title="2022 Slovenian parliamentary election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q526294" start="52957" end="52983" title="Slovenian Democratic Party" label="Slovenian Democratic party"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645045" start="53072" end="53084" title="Robert Golob" label="Robert Golob"/>
<link wikidata="Q45758" start="53097" end="53123" title="Prime Minister of Slovenia" label="Prime Minister of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12797332" start="53167" end="53184" title="Nataša Pirc Musar" label="Natasa Pirc Musar"/>
<link wikidata="Q84029183" start="53256" end="53277" title="2022 Slovenian presidential election" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390259" start="53495" end="53516" title="Breakup of Yugoslavia" label="Breakup of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777287" start="53519" end="53535" title="Divje Babe flute" label="Divje Babe flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="53538" end="53555" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266338" start="53558" end="53580" title="History of the Balkans" label="History of the Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787" start="53583" end="53600" title="History of Europe" label="History of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q187830" start="53603" end="53621" title="History of Austria" label="History of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791" start="53623" end="53639" title="History of Italy" label="History of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q199960" start="53641" end="53659" title="History of Hungary" label="History of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q210726" start="53661" end="53679" title="History of Croatia" label="History of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="53681" end="53702" title="History of Yugoslavia" label="History of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134900" start="53705" end="53736" title="History of the Jews in Slovenia" label="History of the Jews in Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q641691" start="53739" end="53773" title="League of Communists of Yugoslavia" label="League of Communists of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q495877" start="53776" end="53806" title="List of presidents of Slovenia" label="List of presidents of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q256036" start="53809" end="53845" title="List of heads of state of Yugoslavia" label="List of heads of state of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419999" start="53848" end="53885" title="List of prime ministers of Yugoslavia" label="List of prime ministers of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154147" start="53888" end="53908" title="Politics of Slovenia" label="Politics of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45758" start="53911" end="53937" title="Prime Minister of Slovenia" label="Prime Minister of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q163883" start="53940" end="53951" title="Ten-Day War" label="Ten-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967051" start="53954" end="53983" title="Timeline of Slovenian history" label="Timeline of Slovenian history"/>
<link wikidata="Q913828" start="53986" end="54007" title="Republic of Prekmurje" label="Republic of Prekmurje"/>
<link wikidata="Q685826" start="54010" end="54044" title="Slovene March (Kingdom of Hungary)" label="Slovene March (Kingdom of Hungary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650184" start="54170" end="54180" title="Oto Luthar" label="Oto Luthar"/>
<link wikidata="Q21601089" start="54195" end="54212" title="Marjeta Šašel Kos" label="Marjeta Šašel Kos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177974" start="54252" end="54262" title="Peter Štih" label="Peter Štih"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27340" wikidata="Q837309" url="?curid=27340" title="Geography of Slovenia">
<text>Slovenia is situated at the crossroads of central and southeast Europe, touching the Alps and bordering the Adriatic Sea. The Alps—including the Julian Alps, the Kamnik–Savinja Alps and the Karawank chain, as well as the Pohorje massif—dominate northern Slovenia along its long border to Austria. Slovenia&#x27;s Adriatic coastline stretches approximately from Italy to Croatia. Its part south of Sava river belongs to Balkan peninsula – Balkans.

The term &quot;karst&quot; originated in southwestern Slovenia&#x27;s Karst Plateau (), a limestone region of underground rivers, gorges, and caves, between Ljubljana and the Mediterranean.

On the Pannonian plain to the east and northeast, toward the Croatian and Hungarian borders, the landscape is essentially flat. However, the majority of Slovenian terrain is hilly or mountainous, with around 90% of the surface 200 meters or more above sea level.

==Location==
Slovenia&#x27;s location is where southeastern and Central Europe meet, where the Eastern Alps border the Adriatic Sea between Austria and Croatia. The 15th meridian east almost corresponds to the middle line of the country in the direction west–east.

==Geographic coordinates==

Extreme geographical points of Slovenia:
* North: , Budinci, Šalovci,
* South: , Kot pri Damlju, Municipality of Črnomelj,
* East: , Pince–Marof, Municipality of Lendava,
* West: , Robidišče, Municipality of Kobarid.

The maximum north–south distance is 1°28&#x27; or .
The maximum east–west distance is 3°13&#x27; or .

The geometric centre of Slovenia (GEOSS) is located at .

Since 2016, the geodetic system of Slovenia with the elevation benchmark of 0 m has its origin at the Koper tide gauge station. Until then, it referred to the Sartorio mole in Trieste (see metres above the Adriatic).

== Area ==

* Total: 20,271 km2
* Land: 20,149 km2
* Water: 122 km2
* Comparison: slightly smaller than New Jersey

== Borders ==
* Land boundaries
** Total: 1,086 km
** Border countries: Croatia 670 km, Austria 330 km, Italy 280 km, Hungary 102 km
* Coastline: 47 km
* Maritime claims: 

The entire Slovenian coastline is located on the Gulf of Trieste. Towns along the coastline include:
* Koper
* Izola
* Portorož
* Piran

== Regions ==

=== Historical regions ===

The traditional Slovenian regions, based on the former division of Slovenia into the four Habsburg crown lands (Carniola, Carinthia, Styria, and the Littoral) and their parts, are:

* Upper Carniola (&quot;Gorenjska&quot;) (denoted on the map by U.C.)
* Styria (&quot;Štajerska&quot;) (S)
* Prekmurje (P)
* Carinthia (&quot;Koroška&quot;) (C)
* Inner Carniola (&quot;Notranjska&quot;) (I.C.)
* Lower Carniola (&quot;Dolenjska&quot;) (L.C.)
* Gorizia (&quot;Goriška&quot;) (G)
* Slovenian Istria (&quot;Slovenska Istra&quot;) (L)

The last two are usually considered together as the Littoral Region (&quot;Primorska&quot;). White Carniola (&quot;Bela krajina&quot;), otherwise part of Lower Carniola, is usually considered a separate region, as is the Central Sava Valley (&quot;Zasavje&quot;), which is otherwise a part of Upper and Lower Carniola and Styria.

Slovenian Littoral has no natural island, but there is a plan on building an artificial one.

==Climate==

Humid subtropical climate (Cfa) on the coast, oceanic climate (Cfb) in most of Slovenia, continental climate with mild to hot summers and cold winters (Dfb) in the plateaus and mountains on the north, subpolar (Dfc) and tundra (ET) climate above the treeline on the highest mountain peaks. Precipitation is high away from the coast, with the spring being particularly prone to rainfall. Slovenia&#x27;s Alps have frequent snowfalls during the winter.

==Terrain==

The northern part of the country is mountainous and consists of the Julian Alps, Karawanks, Kamnik–Savinja Alps and the Pohorje massif. 

Further east lies the Pannonian plain, which dominates the region of Prekmurje.

Central Slovenia is largely hilly and forested, with the exception of the Ljubljana Basin and the encompassed Ljubljana Marsh, a large wetlands region which was largely drained in the time of the Habsburg monarchy, but still remains a flood zone.

To the southeast of the Ljubljana Basin lies the Karst plateau, a hilly region containing various caves, sinkholes, intermittent lakes and other features of Karst topography. 

Southern Slovenia is home to the Javornik Hills, the beginning of the Dinaric Alps. In the southeast is a short coastal strip on the Adriatic Sea.

There is only one natural island in Slovenia: Bled Island in Lake Bled in the country&#x27;s northwest. Lake Bled and Bled Island are Slovenia&#x27;s most popular tourist destination.

=== Elevation extremes ===
* Lowest point: Adriatic Sea 0 m (tide gauge station in Koper)
* Highest point: Triglav , located in the Julian Alps

== Natural resources ==

More than half of Slovenia, which is , is forested; ranking it third in Europe, by percentage of area forested, after Finland and Sweden. The areas are covered mostly by beech, fir-beech and beech-oak forests and have a relatively high production capacity. Remnants of primeval forests are still to be found, the largest in the Kočevje area. Grassland covers and fields and gardens (). There are of orchards and of vineyards. 

Slovenia&#x27;s terrain and abundance of rivers makes it ideal for hydropower, which is responsible for around a third of the country&#x27;s electricity production. 

Various building stones, most notably marble and limestone have been quarried in the country for centuries. The Podpeč quarry has been used to extract marble since the Roman times.

===Mining===
Slovenia is not known for large mining operations, but still has some notable deposits:
Lignite coal is found primarily in the northeastern part of the country. The country has been extracting this resource for power generation, most notably for use in the Šoštanj Power Plant, however it does not produce enough lignite to be self-sufficient and still largely relies on imports. In 2022, Slovenia produced 2.4 million tonnes of lignite.

The country has deposits of heavy metals, primarily Mercury, Lead and Zinc. Mercury was historically mined in the town of Idrija, which is one of the rare regions in the world where it appears both in its elemental form and as cinnabar ore. Lead and Zinc were mined in the Mežica mine. Both have since closed and have been converted into tourist attractions.

Uranium was also discovered near Žirovski Vrh in the 1960s and a mine operated for a short time, but falling Uranium prices made the mine close in 1990 after only 8 years of operation.

===Land use===
* Arable land: 8.53%
* Permanent crops: 1.43%
* Other: 90.04% (2005)
* Irrigated land: 100 km2 (2003)
* Natural hazards: minor flooding and earthquakes

==Environment==

===Current issues===
The Sava River polluted with domestic and industrial waste; pollution of coastal waters with heavy metals and toxic chemicals; forest damage near Koper from air pollution (originating at metallurgical and chemical plants) and resulting acid rain.

===International agreements===
* Party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution (MARPOL 73/78), Wetlands, Whaling
* Signed, but not ratified:

== See also ==
* List of mountains in Slovenia
* Online map services of Slovenia
* Protected areas of Slovenia
* Slovene Riviera (&quot;Slovenska obala&quot;)

==References==
== External links ==

* – Geodesic Institute of Slovenia – Detailed Topographic and Orthophoto maps of Slovenia </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="0" end="8" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="42" end="49" title="Central Europe" label="central"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="54" end="70" title="southeast Europe" label="southeast Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="85" end="89" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="108" end="120" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q119206" start="145" end="156" title="Julian Alps" label="Julian Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q210436" start="162" end="181" title="Kamnik–Savinja Alps" label="Kamnik–Savinja Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q198007" start="190" end="198" title="Karawanks" label="Karawank"/>
<link wikidata="Q218853" start="221" end="228" title="Pohorje" label="Pohorje"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="288" end="295" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="313" end="321" title="Adriatic" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="361" end="366" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="370" end="377" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="438" end="445" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="463" end="468" title="karst" label="karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q625139" start="518" end="531" title="Karst Plateau" label="Karst Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="538" end="547" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="605" end="614" title="Ljubljana" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="623" end="636" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="646" end="661" title="Pannonian plain" label="Pannonian plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="700" end="707" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="713" end="722" title="Hungary" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="967" end="981" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q63817" start="998" end="1010" title="Eastern Alps" label="Eastern Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="1043" end="1050" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="1055" end="1062" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700643" start="1068" end="1086" title="15th meridian east" label="15th meridian east"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="1205" end="1224" title="geographic coordinate system" label="geographical points"/>
<link wikidata="Q835017" start="1249" end="1256" title="Budinci" label="Budinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q13378373" start="1258" end="1265" title="Municipality of Šalovci" label="Šalovci"/>
<link wikidata="Q15239940" start="1278" end="1292" title="Kot pri Damlju" label="Kot pri Damlju"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482211" start="1294" end="1318" title="Municipality of Črnomelj" label="Municipality of Črnomelj"/>
<link wikidata="Q908108" start="1330" end="1341" title="Pince–Marof" label="Pince–Marof"/>
<link wikidata="Q587328" start="1343" end="1366" title="Municipality of Lendava" label="Municipality of Lendava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922157" start="1378" end="1387" title="Robidišče" label="Robidišče"/>
<link wikidata="Q688287" start="1389" end="1412" title="Municipality of Kobarid" label="Municipality of Kobarid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442633" start="1522" end="1550" title="Geometric Centre of the Republic of Slovenia" label="geometric centre of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015" start="1678" end="1683" title="Koper" label="Koper"/>
<link wikidata="Q23202" start="1765" end="1790" title="metres above the Adriatic" label="metres above the Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="1898" end="1908" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="1982" end="1989" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="1998" end="2005" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2014" end="2019" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="2028" end="2035" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q209757" start="2132" end="2147" title="Gulf of Trieste" label="Gulf of Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015" start="2186" end="2191" title="Koper" label="Koper"/>
<link wikidata="Q15877" start="2194" end="2199" title="Izola" label="Izola"/>
<link wikidata="Q564988" start="2202" end="2210" title="Portorož" label="Portorož"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382" start="2213" end="2218" title="Piran" label="Piran"/>
<link wikidata="Q82794" start="2289" end="2295" title="region" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="2353" end="2361" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473816" start="2362" end="2372" title="crown land" label="crown land"/>
<link wikidata="Q193474" start="2375" end="2383" title="Carniola" label="Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q702224" start="2385" end="2394" title="Duchy of Carinthia" label="Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q580447" start="2396" end="2402" title="Styria (duchy)" label="Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q125323" start="2412" end="2420" title="Slovenian Littoral" label="Littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q909928" start="2447" end="2461" title="Upper Carniola" label="Upper Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q215659" start="2517" end="2523" title="Lower Styria" label="Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q215695" start="2554" end="2563" title="Prekmurje" label="Prekmurje"/>
<link wikidata="Q909894" start="2570" end="2579" title="Carinthia (province)" label="Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q867469" start="2608" end="2622" title="Inner Carniola" label="Inner Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q861573" start="2657" end="2671" title="Lower Carniola" label="Lower Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345610" start="2705" end="2712" title="Goriška" label="Gorizia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574141" start="2741" end="2757" title="Slovenian Istria" label="Slovenian Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q125323" start="2845" end="2860" title="Slovenian Littoral" label="Littoral Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q425767" start="2886" end="2900" title="White Carniola" label="White Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q119206" start="3764" end="3775" title="Julian Alps" label="Julian Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q198007" start="3777" end="3786" title="Karawanks" label="Karawanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q210436" start="3788" end="3807" title="Kamnik–Savinja Alps" label="Kamnik–Savinja Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="3856" end="3871" title="Pannonian Basin" label="Pannonian plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q215695" start="3903" end="3912" title="Prekmurje" label="Prekmurje"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800666" start="3989" end="4004" title="Ljubljana Basin" label="Ljubljana Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q619970" start="4025" end="4040" title="Ljubljana Marsh" label="Ljubljana Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="4111" end="4128" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q625139" start="4212" end="4225" title="Karst Plateau" label="Karst plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499572" start="4261" end="4266" title="List of caves in Slovenia" label="caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="4320" end="4336" title="Karst" label="Karst topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q6165846" start="4373" end="4387" title="Javornik Hills" label="Javornik Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q189915" start="4410" end="4422" title="Dinaric Alps" label="Dinaric Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="4473" end="4485" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q648902" start="4549" end="4558" title="Lake Bled" label="Lake Bled"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="4716" end="4728" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015" start="4756" end="4761" title="Koper" label="Koper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024" start="4780" end="4787" title="Triglav" label="Triglav"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4923" end="4953" title="European countries by forest area" label="by percentage of area forested"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="4961" end="4968" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="4973" end="4979" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q25403" start="5013" end="5018" title="beech" label="beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350" start="5020" end="5023" title="fir" label="fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="5040" end="5043" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q12958961" start="5171" end="5178" title="Kočevje" label="Kočevje"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="5729" end="5733" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19389753" start="5890" end="5909" title="Šoštanj Power Plant" label="Šoštanj Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="6124" end="6131" title="Mercury (element)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="6133" end="6137" title="Lead" label="Lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="6142" end="6146" title="Zinc" label="Zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q15875" start="6194" end="6200" title="Idrija" label="Idrija"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800524" start="6345" end="6356" title="Mežica Mine" label="Mežica mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387472" start="6465" end="6477" title="Žirovski Vrh, Žiri" label="Žirovski Vrh"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="6760" end="6765" title="flood" label="flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="6773" end="6783" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="6828" end="6838" title="Sava" label="Sava River"/>
<link wikidata="Q105789" start="6917" end="6929" title="heavy metals" label="heavy metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015" start="6970" end="6975" title="Koper" label="Koper"/>
<link wikidata="Q40178" start="7060" end="7069" title="acid rain" label="acid rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="7115" end="7128" title="Air Pollution" label="Air Pollution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7130" end="7173" title="Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants" label="Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7175" end="7199" title="Air Pollution-Sulphur 94" label="Air Pollution-Sulphur 94"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="7201" end="7213" title="Biodiversity" label="Biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208645" start="7215" end="7229" title="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change" label="Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="7231" end="7260" title="Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol" label="Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="7262" end="7280" title="Endangered Species" label="Endangered Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069369" start="7282" end="7298" title="Hazardous Wastes" label="Hazardous Wastes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088099" start="7300" end="7314" title="Law of the Sea" label="Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156234" start="7316" end="7330" title="Marine Dumping" label="Marine Dumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q521306" start="7332" end="7348" title="Nuclear Test Ban" label="Nuclear Test Ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="7350" end="7372" title="Ozone Layer Protection" label="Ozone Layer Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q651219" start="7390" end="7402" title="MARPOL 73/78" label="MARPOL 73/78"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="7405" end="7412" title="Wetland" label="Wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="7415" end="7422" title="Whaling" label="Whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q958121" start="7469" end="7498" title="List of mountains in Slovenia" label="List of mountains in Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094099" start="7501" end="7532" title="Online map services of Slovenia" label="Online map services of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564263" start="7535" end="7562" title="Protected areas of Slovenia" label="Protected areas of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294711" start="7565" end="7580" title="Slovene Riviera" label="Slovene Riviera"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27341" wikidata="Q525236" url="?curid=27341" title="Demographics of Slovenia">
<text>Demographic features of the population of Slovenia include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

With 101 inhabitants per square kilometre (262/sq mi), Slovenia ranks low among the European countries in population density (compared to 402/km2 (1042/sq mi) for the Netherlands or 195/km2 (505/sq mi) for Italy). The Littoral–Inner Carniola Statistical Region has the lowest population density, and the Central Slovenia Statistical Region has the highest.

According to the 2002 census, Slovenia&#x27;s main ethnic group are Slovenes (83%). At least 13% of the population were immigrants from other parts of former Yugoslavia, primarily ethnic Bosniaks (Bosnian Muslims), Croats and Serbs and their descendants. They have settled mainly in cities and suburbanised areas. Relatively small but protected by the Constitution of Slovenia are the Hungarian and the Italian national community. A special position is held by the geographically dispersed Roma ethnic community.

Slovenia is among the European countries with the most pronounced ageing of population, ascribable to a low birth rate and increasing life expectancy. Almost all Slovenian inhabitants older than 64 are retired, with no significant difference between the genders. The working-age group is diminishing in spite of immigration. The proposal to raise the retirement age from the current 57 for women and 58 for men was rejected in a referendum in 2011. Also the difference among the genders regarding life expectancy is still significant. In 2007, it was 74.6 years for men and 81.8 years for women. In addition, in 2009, the suicide rate in Slovenia was 22 per 100,000 persons per year, which places Slovenia among the highest ranked European countries in this regard.

==Population==


==Vital statistics==
Source: Statistical Office of the Republic of Slovenia

===Current vital statistics===


===Structure of the population===

===Life expectancy at birth===


==Marriages and divorces==

==Immigration==
===Net Migration===


==Ethnic groups==

The majority of Slovenia&#x27;s population are ethnic Slovenes (83.06%). Hungarians and Istrian Italians have the status of indigenous minorities under the Constitution of Slovenia, which guarantees them seats in the National Assembly. Most other minority groups, particularly those from other parts of the former Yugoslavia (except for one part of autochthonous community of Serbs and Croats), relocated after World War II for economic reasons. Istrian Italians were more than 50% of the total population of Istria for centuries, while making up about a third of the population in 1900. while making up about a third of the population in 1900. The Istrian–Dalmatian exodus (; ; ) was the post-World War II exodus and departure of local ethnic Italians (Istrian Italians and Dalmatian Italians) as well as ethnic Croats from Yugoslavia. The emigrants, who had lived in the now Yugoslav territories of the Julian March (Karst Region and Istria), Kvarner and Dalmatia, largely went to Italy, but some joined the Italian diaspora in the Americas, Australia and South Africa. According to various sources, the exodus is estimated to have amounted to between 230,000 and 350,000 Italians (the others being ethnic Slovenes and Croats who chose to maintain Italian citizenship) leaving the areas in the aftermath of the conflict. According to the census organized in Croatia in 2001 and that organized in Slovenia in 2002, the Italians who remained in the former Yugoslavia amounted to 21,894 people (2,258 in Slovenia and 19,636 in Croatia). The number of speakers of Italian is larger if taking into account non-Italians who speak it as a second language. 

Around 12.4% of the inhabitants of Slovenia were born abroad.
According to data from 2008, there were around 100,000 non-EU citizens living in Slovenia, or around 5% of the overall population of the country. The highest number came from Bosnia and Herzegovina, followed by immigrants from Serbia, North Macedonia, Croatia (which has since joined the EU itself) and Kosovo. In April 2019, there were 143,192 foreign citizens living in Slovenia, representing 6.87% of Slovenia&#x27;s population. The number of people migrating to Slovenia has been steadily rising from 1995; and the rate of immigration itself has been increasing year-on-year, reaching its peak in 2016. Since Slovenia joined the EU in 2004, the yearly inflow of immigrants has doubled by 2006 and tripled by 2009. In 2007, Slovenia was one of the countries with the fastest growth of net migration rate in the European Union.

==Religion==

Traditionally, Slovenes are predominantly Roman Catholic. Before World War II, 97% of Slovenes declared as Roman Catholics, around 2.5% were Lutheran, and only around 0.5% belonged to other denominations. Catholicism was an important feature of both social and political life in pre-communist Slovenia. After 1945, the country underwent a process of gradual but steady secularization. After a decade of severe persecution of religions, the communist regime adopted a policy of relative tolerance towards the churches, but limited their social functioning. After 1990, the Roman Catholic Church regained some of its former influence, but Slovenia remains a largely secularized society. According to the 2002 census, 57.8% of the population is Roman Catholic. As elsewhere in Europe, affiliation with Roman Catholicism is dropping: in 1991, 71.6% were self-declared Catholics, which means a drop of more than 1% annually. The vast majority of Slovenian Catholics belong to the Latin Church. A small number of Eastern Catholics live in the White Carniola region.

Despite a relatively small number of Protestants (less than 1% in 2002), the Protestant legacy is important because of its historical significance, since the bases of Slovene standard language and Slovene literature were established by the Protestant Reformation in the 16th century. Nowadays, a significant Lutheran minority lives in the easternmost region of Prekmurje, where they represent around a fifth of the population and are headed by a bishop with the seat in Murska Sobota.

Besides these two Christian denominations, a small Jewish community has also been historically present. Despite the losses suffered during the Holocaust, Judaism still numbers a few hundred adherents, mostly living in Ljubljana, site of the sole remaining active synagogue in the country.

According to the 2002 census, Islam is the second largest religious denomination with around 2.4% of the population. Most Slovenian Muslims came from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, and North Macedonia. The third largest denomination, with around 2.2% of the population, is Orthodox Christianity, with most adherents belonging to the Serbian Orthodox Church, whereas a minority belong to the Macedonian Orthodox Church and other Orthodox churches.

In the 2002, around 10% of Slovenes declared themselves as atheists, another 10% professed no specific denomination, and around 16% decided not to answer the question about their religious affiliation. According to the Eurobarometer Poll 2005, 37% of Slovenian citizens responded that &quot;they believe there is a god&quot;, whereas 46% answered that &quot;they believe there is some sort of spirit or life force&quot; and 16% that &quot;they do not believe there is any sort of spirit, god, or life force&quot;.

The distribution of the residents of Slovenia by religion is the following: Roman Catholic 57.8%, atheist 10.1%, Muslim 2.4%, Orthodox Christian 2.3%, Protestant 0.9%, other and unknown 26.5% (2002).

According to the published data from the 2002 Slovenian census, out of a total of 47,488 Muslims (2.4% of the total population) 2,804 Muslims (5.90% of the total Muslims in Slovenia) declared themselves as ethnic Slovenian Muslims.

==Language==

The official language in Slovenia is Slovene, which is a member of the South Slavic language group. In 2002, Slovene was the native language of around 88% of Slovenia&#x27;s population according to the census, with more than 92% of the Slovenian population speaking it in their home environment. This places Slovenia among the most homogeneous countries in the EU in terms of the share of speakers of predominant mother tongue. Slovene is sometimes characterized as the most diverse Slavic language in terms of dialects, with different degrees of mutual intelligibility. Accounts of the number of dialects range from as few as seven dialects, often considered dialect groups or dialect bases that are further subdivided into as many as 50 dialects. Other sources characterize the number of dialects as nine or eight.

The distribution of speakers by language is the following: Slovene 87.7%, Serbo-Croatian 8%, Hungarian 0.4%, Albanian 0.4%, Macedonian 0.2%, Romani 0.2%, Italian 0.2%, German 0.1%, other 0.1% (Russian, Czech, Ukrainian, English, Slovak, Polish, Romanian, Turkish, French, Bulgarian, Arabic, Spanish, Dutch, &quot;Vlach&quot;, Rusyn, Greek, Swedish, Danish or Armenian), unknown 2.7% (2002)

== CIA World Factbook demographic statistics ==

The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.

===Population===
2,102,678 (July 2020 est.)

===Age structure===
&quot;0–14 years:&quot;
13.4% (male 138,604/female 130,337)
&quot;15–64 years:&quot;
69.8% (male 703,374/female 692,640)
&quot;65 years and over:&quot;
16.8% (male 132,096/female 203,068) (2011 est.)

===Median age===
:&quot;total:&quot; 42.8 years
:&quot;male:&quot; 41.1 years
:&quot;female:&quot; 44.5 years (2012 est.)

===Urbanization===
:&quot;urban population:&quot; 50% of total population (2012 est.)
:&quot;rate of urbanization:&quot; 0.2% annual rate of change (2010-2015 est.)

===Sex ratio===
&quot;at birth:&quot;
1.07 male(s)/female
&quot;under 15 years:&quot;
1.06 male(s)/female
&quot;15–64 years:&quot;
1.01 male(s)/female
&quot;65 years and over:&quot;
0.66 male(s)/female
&quot;total population:&quot;
0.95 male(s)/female (2011 est.)

===Infant mortality rate===
4.12 deaths/1,000 live births (2010)

===Life expectancy at birth===
&quot;total population:&quot;
80 years
&quot;male:&quot;
77 years
&quot;female:&quot;
83 years (2013 est)

==See also==
* Gottschee
* Bosniaks of Slovenia
* Croats of Slovenia 
* Montenegrins of Slovenia
* Serbs of Slovenia
* History of the Jews in Slovenia
* Izbrisani
** Demographics of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia
** Demographics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
* Demographics of Austria
* Demographics of Croatia
* Demographics of Hungary
* Demographics of Italy

== References ==

==External links==
* Demography and Social Statistics of Slovenia, SURS
* Results of the 2002 census, SURS</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="0" end="11" title="Demography" label="Demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="28" end="38" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="42" end="50" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="59" end="77" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="79" end="88" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="376" end="387" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="415" end="420" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q375299" start="427" end="469" title="Littoral–Inner Carniola Statistical Region" label="Littoral–Inner Carniola Statistical Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q205926" start="513" end="548" title="Central Slovenia Statistical Region" label="Central Slovenia Statistical Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q15863" start="635" end="643" title="Slovenes" label="Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="718" end="735" title="former Yugoslavia" label="former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="754" end="762" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="764" end="779" title="Bosnian Muslims" label="Bosnian Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="782" end="788" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="793" end="798" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294338" start="919" end="943" title="Constitution of Slovenia" label="Constitution of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="952" end="961" title="Hungarian people" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089050" start="970" end="996" title="Italians in Slovenia" label="Italian national community"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="1057" end="1078" title="Roma people" label="Roma ethnic community"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="1215" end="1230" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1510" end="1528" title="2011 Slovenian referendum" label="referendum in 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q210297" start="1703" end="1715" title="List of countries by suicide rate" label="suicide rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="2144" end="2152" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15863" start="2182" end="2190" title="Slovenes" label="Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="2201" end="2211" title="Hungary" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089050" start="2216" end="2232" title="Istrian Italians" label="Istrian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294338" start="2284" end="2308" title="Constitution of Slovenia" label="Constitution of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="2442" end="2452" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2539" end="2551" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089050" start="2574" end="2590" title="Istrian Italians" label="Istrian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714904" start="2777" end="2801" title="Istrian–Dalmatian exodus" label="Istrian–Dalmatian exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2822" end="2834" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="2872" end="2880" title="Italians" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089050" start="2882" end="2898" title="Istrian Italians" label="Istrian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533689" start="2903" end="2921" title="Dalmatian Italians" label="Dalmatian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="2941" end="2947" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="2953" end="2963" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q958521" start="3033" end="3045" title="Julian March" label="Julian March"/>
<link wikidata="Q625139" start="3047" end="3059" title="Karst Region" label="Karst Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="3064" end="3070" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q938838" start="3073" end="3080" title="Kvarner" label="Kvarner"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="3085" end="3093" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="3111" end="3116" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675084" start="3138" end="3154" title="Italian diaspora" label="Italian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="3162" end="3170" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="3172" end="3181" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="3186" end="3198" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274327" start="3378" end="3397" title="Italian citizenship" label="Italian citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="3488" end="3495" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="3526" end="3534" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="3584" end="3594" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093327" start="3628" end="3639" title="Italian language in Slovenia" label="in Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503479" start="3651" end="3661" title="Italians of Croatia" label="in Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="4018" end="4040" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="4070" end="4076" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="4078" end="4093" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="4095" end="4102" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="4131" end="4133" title="EU" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="4146" end="4152" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932516" start="4631" end="4649" title="net migration rate" label="net migration rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361259" start="4730" end="4744" title="Roman Catholicism in Slovenia" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q85502" start="5057" end="5071" title="secularization" label="secularization"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="5663" end="5675" title="Latin Church" label="Latin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q49376" start="5695" end="5712" title="Eastern Catholic Churches" label="Eastern Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q425767" start="5725" end="5739" title="White Carniola" label="White Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="5786" end="5797" title="Protestantism" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="6000" end="6011" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="6057" end="6065" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q215695" start="6110" end="6119" title="Prekmurje" label="Prekmurje"/>
<link wikidata="Q15899" start="6219" end="6232" title="Murska Sobota" label="Murska Sobota"/>
<link wikidata="Q134900" start="6286" end="6302" title="History of the Jews in Slovenia" label="Jewish community"/>
<link wikidata="Q134900" start="6378" end="6387" title="The Holocaust in Slovenia" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="6498" end="6507" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="6555" end="6560" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="6675" end="6697" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="6699" end="6705" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="6711" end="6726" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="6799" end="6820" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="6859" end="6882" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Serbian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q906685" start="6917" end="6943" title="Macedonian Orthodox Church" label="Macedonian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="7033" end="7041" title="atheists" label="atheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q748216" start="7193" end="7211" title="Eurobarometer" label="Eurobarometer Poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7565" end="7579" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="7587" end="7594" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="7602" end="7608" title="Islam" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="7615" end="7633" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="7640" end="7650" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099846" start="7903" end="7920" title="Slovenian Muslims" label="Slovenian Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="7974" end="7981" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q146665" start="8008" end="8035" title="South Slavic languages" label="South Slavic language group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503153" start="8448" end="8456" title="Slovene dialects" label="dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="8814" end="8821" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="8829" end="8843" title="Serbo-Croatian language" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="8848" end="8857" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="8864" end="8872" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="8879" end="8889" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13201" start="8896" end="8902" title="Romani language" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="8909" end="8916" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="8923" end="8929" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="8948" end="8955" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="8957" end="8962" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="8964" end="8973" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="8975" end="8982" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="8984" end="8990" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="8992" end="8998" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="9000" end="9008" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="9010" end="9017" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="9019" end="9025" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="9027" end="9036" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="9038" end="9044" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="9046" end="9053" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="9055" end="9060" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="9068" end="9073" title="Romanian language" label="Vlach"/>
<link wikidata="Q26245" start="9081" end="9086" title="Rusyn language" label="Rusyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="9088" end="9093" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="9095" end="9102" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="9104" end="9110" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8785" start="9114" end="9122" title="Armenian language" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="9245" end="9263" title="CIA World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588090" start="10333" end="10342" title="Gottschee" label="Gottschee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947382" start="10345" end="10365" title="Bosniaks of Slovenia" label="Bosniaks of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187243" start="10368" end="10386" title="Croats of Slovenia" label="Croats of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905201" start="10390" end="10414" title="Montenegrins of Slovenia" label="Montenegrins of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564956" start="10417" end="10434" title="Serbs of Slovenia" label="Serbs of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134900" start="10437" end="10468" title="History of the Jews in Slovenia" label="History of the Jews in Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655145" start="10471" end="10480" title="Izbrisani" label="Izbrisani"/>
<link wikidata="Q116470996" start="10484" end="10525" title="Demographics of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Demographics of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q851965" start="10529" end="10589" title="Demographics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Demographics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q671856" start="10592" end="10615" title="Demographics of Austria" label="Demographics of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047394" start="10618" end="10641" title="Demographics of Croatia" label="Demographics of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q936370" start="10644" end="10667" title="Demographics of Hungary" label="Demographics of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800338" start="10670" end="10691" title="Demographics of Italy" label="Demographics of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629661" start="10778" end="10782" title="Statistical Office of the Republic of Slovenia" label="SURS"/>
</links>
</doc>
